The Project Gutenberg eBook, Sir Dominick Ferrand, by Henry James


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: Sir Dominick Ferrand


Author: Henry James



Release Date: February 14, 2015  [eBook #2716]
[This file was first posted on July 3, 2000]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SIR DOMINICK FERRAND***


Transcribed from 1893 Macmillan and Co. edition by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.org.  Proofed by Nina Hall, Mohua Sen, Bridie, Francine
Smith and David.





                          SIR DOMINICK FERRAND.


I.


“THERE are several objections to it, but I’ll take it if you’ll alter
it,” Mr. Locket’s rather curt note had said; and there was no waste of
words in the postscript in which he had added: “If you’ll come in and see
me, I’ll show you what I mean.”  This communication had reached Jersey
Villas by the first post, and Peter Baron had scarcely swallowed his
leathery muffin before he got into motion to obey the editorial behest.
He knew that such precipitation looked eager, and he had no desire to
look eager—it was not in his interest; but how could he maintain a
godlike calm, principled though he was in favour of it, the first time
one of the great magazines had accepted, even with a cruel reservation, a
specimen of his ardent young genius?

It was not till, like a child with a sea-shell at his ear, he began to be
aware of the great roar of the “underground,” that, in his third-class
carriage, the cruelty of the reservation penetrated, with the taste of
acrid smoke, to his inner sense.  It was really degrading to be eager in
the face of having to “alter.”  Peter Baron tried to figure to himself at
that moment that he was not flying to betray the extremity of his need,
but hurrying to fight for some of those passages of superior boldness
which were exactly what the conductor of the “Promiscuous Review” would
be sure to be down upon.  He made believe—as if to the greasy
fellow-passenger opposite—that he felt indignant; but he saw that to the
small round eye of this still more downtrodden brother he represented
selfish success.  He would have liked to linger in the conception that he
had been “approached” by the Promiscuous; but whatever might be thought
in the office of that periodical of some of his flights of fancy, there
was no want of vividness in his occasional suspicion that he passed there
for a familiar bore.  The only thing that was clearly flattering was the
fact that the Promiscuous rarely published fiction.  He should therefore
be associated with a deviation from a solemn habit, and that would more
than make up to him for a phrase in one of Mr. Locket’s inexorable
earlier notes, a phrase which still rankled, about his showing no symptom
of the faculty really creative.  “You don’t seem able to keep a character
together,” this pitiless monitor had somewhere else remarked.  Peter
Baron, as he sat in his corner while the train stopped, considered, in
the befogged gaslight, the bookstall standard of literature and asked
himself whose character had fallen to pieces now.  Tormenting indeed had
always seemed to him such a fate as to have the creative head without the
creative hand.

It should be mentioned, however, that before he started on his mission to
Mr. Locket his attention had been briefly engaged by an incident
occurring at Jersey Villas.  On leaving the house (he lived at No.  3,
the door of which stood open to a small front garden), he encountered the
lady who, a week before, had taken possession of the rooms on the ground
floor, the “parlours” of Mrs. Bundy’s terminology.  He had heard her, and
from his window, two or three times, had even seen her pass in and out,
and this observation had created in his mind a vague prejudice in her
favour.  Such a prejudice, it was true, had been subjected to a violent
test; it had been fairly apparent that she had a light step, but it was
still less to be overlooked that she had a cottage piano.  She had
furthermore a little boy and a very sweet voice, of which Peter Baron had
caught the accent, not from her singing (for she only played), but from
her gay admonitions to her child, whom she occasionally allowed to amuse
himself—under restrictions very publicly enforced—in the tiny black patch
which, as a forecourt to each house, was held, in the humble row, to be a
feature.  Jersey Villas stood in pairs, semi-detached, and Mrs.
Ryves—such was the name under which the new lodger presented herself—had
been admitted to the house as confessedly musical.  Mrs. Bundy, the
earnest proprietress of No. 3, who considered her “parlours” (they were a
dozen feet square), even more attractive, if possible, than the second
floor with which Baron had had to content himself—Mrs. Bundy, who
reserved the drawing-room for a casual dressmaking business, had threshed
out the subject of the new lodger in advance with our young man,
reminding him that her affection for his own person was a proof that,
other things being equal, she positively preferred tenants who were
clever.

This was the case with Mrs. Ryves; she had satisfied Mrs. Bundy that she
was not a simple strummer.  Mrs. Bundy admitted to Peter Baron that, for
herself, she had a weakness for a pretty tune, and Peter could honestly
reply that his ear was equally sensitive.  Everything would depend on the
“touch” of their inmate.  Mrs. Ryves’s piano would blight his existence
if her hand should prove heavy or her selections vulgar; but if she
played agreeable things and played them in an agreeable way she would
render him rather a service while he smoked the pipe of “form.”  Mrs.
Bundy, who wanted to let her rooms, guaranteed on the part of the
stranger a first-class talent, and Mrs. Ryves, who evidently knew
thoroughly what she was about, had not falsified this somewhat rash
prediction.  She never played in the morning, which was Baron’s
working-time, and he found himself listening with pleasure at other hours
to her discreet and melancholy strains.  He really knew little about
music, and the only criticism he would have made of Mrs. Ryves’s
conception of it was that she seemed devoted to the dismal.  It was not,
however, that these strains were not pleasant to him; they floated up, on
the contrary, as a sort of conscious response to some of his broodings
and doubts.  Harmony, therefore, would have reigned supreme had it not
been for the singularly bad taste of No. 4.  Mrs. Ryves’s piano was on
the free side of the house and was regarded by Mrs. Bundy as open to no
objection but that of their own gentleman, who was so reasonable.  As
much, however, could not be said of the gentleman of No. 4, who had not
even Mr. Baron’s excuse of being “littery” (he kept a bull-terrier and
had five hats—the street could count them), and whom, if you had listened
to Mrs. Bundy, you would have supposed to be divided from the obnoxious
instrument by walls and corridors, obstacles and intervals, of massive
structure and fabulous extent.  This gentleman had taken up an attitude
which had now passed into the phase of correspondence and compromise; but
it was the opinion of the immediate neighbourhood that he had not a leg
to stand upon, and on whatever subject the sentiment of Jersey Villas
might have been vague, it was not so on the rights and the wrongs of
landladies.

Mrs. Ryves’s little boy was in the garden as Peter Baron issued from the
house, and his mother appeared to have come out for a moment, bareheaded,
to see that he was doing no harm.  She was discussing with him the
responsibility that he might incur by passing a piece of string round one
of the iron palings and pretending he was in command of a “geegee”; but
it happened that at the sight of the other lodger the child was seized
with a finer perception of the drivable.  He rushed at Baron with a
flourish of the bridle, shouting, “Ou geegee!” in a manner productive of
some refined embarrassment to his mother.  Baron met his advance by
mounting him on a shoulder and feigning to prance an instant, so that by
the time this performance was over—it took but a few seconds—the young
man felt introduced to Mrs. Ryves.  Her smile struck him as charming, and
such an impression shortens many steps.  She said, “Oh, thank you—you
mustn’t let him worry you”; and then as, having put down the child and
raised his hat, he was turning away, she added: “It’s very good of you
not to complain of my piano.”

“I particularly enjoy it—you play beautifully,” said Peter Baron.

“I have to play, you see—it’s all I can do.  But the people next door
don’t like it, though my room, you know, is not against their wall.
Therefore I thank you for letting me tell them that you, in the house,
don’t find me a nuisance.”

She looked gentle and bright as she spoke, and as the young man’s eyes
rested on her the tolerance for which she expressed herself indebted
seemed to him the least indulgence she might count upon.  But he only
laughed and said “Oh, no, you’re not a nuisance!” and felt more and more
introduced.

The little boy, who was handsome, hereupon clamoured for another ride,
and she took him up herself, to moderate his transports.  She stood a
moment with the child in her arms, and he put his fingers exuberantly
into her hair, so that while she smiled at Baron she slowly, permittingly
shook her head to get rid of them.

“If they really make a fuss I’m afraid I shall have to go,” she went on.

“Oh, don’t go!” Baron broke out, with a sudden expressiveness which made
his voice, as it fell upon his ear, strike him as the voice of another.
She gave a vague exclamation and, nodding slightly but not unsociably,
passed back into the house.  She had made an impression which remained
till the other party to the conversation reached the railway-station,
when it was superseded by the thought of his prospective discussion with
Mr. Locket.  This was a proof of the intensity of that interest.

The aftertaste of the later conference was also intense for Peter Baron,
who quitted his editor with his manuscript under his arm.  He had had the
question out with Mr. Locket, and he was in a flutter which ought to have
been a sense of triumph and which indeed at first he succeeded in
regarding in this light.  Mr. Locket had had to admit that there was an
idea in his story, and that was a tribute which Baron was in a position
to make the most of.  But there was also a scene which scandalised the
editorial conscience and which the young man had promised to rewrite.
The idea that Mr. Locket had been so good as to disengage depended for
clearness mainly on this scene; so it was easy to see his objection was
perverse.  This inference was probably a part of the joy in which Peter
Baron walked as he carried home a contribution it pleased him to classify
as accepted.  He walked to work off his excitement and to think in what
manner he should reconstruct.  He went some distance without settling
that point, and then, as it began to worry him, he looked vaguely into
shop-windows for solutions and hints.  Mr. Locket lived in the depths of
Chelsea, in a little panelled, amiable house, and Baron took his way
homeward along the King’s Road.  There was a new amusement for him, a
fresher bustle, in a London walk in the morning; these were hours that he
habitually spent at his table, in the awkward attitude engendered by the
poor piece of furniture, one of the rickety features of Mrs. Bundy’s
second floor, which had to serve as his altar of literary sacrifice.  If
by exception he went out when the day was young he noticed that life
seemed younger with it; there were livelier industries to profit by and
shop-girls, often rosy, to look at; a different air was in the streets
and a chaff of traffic for the observer of manners to catch.  Above all,
it was the time when poor Baron made his purchases, which were wholly of
the wandering mind; his extravagances, for some mysterious reason, were
all matutinal, and he had a foreknowledge that if ever he should ruin
himself it would be well before noon.  He felt lavish this morning, on
the strength of what the Promiscuous would do for him; he had lost sight
for the moment of what he should have to do for the Promiscuous.  Before
the old bookshops and printshops, the crowded panes of the
curiosity-mongers and the desirable exhibitions of mahogany “done up,” he
used, by an innocent process, to commit luxurious follies.  He
refurnished Mrs. Bundy with a freedom that cost her nothing, and lost
himself in pictures of a transfigured second floor.

On this particular occasion the King’s Road proved almost unprecedentedly
expensive, and indeed this occasion differed from most others in
containing the germ of real danger.  For once in a way he had a bad
conscience—he felt himself tempted to pick his own pocket.  He never saw
a commodious writing-table, with elbow-room and drawers and a fair
expanse of leather stamped neatly at the edge with gilt, without being
freshly reminded of Mrs. Bundy’s dilapidations.  There were several such
tables in the King’s Road—they seemed indeed particularly numerous today.
Peter Baron glanced at them all through the fronts of the shops, but
there was one that detained him in supreme contemplation.  There was a
fine assurance about it which seemed a guarantee of masterpieces; but
when at last he went in and, just to help himself on his way, asked the
impossible price, the sum mentioned by the voluble vendor mocked at him
even more than he had feared.  It was far too expensive, as he hinted,
and he was on the point of completing his comedy by a pensive retreat
when the shopman bespoke his attention for another article of the same
general character, which he described as remarkably cheap for what it
was.  It was an old piece, from a sale in the country, and it had been in
stock some time; but it had got pushed out of sight in one of the upper
rooms—they contained such a wilderness of treasures—and happened to have
but just come to light.  Peter suffered himself to be conducted into an
interminable dusky rear, where he presently found himself bending over
one of those square substantial desks of old mahogany, raised, with the
aid of front legs, on a sort of retreating pedestal which is fitted with
small drawers, contracted conveniences known immemorially to the knowing
as davenports.  This specimen had visibly seen service, but it had an
old-time solidity and to Peter Baron it unexpectedly appealed.

He would have said in advance that such an article was exactly what he
didn’t want, but as the shopman pushed up a chair for him and he sat down
with his elbows on the gentle slope of the large, firm lid, he felt that
such a basis for literature would be half the battle.  He raised the lid
and looked lovingly into the deep interior; he sat ominously silent while
his companion dropped the striking words: “Now that’s an article I
personally covet!”  Then when the man mentioned the ridiculous price
(they were literally giving it away), he reflected on the economy of
having a literary altar on which one could really kindle a fire.  A
davenport was a compromise, but what was all life but a compromise?  He
could beat down the dealer, and at Mrs. Bundy’s he had to write on an
insincere card-table.  After he had sat for a minute with his nose in the
friendly desk he had a queer impression that it might tell him a secret
or two—one of the secrets of form, one of the sacrificial
mysteries—though no doubt its career had been literary only in the sense
of its helping some old lady to write invitations to dull dinners.  There
was a strange, faint odour in the receptacle, as if fragrant, hallowed
things had once been put away there.  When he took his head out of it he
said to the shopman: “I don’t mind meeting you halfway.”  He had been
told by knowing people that that was the right thing.  He felt rather
vulgar, but the davenport arrived that evening at Jersey Villas.




II.


“I DARESAY it will be all right; he seems quiet now,” said the poor lady
of the “parlours” a few days later, in reference to their litigious
neighbour and the precarious piano.  The two lodgers had grown regularly
acquainted, and the piano had had much to do with it.  Just as this
instrument served, with the gentleman at No. 4, as a theme for
discussion, so between Peter Baron and the lady of the parlours it had
become a basis of peculiar agreement, a topic, at any rate, of
conversation frequently renewed.  Mrs. Ryves was so prepossessing that
Peter was sure that even if they had not had the piano he would have
found something else to thresh out with her.  Fortunately however they
did have it, and he, at least, made the most of it, knowing more now
about his new friend, who when, widowed and fatigued, she held her
beautiful child in her arms, looked dimly like a modern Madonna.  Mrs.
Bundy, as a letter of furnished lodgings, was characterised in general by
a familiar domestic severity in respect to picturesque young women, but
she had the highest confidence in Mrs. Ryves.  She was luminous about her
being a lady, and a lady who could bring Mrs. Bundy back to a gratified
recognition of one of those manifestations of mind for which she had an
independent esteem.  She was professional, but Jersey Villas could be
proud of a profession that didn’t happen to be the wrong one—they had
seen something of that.  Mrs. Ryves had a hundred a year (Baron wondered
how Mrs. Bundy knew this; he thought it unlikely Mrs. Ryves had told
her), and for the rest she depended on her lovely music.  Baron judged
that her music, even though lovely, was a frail dependence; it would
hardly help to fill a concert-room, and he asked himself at first whether
she played country-dances at children’s parties or gave lessons to young
ladies who studied above their station.

Very soon, indeed, he was sufficiently enlightened; it all went fast, for
the little boy had been almost as great a help as the piano.  Sidney
haunted the doorstep of No.  3 he was eminently sociable, and had
established independent relations with Peter, a frequent feature of which
was an adventurous visit, upstairs, to picture books criticised for not
being _all_ geegees and walking sticks happily more conformable.  The
young man’s window, too, looked out on their acquaintance; through a
starched muslin curtain it kept his neighbour before him, made him almost
more aware of her comings and goings than he felt he had a right to be.
He was capable of a shyness of curiosity about her and of dumb little
delicacies of consideration.  She did give a few lessons; they were
essentially local, and he ended by knowing more or less what she went out
for and what she came in from.  She had almost no visitors, only a decent
old lady or two, and, every day, poor dingy Miss Teagle, who was also
ancient and who came humbly enough to governess the infant of the
parlours.  Peter Baron’s window had always, to his sense, looked out on a
good deal of life, and one of the things it had most shown him was that
there is nobody so bereft of joy as not to be able to command for
twopence the services of somebody less joyous.  Mrs. Ryves was a
struggler (Baron scarcely liked to think of it), but she occupied a
pinnacle for Miss Teagle, who had lived on—and from a noble nursery—into
a period of diplomas and humiliation.

Mrs. Ryves sometimes went out, like Baron himself, with manuscripts under
her arm, and, still more like Baron, she almost always came back with
them.  Her vain approaches were to the music-sellers; she tried to
compose—to produce songs that would make a hit.  A successful song was an
income, she confided to Peter one of the first times he took Sidney,
blasé and drowsy, back to his mother.  It was not on one of these
occasions, but once when he had come in on no better pretext than that of
simply wanting to (she had after all virtually invited him), that she
mentioned how only one song in a thousand was successful and that the
terrible difficulty was in getting the right words.  This rightness was
just a vulgar “fluke”—there were lots of words really clever that were of
no use at all.  Peter said, laughing, that he supposed any words he
should try to produce would be sure to be too clever; yet only three
weeks after his first encounter with Mrs. Ryves he sat at his delightful
davenport (well aware that he had duties more pressing), trying to string
together rhymes idiotic enough to make his neighbour’s fortune.  He was
satisfied of the fineness of her musical gift—it had the touching note.
The touching note was in her person as well.

The davenport was delightful, after six months of its tottering
predecessor, and such a re-enforcement to the young man’s style was not
impaired by his sense of something lawless in the way it had been gained.
He had made the purchase in anticipation of the money he expected from
Mr. Locket, but Mr. Locket’s liberality was to depend on the ingenuity of
his contributor, who now found himself confronted with the consequence of
a frivolous optimism.  The fruit of his labour presented, as he stared at
it with his elbows on his desk, an aspect uncompromising and
incorruptible.  It seemed to look up at him reproachfully and to say,
with its essential finish: “How could you promise anything so base; how
could you pass your word to mutilate and dishonour me?”  The alterations
demanded by Mr. Locket were impossible; the concessions to the platitude
of his conception of the public mind were degrading.  The public mind!—as
if the public _had_ a mind, or any principle of perception more
discoverable than the stare of huddled sheep!  Peter Baron felt that it
concerned him to determine if he were only not clever enough or if he
were simply not abject enough to rewrite his story.  He might in truth
have had less pride if he had had more skill, and more discretion if he
had had more practice.  Humility, in the profession of letters, was half
of practice, and resignation was half of success.  Poor Peter actually
flushed with pain as he recognised that this was not success, the
production of gelid prose which his editor could do nothing with on the
one side and he himself could do nothing with on the other.  The truth
about his luckless tale was now the more bitter from his having managed,
for some days, to taste it as sweet.

As he sat there, baffled and sombre, biting his pen and wondering what
was meant by the “rewards” of literature, he generally ended by tossing
away the composition deflowered by Mr. Locket and trying his hand at the
sort of twaddle that Mrs. Ryves might be able to set to music.  Success
in these experiments wouldn’t be a reward of literature, but it might
very well become a labour of love.  The experiments would be pleasant
enough for him if they were pleasant for his inscrutable neighbour.  That
was the way he thought of her now, for he had learned enough about her,
little by little, to guess how much there was still to learn.  To spend
his mornings over cheap rhymes for her was certainly to shirk the
immediate question; but there were hours when he judged this question to
be altogether too arduous, reflecting that he might quite as well perish
by the sword as by famine.  Besides, he did meet it obliquely when he
considered that he shouldn’t be an utter failure if he were to produce
some songs to which Mrs. Ryves’s accompaniments would give a circulation.
He had not ventured to show her anything yet, but one morning, at a
moment when her little boy was in his room, it seemed to him that, by an
inspiration, he had arrived at the happy middle course (it was an art by
itself), between sound and sense.  If the sense was not confused it was
because the sound was so familiar.

He had said to the child, to whom he had sacrificed barley-sugar (it had
no attraction for his own lips, yet in these days there was always some
of it about), he had confided to the small Sidney that if he would wait a
little he should be intrusted with something nice to take down to his
parent.  Sidney had absorbing occupation and, while Peter copied off the
song in a pretty hand, roamed, gurgling and sticky, about the room.  In
this manner he lurched like a little toper into the rear of the
davenport, which stood a few steps out from the recess of the window,
and, as he was fond of beating time to his intensest joys, began to bang
on the surface of it with a paper-knife which at that spot had chanced to
fall upon the floor.  At the moment Sidney committed this violence his
kind friend had happened to raise the lid of the desk and, with his head
beneath it, was rummaging among a mass of papers for a proper envelope.
“I say, I say, my boy!” he exclaimed, solicitous for the ancient glaze of
his most cherished possession.  Sidney paused an instant; then, while
Peter still hunted for the envelope, he administered another, and this
time a distinctly disobedient, rap.  Peter heard it from within and was
struck with its oddity of sound—so much so that, leaving the child for a
moment under a demoralising impression of impunity, he waited with quick
curiosity for a repetition of the stroke.  It came of course immediately,
and then the young man, who had at the same instant found his envelope
and ejaculated “Hallo, this thing has a false back!” jumped up and
secured his visitor, whom with his left arm he held in durance on his
knee while with his free hand he addressed the missive to Mrs. Ryves.

As Sidney was fond of errands he was easily got rid of, and after he had
gone Baron stood a moment at the window chinking pennies and keys in
pockets and wondering if the charming composer would think his song as
good, or in other words as bad, as he thought it.  His eyes as he turned
away fell on the wooden back of the davenport, where, to his regret, the
traces of Sidney’s assault were visible in three or four ugly scratches.
“Confound the little brute!” he exclaimed, feeling as if an altar had
been desecrated.  He was reminded, however, of the observation this
outrage had led him to make, and, for further assurance, he knocked on
the wood with his knuckle.  It sounded from that position commonplace
enough, but his suspicion was strongly confirmed when, again standing
beside the desk, he put his head beneath the lifted lid and gave ear
while with an extended arm he tapped sharply in the same place.  The back
was distinctly hollow; there was a space between the inner and the outer
pieces (he could measure it), so wide that he was a fool not to have
noticed it before.  The depth of the receptacle from front to rear was so
great that it could sacrifice a certain quantity of room without
detection.  The sacrifice could of course only be for a purpose, and the
purpose could only be the creation of a secret compartment.  Peter Baron
was still boy enough to be thrilled by the idea of such a feature, the
more so as every indication of it had been cleverly concealed.  The
people at the shop had never noticed it, else they would have called his
attention to it as an enhancement of value.  His legendary lore
instructed him that where there was a hiding-place there was always a
hidden spring, and he pried and pressed and fumbled in an eager search
for the sensitive spot.  The article was really a wonder of neat
construction; everything fitted with a closeness that completely saved
appearances.

It took Baron some minutes to pursue his inquiry, during which he
reflected that the people of the shop were not such fools after all.
They had admitted moreover that they had accidentally neglected this
relic of gentility—it had been overlooked in the multiplicity of their
treasures.  He now recalled that the man had wanted to polish it up
before sending it home, and that, satisfied for his own part with its
honourable appearance and averse in general to shiny furniture, he had in
his impatience declined to wait for such an operation, so that the object
had left the place for Jersey Villas, carrying presumably its secret with
it, two or three hours after his visit.  This secret it seemed indeed
capable of keeping; there was an absurdity in being baffled, but Peter
couldn’t find the spring.  He thumped and sounded, he listened and
measured again; he inspected every joint and crevice, with the effect of
becoming surer still of the existence of a chamber and of making up his
mind that his davenport was a rarity.  Not only was there a compartment
between the two backs, but there was distinctly something _in_ the
compartment!  Perhaps it was a lost manuscript—a nice, safe,
old-fashioned story that Mr. Locket wouldn’t object to.  Peter returned
to the charge, for it had occurred to him that he had perhaps not
sufficiently visited the small drawers, of which, in two vertical rows,
there were six in number, of different sizes, inserted sideways into that
portion of the structure which formed part of the support of the desk.
He took them out again and examined more minutely the condition of their
sockets, with the happy result of discovering at last, in the place into
which the third on the left-hand row was fitted, a small sliding panel.
Behind the panel was a spring, like a flat button, which yielded with a
click when he pressed it and which instantly produced a loosening of one
of the pieces of the shelf forming the highest part of the
davenport—pieces adjusted to each other with the most deceptive
closeness.

This particular piece proved to be, in its turn, a sliding panel, which,
when pushed, revealed the existence of a smaller receptacle, a narrow,
oblong box, in the false back.  Its capacity was limited, but if it
couldn’t hold many things it might hold precious ones.  Baron, in
presence of the ingenuity with which it had been dissimulated,
immediately felt that, but for the odd chance of little Sidney Ryves’s
having hammered on the outside at the moment he himself happened to have
his head in the desk, he might have remained for years without suspicion
of it.  This apparently would have been a loss, for he had been right in
guessing that the chamber was not empty.  It contained objects which,
whether precious or not, had at any rate been worth somebody’s hiding.
These objects were a collection of small flat parcels, of the shape of
packets of letters, wrapped in white paper and neatly sealed.  The seals,
mechanically figured, bore the impress neither of arms nor of initials;
the paper looked old—it had turned faintly sallow; the packets might have
been there for ages.  Baron counted them—there were nine in all, of
different sizes; he turned them over and over, felt them curiously and
snuffed in their vague, musty smell, which affected him with the
melancholy of some smothered human accent.  The little bundles were
neither named nor numbered—there was not a word of writing on any of the
covers; but they plainly contained old letters, sorted and matched
according to dates or to authorship.  They told some old, dead story—they
were the ashes of fires burned out.

As Peter Baron held his discoveries successively in his hands he became
conscious of a queer emotion which was not altogether elation and yet was
still less pure pain.  He had made a find, but it somehow added to his
responsibility; he was in the presence of something interesting, but (in
a manner he couldn’t have defined) this circumstance suddenly constituted
a danger.  It was the perception of the danger, for instance, which
caused to remain in abeyance any impulse he might have felt to break one
of the seals.  He looked at them all narrowly, but he was careful not to
loosen them, and he wondered uncomfortably whether the contents of the
secret compartment would be held in equity to be the property of the
people in the King’s Road.  He had given money for the davenport, but had
he given money for these buried papers?  He paid by a growing
consciousness that a nameless chill had stolen into the air the penalty,
which he had many a time paid before, of being made of sensitive stuff.
It was as if an occasion had insidiously arisen for a sacrifice—a
sacrifice for the sake of a fine superstition, something like honour or
kindness or justice, something indeed perhaps even finer still—a
difficult deciphering of duty, an impossible tantalising wisdom.
Standing there before his ambiguous treasure and losing himself for the
moment in the sense of a dawning complication, he was startled by a
light, quick tap at the door of his sitting-room.  Instinctively, before
answering, he listened an instant—he was in the attitude of a miser
surprised while counting his hoard.  Then he answered “One moment,
please!” and slipped the little heap of packets into the biggest of the
drawers of the davenport, which happened to be open.  The aperture of the
false back was still gaping, and he had not time to work back the spring.
He hastily laid a big book over the place and then went and opened his
door.

It offered him a sight none the less agreeable for being unexpected—the
graceful and agitated figure of Mrs. Ryves.  Her agitation was so visible
that he thought at first that something dreadful had happened to her
child—that she had rushed up to ask for help, to beg him to go for the
doctor.  Then he perceived that it was probably connected with the
desperate verses he had transmitted to her a quarter of an hour before;
for she had his open manuscript in one hand and was nervously pulling it
about with the other.  She looked frightened and pretty, and if, in
invading the privacy of a fellow-lodger, she had been guilty of a
departure from rigid custom, she was at least conscious of the enormity
of the step and incapable of treating it with levity.  The levity was for
Peter Baron, who endeavoured, however, to clothe his familiarity with
respect, pushing forward the seat of honour and repeating that he
rejoiced in such a visit.  The visitor came in, leaving the door ajar,
and after a minute during which, to help her, he charged her with the
purpose of telling him that he ought to be ashamed to send her down such
rubbish, she recovered herself sufficiently to stammer out that his song
was exactly what she had been looking for and that after reading it she
had been seized with an extraordinary, irresistible impulse—that of
thanking him for it in person and without delay.

“It was the impulse of a kind nature,” he said, “and I can’t tell you
what pleasure you give me.”

She declined to sit down, and evidently wished to appear to have come but
for a few seconds.  She looked confusedly at the place in which she found
herself, and when her eyes met his own they struck him as anxious and
appealing.  She was evidently not thinking of his song, though she said
three or four times over that it was beautiful.  “Well, I only wanted you
to know, and now I must go,” she added; but on his hearthrug she lingered
with such an odd helplessness that he felt almost sorry for her.

“Perhaps I can improve it if you find it doesn’t go,” said Baron.  “I’m
so delighted to do anything for you I can.”

“There may be a word or two that might be changed,” she answered, rather
absently.  “I shall have to think it over, to live with it a little.  But
I like it, and that’s all I wanted to say.”

“Charming of you.  I’m not a bit busy,” said Baron.

Again she looked at him with a troubled intensity, then suddenly she
demanded: “Is there anything the matter with you?”

“The matter with me?”

“I mean like being ill or worried.  I wondered if there might be; I had a
sudden fancy; and that, I think, is really why I came up.”

“There isn’t, indeed; I’m all right.  But your sudden fancies are
inspirations.”

“It’s absurd.  You must excuse me.  Good-by!” said Mrs. Ryves.

“What are the words you want changed?” Baron asked.

“I don’t want any—if you’re all right.  Good-by,” his visitor repeated,
fixing her eyes an instant on an object on his desk that had caught them.
His own glanced in the same direction and he saw that in his hurry to
shuffle away the packets found in the davenport he had overlooked one of
them, which lay with its seals exposed.  For an instant he felt found
out, as if he had been concerned in something to be ashamed of, and it
was only his quick second thought that told him how little the incident
of which the packet was a sequel was an affair of Mrs. Ryves’s.  Her
conscious eyes came back to his as if they were sounding them, and
suddenly this instinct of keeping his discovery to himself was succeeded
by a really startled inference that, with the rarest alertness, she had
guessed something and that her guess (it seemed almost supernatural), had
been her real motive.  Some secret sympathy had made her vibrate—had
touched her with the knowledge that he had brought something to light.
After an instant he saw that she also divined the very reflection he was
then making, and this gave him a lively desire, a grateful, happy desire,
to appear to have nothing to conceal.  For herself, it determined her
still more to put an end to her momentary visit.  But before she had
passed to the door he exclaimed: “All right?  How can a fellow be
anything else who has just had such a find?”

She paused at this, still looking earnest and asking: “What have you
found?”

“Some ancient family papers, in a secret compartment of my
writing-table.”  And he took up the packet he had left out, holding it
before her eyes.  “A lot of other things like that.”

“What are they?” murmured Mrs. Ryves.

“I haven’t the least idea.  They’re sealed.”

“You haven’t broken the seals?” She had come further back.

“I haven’t had time; it only happened ten minutes ago.”

“I knew it,” said Mrs. Ryves, more gaily now.

“What did you know?”

“That you were in some predicament.”

“You’re extraordinary.  I never heard of anything so miraculous; down two
flights of stairs.”

“_Are_ you in a quandary?” the visitor asked.

“Yes, about giving them back.”  Peter Baron stood smiling at her and
rapping his packet on the palm of his hand.  “What do you advise?”

She herself smiled now, with her eyes on the sealed parcel.  “Back to
whom?”

“The man of whom I bought the table.”

“Ah then, they’re not from _your_ family?”

“No indeed, the piece of furniture in which they were hidden is not an
ancestral possession.  I bought it at second hand—you see it’s old—the
other day in the King’s Road.  Obviously the man who sold it to me sold
me more than he meant; he had no idea (from his own point of view it was
stupid of him), that there was a hidden chamber or that mysterious
documents were buried there.  Ought I to go and tell him?  It’s rather a
nice question.”

“Are the papers of value?” Mrs. Ryves inquired.

“I haven’t the least idea.  But I can ascertain by breaking a seal.”

“Don’t!” said Mrs. Ryves, with much expression.  She looked grave again.

“It’s rather tantalising—it’s a bit of a problem,” Baron went on, turning
his packet over.

Mrs. Ryves hesitated.  “Will you show me what you have in your hand?”

He gave her the packet, and she looked at it and held it for an instant
to her nose.  “It has a queer, charming old fragrance,” he said.

“Charming?  It’s horrid.”  She handed him back the packet, saying again
more emphatically “Don’t!”

“Don’t break a seal?”

“Don’t give back the papers.”

“Is it honest to keep them?”

“Certainly.  They’re yours as much as the people’s of the shop.  They
were in the hidden chamber when the table came to the shop, and the
people had every opportunity to find them out.  They didn’t—therefore let
them take the consequences.”

Peter Baron reflected, diverted by her intensity.  She was pale, with
eyes almost ardent.  “The table had been in the place for years.”

“That proves the things haven’t been missed.”

“Let me show you how they were concealed,” he rejoined; and he exhibited
the ingenious recess and the working of the curious spring.  She was
greatly interested, she grew excited and became familiar; she appealed to
him again not to do anything so foolish as to give up the papers, the
rest of which, in their little blank, impenetrable covers, he placed in a
row before her.  “They might be traced—their history, their ownership,”
he argued; to which she replied that this was exactly why he ought to be
quiet.  He declared that women had not the smallest sense of honour, and
she retorted that at any rate they have other perceptions more delicate
than those of men.  He admitted that the papers might be rubbish, and she
conceded that nothing was more probable; yet when he offered to settle
the point off-hand she caught him by the wrist, acknowledging that,
absurd as it was, she was nervous.  Finally she put the whole thing on
the ground of his just doing her a favour.  She asked him to retain the
papers, to be silent about them, simply because it would please her.
That would be reason enough.  Baron’s acquaintance, his agreeable
relations with her, advanced many steps in the treatment of this
question; an element of friendly candour made its way into their
discussion of it.

“I can’t make out why it matters to you, one way or the other, nor why
you should think it worth talking about,” the young man reasoned.

“Neither can I.  It’s just a whim.”

“Certainly, if it will give you any pleasure, I’ll say nothing at the
shop.”

“That’s charming of you, and I’m very grateful.  I see now that this was
why the spirit moved me to come up—to save them,” Mrs. Ryves went on.
She added, moving away, that now she had saved them she must really go.

“To save them for what, if I mayn’t break the seals?” Baron asked.

“I don’t know—for a generous sacrifice.”

“Why should it be generous?  What’s at stake?” Peter demanded, leaning
against the doorpost as she stood on the landing.

“I don’t know what, but I feel as if something or other were in peril.
Burn them up!” she exclaimed with shining eyes.

“Ah, you ask too much—I’m so curious about them!”

“Well, I won’t ask more than I ought, and I’m much obliged to you for
your promise to be quiet.  I trust to your discretion.  Good-by.”

“You ought to _reward_ my discretion,” said Baron, coming out to the
landing.

She had partly descended the staircase and she stopped, leaning against
the baluster and smiling up at him.  “Surely you’ve had your reward in
the honour of my visit.”

“That’s delightful as far as it goes.  But what will you do for me if I
burn the papers?”

Mrs. Ryves considered a moment.  “Burn them first and you’ll see!”

On this she went rapidly downstairs, and Baron, to whom the answer
appeared inadequate and the proposition indeed in that form grossly
unfair, returned to his room.  The vivacity of her interest in a question
in which she had discoverably nothing at stake mystified, amused and, in
addition, irresistibly charmed him.  She was delicate, imaginative,
inflammable, quick to feel, quick to act.  He didn’t complain of it, it
was the way he liked women to be; but he was not impelled for the hour to
commit the sealed packets to the flames.  He dropped them again into
their secret well, and after that he went out.  He felt restless and
excited; another day was lost for work—the dreadful job to be performed
for Mr. Locket was still further off.




III.


TEN days after Mrs. Ryves’s visit he paid by appointment another call on
the editor of the Promiscuous.  He found him in the little wainscoted
Chelsea house, which had to Peter’s sense the smoky brownness of an old
pipebowl, surrounded with all the emblems of his office—a litter of
papers, a hedge of encyclopædias, a photographic gallery of popular
contributors—and he promised at first to consume very few of the moments
for which so many claims competed.  It was Mr. Locket himself however who
presently made the interview spacious, gave it air after discovering that
poor Baron had come to tell him something more interesting than that he
couldn’t after all patch up his tale.  Peter had begun with this, had
intimated respectfully that it was a case in which both practice and
principle rebelled, and then, perceiving how little Mr. Locket was
affected by his audacity, had felt weak and slightly silly, left with his
heroism on his hands.  He had armed himself for a struggle, but the
Promiscuous didn’t even protest, and there would have been nothing for
him but to go away with the prospect of never coming again had he not
chanced to say abruptly, irrelevantly, as he got up from his chair:

“Do you happen to be at all interested in Sir Dominick Ferrand?”

Mr. Locket, who had also got up, looked over his glasses.  “The late Sir
Dominick?”

“The only one; you know the family’s extinct.”

Mr. Locket shot his young friend another sharp glance, a silent retort to
the glibness of this information.  “Very extinct indeed.  I’m afraid the
subject today would scarcely be regarded as attractive.”

“Are you very sure?” Baron asked.

Mr. Locket leaned forward a little, with his fingertips on his table, in
the attitude of giving permission to retire.  “I might consider the
question in a special connection.”  He was silent a minute, in a way that
relegated poor Peter to the general; but meeting the young man’s eyes
again he asked: “Are you—a—thinking of proposing an article upon him?”

“Not exactly proposing it—because I don’t yet quite see my way; but the
idea rather appeals to me.”

Mr. Locket emitted the safe assertion that this eminent statesman had
been a striking figure in his day; then he added: “Have you been studying
him?”

“I’ve been dipping into him.”

“I’m afraid he’s scarcely a question of the hour,” said Mr. Locket,
shuffling papers together.

“I think I could make him one,” Peter Baron declared.

Mr. Locket stared again; he was unable to repress an unattenuated “You?”

“I have some new material,” said the young man, colouring a little.
“That often freshens up an old story.”

“It buries it sometimes.  It’s often only another tombstone.”

“That depends upon what it is.  However,” Peter added, “the documents I
speak of would be a crushing monument.”

Mr. Locket, hesitating, shot another glance under his glasses.  “Do you
allude to—a—revelations?”

“Very curious ones.”

Mr. Locket, still on his feet, had kept his body at the bowing angle; it
was therefore easy for him after an instant to bend a little further and
to sink into his chair with a movement of his hand toward the seat Baron
had occupied.  Baron resumed possession of this convenience, and the
conversation took a fresh start on a basis which such an extension of
privilege could render but little less humiliating to our young man.  He
had matured no plan of confiding his secret to Mr. Locket, and he had
really come out to make him conscientiously that other announcement as to
which it appeared that so much artistic agitation had been wasted.  He
had indeed during the past days—days of painful indecision—appealed in
imagination to the editor of the Promiscuous, as he had appealed to other
sources of comfort; but his scruples turned their face upon him from
quarters high as well as low, and if on the one hand he had by no means
made up his mind not to mention his strange knowledge, he had still more
left to the determination of the moment the question of how he should
introduce the subject.  He was in fact too nervous to decide; he only
felt that he needed for his peace of mind to communicate his discovery.
He wanted an opinion, the impression of somebody else, and even in this
intensely professional presence, five minutes after he had begun to tell
his queer story, he felt relieved of half his burden.  His story was very
queer; he could take the measure of that himself as he spoke; but
wouldn’t this very circumstance qualify it for the Promiscuous?

“Of course the letters may be forgeries,” said Mr. Locket at last.

“I’ve no doubt that’s what many people will say.”

“Have they been seen by any expert?”

“No indeed; they’ve been seen by nobody.”

“Have you got any of them with you?”

“No; I felt nervous about bringing them out.”

“That’s a pity.  I should have liked the testimony of my eyes.”

“You may have it if you’ll come to my rooms.  If you don’t care to do
that without a further guarantee I’ll copy you out some passages.”

“Select a few of the worst!” Mr. Locket laughed.  Over Baron’s
distressing information he had become quite human and genial.  But he
added in a moment more dryly: “You know they ought to be seen by an
expert.”

“That’s exactly what I dread,” said Peter.

“They’ll be worth nothing to me if they’re not.”

Peter communed with his innermost spirit.  “How much will they be worth
to _me_ if they _are_?”

Mr. Locket turned in his study-chair.  “I should require to look at them
before answering that question.”

“I’ve been to the British museum—there are many of his letters there.
I’ve obtained permission to see them, and I’ve compared everything
carefully.  I repudiate the possibility of forgery.  No sign of
genuineness is wanting; there are details, down to the very postmarks,
that no forger could have invented.  Besides, whose interest could it
conceivably have been?  A labor of unspeakable difficulty, and all for
what advantage?  There are so many letters, too—twenty-seven in all.”

“Lord, what an ass!” Mr. Locket exclaimed.

“It will be one of the strangest post-mortem revelations of which history
preserves the record.”

Mr. Locket, grave now, worried with a paper-knife the crevice of a
drawer.  “It’s very odd.  But to be worth anything such documents should
be subjected to a searching criticism—I mean of the historical kind.”

“Certainly; that would be the task of the writer introducing them to the
public.”

Again Mr. Locket considered; then with a smile he looked up.  “You had
better give up original composition and take to buying old furniture.”

“Do you mean because it will pay better?”

“For you, I should think, original composition couldn’t pay worse.  The
creative faculty’s so rare.”

“I do feel tempted to turn my attention to real heroes,” Peter replied.

“I’m bound to declare that Sir Dominick Ferrand was never one of mine.
Flashy, crafty, second-rate—that’s how I’ve always read him.  It was
never a secret, moreover, that his private life had its weak spots.  He
was a mere flash in the pan.”

“He speaks to the people of this country,” said Baron.

“He did; but his voice—the voice, I mean, of his prestige—is scarcely
audible now.”

“They’re still proud of some of the things he did at the Foreign
Office—the famous ‘exchange’ with Spain, in the Mediterranean, which took
Europe so by surprise and by which she felt injured, especially when it
became apparent how much we had the best of the bargain.  Then the
sudden, unexpected show of force by which he imposed on the United States
our interpretation of that tiresome treaty—I could never make out what it
was about.  These were both matters that no one really cared a straw
about, but he made every one feel as if they cared; the nation rose to
the way he played his trumps—it was uncommon.  He was one of the few men
we’ve had, in our period, who took Europe, or took America, by surprise,
made them jump a bit; and the country liked his doing it—it was a
pleasant change.  The rest of the world considered that they knew in any
case exactly what we would do, which was usually nothing at all.  Say
what you like, he’s still a high name; partly also, no doubt, on account
of other things his early success and early death, his political ‘cheek’
and wit; his very appearance—he certainly was handsome—and the
possibilities (of future personal supremacy) which it was the fashion at
the time, which it’s the fashion still, to say had passed away with him.
He had been twice at the Foreign Office; that alone was remarkable for a
man dying at forty-four.  What therefore will the country think when it
learns he was venal?”

Peter Baron himself was not angry with Sir Dominick Ferrand, who had
simply become to him (he had been “reading up” feverishly for a week) a
very curious subject of psychological study; but he could easily put
himself in the place of that portion of the public whose memory was long
enough for their patriotism to receive a shock.  It was some time
fortunately since the conduct of public affairs had wanted for men of
disinterested ability, but the extraordinary documents concealed (of all
places in the world—it was as fantastic as a nightmare) in a “bargain”
picked up at second-hand by an obscure scribbler, would be a calculable
blow to the retrospective mind.  Baron saw vividly that if these relics
should be made public the scandal, the horror, the chatter would be
immense.  Immense would be also the contribution to truth, the
rectification of history.  He had felt for several days (and it was
exactly what had made him so nervous) as if he held in his hand the key
to public attention.

“There are too many things to explain,” Mr. Locket went on, “and the
singular _provenance_ of your papers would count almost overwhelmingly
against them even if the other objections were met.  There would be a
perfect and probably a very complicated pedigree to trace.  How did they
get into your davenport, as you call it, and how long had they been
there?  What hands secreted them? what hands had, so incredibly, clung to
them and preserved them?  Who are the persons mentioned in them? who are
the correspondents, the parties to the nefarious transactions?  You say
the transactions appear to be of two distinct kinds—some of them
connected with public business and others involving obscure personal
relations.”

“They all have this in common,” said Peter Baron, “that they constitute
evidence of uneasiness, in some instances of painful alarm, on the
writer’s part, in relation to exposure—the exposure in the one case, as I
gather, of the fact that he had availed himself of official opportunities
to promote enterprises (public works and that sort of thing) in which he
had a pecuniary stake.  The dread of the light in the other connection is
evidently different, and these letters are the earliest in date.  They
are addressed to a woman, from whom he had evidently received money.”

Mr. Locket wiped his glasses.  “What woman?”

“I haven’t the least idea.  There are lots of questions I can’t answer,
of course; lots of identities I can’t establish; lots of gaps I can’t
fill.  But as to two points I’m clear, and they are the essential ones.
In the first place the papers in my possession are genuine; in the second
place they’re compromising.”

With this Peter Baron rose again, rather vexed with himself for having
been led on to advertise his treasure (it was his interlocutor’s
perfectly natural scepticism that produced this effect), for he felt that
he was putting himself in a false position.  He detected in Mr. Locket’s
studied detachment the fermentation of impulses from which, unsuccessful
as he was, he himself prayed to be delivered.

Mr. Locket remained seated; he watched Baron go across the room for his
hat and umbrella.  “Of course, the question would come up of whose
property today such documents would legally he.  There are heirs,
descendants, executors to consider.”

“In some degree perhaps; but I’ve gone into that a little.  Sir Dominick
Ferrand had no children, and he left no brothers and no sisters.  His
wife survived him, but she died ten years ago.  He can have had no heirs
and no executors to speak of, for he left no property.”

“That’s to his honour and against your theory,” said Mr. Locket.

“I _have_ no theory.  He left a largeish mass of debt,” Peter Baron
added.  At this Mr. Locket got up, while his visitor pursued: “So far as
I can ascertain, though of course my inquiries have had to be very rapid
and superficial, there is no one now living, directly or indirectly
related to the personage in question, who would be likely to suffer from
any steps in the direction of publicity.  It happens to be a rare
instance of a life that had, as it were, no loose ends.  At least there
are none perceptible at present.”

“I see, I see,” said Mr. Locket.  “But I don’t think I should care much
for your article.”

“What article?”

“The one you seem to wish to write, embodying this new matter.”

“Oh, I don’t wish to write it!” Peter exclaimed.  And then he bade his
host good-by.

“Good-by,” said Mr. Locket.  “Mind you, I don’t say that I think there’s
nothing in it.”

“You would think there was something in it if you were to see my
documents.”

“I should like to see the secret compartment,” the caustic editor
rejoined.  “Copy me out some extracts.”

“To what end, if there’s no question of their being of use to you?”

“I don’t say that—I might like the letters themselves.”

“Themselves?”

“Not as the basis of a paper, but just to publish—for a sensation.”

“They’d sell your number!” Baron laughed.

“I daresay I should like to look at them,” Mr. Locket conceded after a
moment.  “When should I find you at home?”

“Don’t come,” said the young man.  “I make you no offer.”

“I might make _you_ one,” the editor hinted.  “Don’t trouble yourself; I
shall probably destroy them.”  With this Peter Baron took his departure,
waiting however just afterwards, in the street near the house, as if he
had been looking out for a stray hansom, to which he would not have
signalled had it appeared.  He thought Mr. Locket might hurry after him,
but Mr. Locket seemed to have other things to do, and Peter Baron
returned on foot to Jersey Villas.




IV.


ON the evening that succeeded this apparently pointless encounter he had
an interview more conclusive with Mrs. Bundy, for whose shrewd and
philosophic view of life he had several times expressed, even to the good
woman herself, a considerable relish.  The situation at Jersey Villas
(Mrs. Ryves had suddenly flown off to Dover) was such as to create in him
a desire for moral support, and there was a kind of domestic
determination in Mrs. Bundy which seemed, in general, to advertise it.
He had asked for her on coming in, but had been told she was absent for
the hour; upon which he had addressed himself mechanically to the task of
doing up his dishonoured manuscript—the ingenious fiction about which Mr.
Locket had been so stupid—for further adventures and not improbable
defeats.  He passed a restless, ineffective afternoon, asking himself if
his genius were a horrid delusion, looking out of his window for
something that didn’t happen, something that seemed now to be the advent
of a persuasive Mr. Locket and now the return, from an absence more
disappointing even than Mrs. Bundy’s, of his interesting neighbour of the
parlours.  He was so nervous and so depressed that he was unable even to
fix his mind on the composition of the note with which, on its next
peregrination, it was necessary that his manuscript should be
accompanied.  He was too nervous to eat, and he forgot even to dine; he
forgot to light his candles, he let his fire go out, and it was in the
melancholy chill of the late dusk that Mrs. Bundy, arriving at last with
his lamp, found him extended moodily upon his sofa.  She had been
informed that he wished to speak to her, and as she placed on the
malodorous luminary an oily shade of green pasteboard she expressed the
friendly hope that there was nothing wrong with his ’ealth.

The young man rose from his couch, pulling himself together sufficiently
to reply that his health was well enough but that his spirits were down
in his hoots.  He had a strong disposition to “draw” his landlady on the
subject of Mrs. Ryves, as well as a vivid conviction that she constituted
a theme as to which Mrs. Bundy would require little pressure to tell him
even more than she knew.  At the same time he hated to appear to pry into
the secrets of his absent friend; to discuss her with their bustling
hostess resembled too much for his taste a gossip with a tattling servant
about an unconscious employer.  He left out of account however Mrs.
Bundy’s knowledge of the human heart, for it was this fine principle that
broke down the barriers after he had reflected reassuringly that it was
not meddling with Mrs. Ryves’s affairs to try and find out if she struck
such an observer as happy.  Crudely, abruptly, even a little blushingly,
he put the direct question to Mrs. Bundy, and this led tolerably straight
to another question, which, on his spirit, sat equally heavy (they were
indeed but different phases of the same), and which the good woman
answered with expression when she ejaculated: “Think it a liberty for you
to run down for a few hours?  If she do, my dear sir, just send her to me
to talk to!”  As regards happiness indeed she warned Baron against
imposing too high a standard on a young thing who had been through so
much, and before he knew it he found himself, without the responsibility
of choice, in submissive receipt of Mrs. Bundy’s version of this
experience.  It was an interesting picture, though it had its
infirmities, one of them congenital and consisting of the fact that it
had sprung essentially from the virginal brain of Miss Teagle.
Amplified, edited, embellished by the richer genius of Mrs. Bundy, who
had incorporated with it and now liberally introduced copious
interleavings of Miss Teagle’s own romance, it gave Peter Baron much food
for meditation, at the same time that it only half relieved his curiosity
about the causes of the charming woman’s underlying strangeness.  He
sounded this note experimentally in Mrs. Bundy’s ear, but it was easy to
see that it didn’t reverberate in her fancy.  She had no idea of the
picture it would have been natural for him to desire that Mrs. Ryves
should present to him, and she was therefore unable to estimate the
points in respect to which his actual impression was irritating.  She had
indeed no adequate conception of the intellectual requirements of a young
man in love.  She couldn’t tell him why their faultless friend was so
isolated, so unrelated, so nervously, shrinkingly proud.  On the other
hand she could tell him (he knew it already) that she had passed many
years of her life in the acquisition of accomplishments at a seat of
learning no less remote than Boulogne, and that Miss Teagle had been
intimately acquainted with the late Mr. Everard Ryves, who was a “most
rising” young man in the city, not making any year less than his clear
twelve hundred.  “Now that he isn’t there to make them, his mourning
widow can’t live as she had then, can she?” Mrs. Bundy asked.

Baron was not prepared to say that she could, but he thought of another
way she might live as he sat, the next day, in the train which rattled
him down to Dover.  The place, as he approached it, seemed bright and
breezy to him; his roamings had been neither far enough nor frequent
enough to make the cockneyfied coast insipid.  Mrs. Bundy had of course
given him the address he needed, and on emerging from the station he was
on the point of asking what direction he should take.  His attention
however at this moment was drawn away by the bustle of the departing
boat.  He had been long enough shut up in London to be conscious of
refreshment in the mere act of turning his face to Paris.  He wandered
off to the pier in company with happier tourists and, leaning on a rail,
watched enviously the preparation, the agitation of foreign travel.  It
was for some minutes a foretaste of adventure; but, ah, when was he to
have the very draught?  He turned away as he dropped this interrogative
sigh, and in doing so perceived that in another part of the pier two
ladies and a little boy were gathered with something of the same
wistfulness.  The little boy indeed happened to look round for a moment,
upon which, with the keenness of the predatory age, he recognised in our
young man a source of pleasures from which he lately had been weaned.  He
bounded forward with irrepressible cries of “Geegee!” and Peter lifted
him aloft for an embrace.  On putting him down the pilgrim from Jersey
Villas stood confronted with a sensibly severe Miss Teagle, who had
followed her little charge.  “What’s the matter with the old woman?” he
asked himself as he offered her a hand which she treated as the merest
detail.  Whatever it was, it was (and very properly, on the part of a
loyal _suivante_) the same complaint as that of her employer, to whom,
from a distance, for Mrs. Ryves had not advanced an inch, he flourished
his hat as she stood looking at him with a face that he imagined rather
white.  Mrs. Ryves’s response to this salutation was to shift her
position in such a manner as to appear again absorbed in the Calais boat.
Peter Baron, however, kept hold of the child, whom Miss Teagle artfully
endeavoured to wrest from him—a policy in which he was aided by Sidney’s
own rough but instinctive loyalty; and he was thankful for the happy
effect of being dragged by his jubilant friend in the very direction in
which he had tended for so many hours.  Mrs. Ryves turned once more as he
came near, and then, from the sweet, strained smile with which she asked
him if he were on his way to France, he saw that if she had been angry at
his having followed her she had quickly got over it.

“No, I’m not crossing; but it came over me that you might be, and that’s
why I hurried down—to catch you before you were off.”

“Oh, we can’t go—more’s the pity; but why, if we could,” Mrs. Ryves
inquired, “should you wish to prevent it?”

“Because I’ve something to ask you first, something that may take some
time.”  He saw now that her embarrassment had really not been resentful;
it had been nervous, tremulous, as the emotion of an unexpected pleasure
might have been.  “That’s really why I determined last night, without
asking your leave first to pay you this little visit—that and the intense
desire for another bout of horse-play with Sidney.  Oh, I’ve come to see
you,” Peter Baron went on, “and I won’t make any secret of the fact that
I expect you to resign yourself gracefully to the trial and give me all
your time.  The day’s lovely, and I’m ready to declare that the place is
as good as the day.  Let me drink deep of these things, drain the cup
like a man who hasn’t been out of London for months and months.  Let me
walk with you and talk with you and lunch with you—I go back this
afternoon.  Give me all your hours in short, so that they may live in my
memory as one of the sweetest occasions of life.”

The emission of steam from the French packet made such an uproar that
Baron could breathe his passion into the young woman’s ear without
scandalising the spectators; and the charm which little by little it
scattered over his fleeting visit proved indeed to be the collective
influence of the conditions he had put into words.  “What is it you wish
to ask me?” Mrs. Ryves demanded, as they stood there together; to which
he replied that he would tell her all about it if she would send Miss
Teagle off with Sidney.  Miss Teagle, who was always anticipating her
cue, had already begun ostentatiously to gaze at the distant shores of
France and was easily enough induced to take an earlier start home and
rise to the responsibility of stopping on her way to contend with the
butcher.  She had however to retire without Sidney, who clung to his
recovered prey, so that the rest of the episode was seasoned, to Baron’s
sense, by the importunate twitch of the child’s little, plump, cool hand.
The friends wandered together with a conjugal air and Sidney not between
them, hanging wistfully, first, over the lengthened picture of the Calais
boat, till they could look after it, as it moved rumbling away, in a
spell of silence which seemed to confess—especially when, a moment later,
their eyes met—that it produced the same fond fancy in each.  The
presence of the boy moreover was no hindrance to their talking in a
manner that they made believe was very frank.  Peter Baron presently told
his companion what it was he had taken a journey to ask, and he had time
afterwards to get over his discomfiture at her appearance of having
fancied it might be something greater.  She seemed disappointed (but she
was forgiving) on learning from him that he had only wished to know if
she judged ferociously his not having complied with her request to
respect certain seals.

“How ferociously do you suspect me of having judged it?” she inquired.

“Why, to the extent of leaving the house the next moment.”

They were still lingering on the great granite pier when he touched on
this matter, and she sat down at the end while the breeze, warmed by the
sunshine, ruffled the purple sea.  She coloured a little and looked
troubled, and after an instant she repeated interrogatively: “The next
moment?”

“As soon as I told you what I had done.  I was scrupulous about this, you
will remember; I went straight downstairs to confess to you.  You turned
away from me, saying nothing; I couldn’t imagine—as I vow I can’t imagine
now—why such a matter should appear so closely to touch you.  I went out
on some business and when I returned you had quitted the house.  It had
all the look of my having offended you, of your wishing to get away from
me.  You didn’t even give me time to tell you how it was that, in spite
of your advice, I determined to see for myself what my discovery
represented.  You must do me justice and hear what determined me.”

Mrs. Ryves got up from her scat and asked him, as a particular favour,
not to allude again to his discovery.  It was no concern of hers at all,
and she had no warrant for prying into his secrets.  She was very sorry
to have been for a moment so absurd as to appear to do so, and she humbly
begged his pardon for her meddling.  Saying this she walked on with a
charming colour in her cheek, while he laughed out, though he was really
bewildered, at the endless capriciousness of women.  Fortunately the
incident didn’t spoil the hour, in which there were other sources of
satisfaction, and they took their course to her lodgings with such
pleasant little pauses and excursions by the way as permitted her to show
him the objects of interest at Dover.  She let him stop at a
wine-merchant’s and buy a bottle for luncheon, of which, in its order,
they partook, together with a pudding invented by Miss Teagle, which, as
they hypocritically swallowed it, made them look at each other in an
intimacy of indulgence.  They came out again and, while Sidney grubbed in
the gravel of the shore, sat selfishly on the Parade, to the
disappointment of Miss Teagle, who had fixed her hopes on a fly and a
ladylike visit to the castle.  Baron had his eye on his watch—he had to
think of his train and the dismal return and many other melancholy
things; but the sea in the afternoon light was a more appealing picture;
the wind had gone down, the Channel was crowded, the sails of the ships
were white in the purple distance.  The young man had asked his companion
(he had asked her before) when she was to come back to Jersey Villas, and
she had said that she should probably stay at Dover another week.  It was
dreadfully expensive, but it was doing the child all the good in the
world, and if Miss Teagle could go up for some things she should probably
be able to manage an extension.  Earlier in the day she had said that she
perhaps wouldn’t return to Jersey Villas at all, or only return to wind
up her connection with Mrs. Bundy.  At another moment she had spoken of
an early date, an immediate reoccupation of the wonderful parlours.
Baron saw that she had no plan, no real reasons, that she was vague and,
in secret, worried and nervous, waiting for something that didn’t depend
on herself.  A silence of several minutes had fallen upon them while they
watched the shining sails; to which Mrs. Ryves put an end by exclaiming
abruptly, but without completing her sentence: “Oh, if you had come to
tell me you had destroyed them—”

“Those terrible papers?  I like the way you talk about ‘destroying!’  You
don’t even know what they are.”

“I don’t want to know; they put me into a state.”

“What sort of a state?”

“I don’t know; they haunt me.”

“They haunted me; that was why, early one morning, suddenly, I couldn’t
keep my hands off them.  I had told you I wouldn’t touch them.  I had
deferred to your whim, your superstition (what is it?) but at last they
got the better of me.  I had lain awake all night threshing about,
itching with curiosity.  It made me ill; my own nerves (as I may say)
were irritated, my capacity to work was gone.  It had come over me in the
small hours in the shape of an obsession, a fixed idea, that there was
nothing in the ridiculous relics and that my exaggerated scruples were
making a fool of me.  It was ten to one they were rubbish, they were
vain, they were empty; that they had been even a practical joke on the
part of some weak-minded gentleman of leisure, the former possessor of
the confounded davenport.  The longer I hovered about them with such
precautions the longer I was taken in, and the sooner I exposed their
insignificance the sooner I should get back to my usual occupations.
This conviction made my hand so uncontrollable that that morning before
breakfast I broke one of the seals.  It took me but a few minutes to
perceive that the contents were not rubbish; the little bundle contained
old letters—very curious old letters.”

“I know—I know; ‘private and confidential.’  So you broke the other
seals?”  Mrs. Ryves looked at him with the strange apprehension he had
seen in her eyes when she appeared at his door the moment after his
discovery.

“You know, of course, because I told you an hour later, though you would
let me tell you very little.”

Baron, as he met this queer gaze, smiled hard at her to prevent her
guessing that he smarted with the fine reproach conveyed in the tone of
her last words; but she appeared able to guess everything, for she
reminded him that she had not had to wait that morning till he came
downstairs to know what had happened above, but had shown him at the
moment how she had been conscious of it an hour before, had passed on her
side the same tormented night as he, and had had to exert extraordinary
self-command not to rush up to his rooms while the study of the open
packets was going on.  “You’re so sensitively organised and you’ve such
mysterious powers that you re uncanny,” Baron declared.

“I feel what takes place at a distance; that’s all.”

“One would think somebody you liked was in danger.”

“I told you that that was what was present to me the day I came up to see
you.”

“Oh, but you don’t like me so much as that,” Baron argued, laughing.

She hesitated.  “No, I don’t know that I do.”

“It must be for someone else—the other person concerned.  The other day,
however, you wouldn’t let me tell you that person’s name.”

Mrs. Ryves, at this, rose quickly.  “I don’t want to know it; it’s none
of my business.”

“No, fortunately, I don’t think it is,” Baron rejoined, walking with her
along the Parade.  She had Sidney by the hand now, and the young man was
on the other side of her.  They moved toward the station—she had offered
to go part of the way.  “But with your miraculous gift it’s a wonder you
haven’t divined.”

“I only divine what I want,” said Mrs. Ryves.

“That’s very convenient!” exclaimed Peter, to whom Sidney had presently
come round again.  “Only, being thus in the dark, it’s difficult to see
your motive for wishing the papers destroyed.”

Mrs. Ryves meditated, looking fixedly at the ground.  “I thought you
might do it to oblige me.”

“Does it strike you that such an expectation, formed in such conditions,
is reasonable?”

Mrs. Ryves stopped short, and this time she turned on him the clouded
clearness of her eyes.  “What do you mean to do with them?”

It was Peter Baron’s turn to meditate, which he did, on the empty asphalt
of the Parade (the “season,” at Dover, was not yet), where their shadows
were long in the afternoon light.  He was under such a charm as he had
never known, and he wanted immensely to be able to reply: “I’ll do
anything you like if you’ll love me.”  These words, however, would have
represented a responsibility and have constituted what was vulgarly
termed an offer.  An offer of what? he quickly asked himself here, as he
had already asked himself after making in spirit other awkward dashes in
the same direction—of what but his poverty, his obscurity, his attempts
that had come to nothing, his abilities for which there was nothing to
show?  Mrs. Ryves was not exactly a success, but she was a greater
success than Peter Baron.  Poor as he was he hated the sordid (he knew
she didn’t love it), and he felt small for talking of marriage.
Therefore he didn’t put the question in the words it would have pleased
him most to hear himself utter, but he compromised, with an angry young
pang, and said to her: “What will you do for me if I put an end to them?”

She shook her head sadly—it was always her prettiest movement.  “I can
promise nothing—oh, no, I can’t promise!  We must part now,” she added.
“You’ll miss your train.”

He looked at his watch, taking the hand she held out to him.  She drew it
away quickly, and nothing then was left him, before hurrying to the
station, but to catch up Sidney and squeeze him till he uttered a little
shriek.  On the way back to town the situation struck him as grotesque.




V.


IT tormented him so the next morning that after threshing it out a little
further he felt he had something of a grievance.  Mrs. Ryves’s
intervention had made him acutely uncomfortable, for she had taken the
attitude of exerting pressure without, it appeared, recognising on his
part an equal right.  She had imposed herself as an influence, yet she
held herself aloof as a participant; there were things she looked to him
to do for her, yet she could tell him of no good that would come to him
from the doing.  She should either have had less to say or have been
willing to say more, and he asked himself why he should be the sport of
her moods and her mysteries.  He perceived her knack of punctual
interference to be striking, but it was just this apparent infallibility
that he resented.  Why didn’t she set up at once as a professional
clairvoyant and eke out her little income more successfully?  In purely
private life such a gift was disconcerting; her divinations, her evasions
disturbed at any rate his own tranquillity.

What disturbed it still further was that he received early in the day a
visit from Mr. Locket, who, leaving him under no illusion as to the
grounds of such an honour, remarked as soon as he had got into the room
or rather while he still panted on the second flight and the smudged
little slavey held open Baron’s door, that he had taken up his young
friend’s invitation to look at Sir Dominick Ferrand’s letters for
himself.  Peter drew them forth with a promptitude intended to show that
he recognised the commercial character of the call and without
attenuating the inconsequence of this departure from the last
determination he had expressed to Mr. Locket.  He showed his visitor the
davenport and the hidden recess, and he smoked a cigarette, humming
softly, with a sense of unwonted advantage and triumph, while the
cautious editor sat silent and handled the papers.  For all his caution
Mr. Locket was unable to keep a warmer light out of his judicial eye as
he said to Baron at last with sociable brevity—a tone that took many
things for granted: “I’ll take them home with me—they require much
attention.”

The young man looked at him a moment.  “Do you think they’re genuine?”
He didn’t mean to be mocking, he meant not to be; but the words sounded
so to his own ear, and he could see that they produced that effect on Mr.
Locket.

“I can’t in the least determine.  I shall have to go into them at my
leisure, and that’s why I ask you to lend them to me.”

He had shuffled the papers together with a movement charged, while he
spoke, with the air of being preliminary to that of thrusting them into a
little black bag which he had brought with him and which, resting on the
shelf of the davenport, struck Peter, who viewed it askance, as an object
darkly editorial.  It made our young man, somehow, suddenly apprehensive;
the advantage of which he had just been conscious was about to be
transferred by a quiet process of legerdemain to a person who already had
advantages enough.  Baron, in short, felt a deep pang of anxiety; he
couldn’t have said why.  Mr. Locket took decidedly too many things for
granted, and the explorer of Sir Dominick Ferrand’s irregularities
remembered afresh how clear he had been after all about his indisposition
to traffic in them.  He asked his visitor to what end he wished to remove
the letters, since on the one hand there was no question now of the
article in the Promiscuous which was to reveal their existence, and on
the other he himself, as their owner, had a thousand insurmountable
scruples about putting them into circulation.

Mr. Locket looked over his spectacles as over the battlements of a
fortress.  “I’m not thinking of the end—I’m thinking of the beginning.  A
few glances have assured me that such documents ought to be submitted to
some competent eye.”

“Oh, you mustn’t show them to anyone!” Baron exclaimed.

“You may think me presumptuous, but the eye that I venture to allude to
in those terms—”

“Is the eye now fixed so terribly on _me_?” Peter laughingly interrupted.
“Oh, it would be interesting, I confess, to know how they strike a man of
your acuteness!”  It had occurred to him that by such a concession he
might endear himself to a literary umpire hitherto implacable.  There
would be no question of his publishing Sir Dominick Ferrand, but he
might, in due acknowledgment of services rendered, form the habit of
publishing Peter Baron.  “How long would it be your idea to retain them?”
he inquired, in a manner which, he immediately became aware, was what
incited Mr. Locket to begin stuffing the papers into his bag.  With this
perception he came quickly closer and, laying his hand on the gaping
receptacle, lightly drew its two lips together.  In this way the two men
stood for a few seconds, touching, almost in the attitude of combat,
looking hard into each other’s eyes.

The tension was quickly relieved however by the surprised flush which
mantled on Mr. Locket’s brow.  He fell back a few steps with an injured
dignity that might have been a protest against physical violence.
“Really, my dear young sir, your attitude is tantamount to an accusation
of intended bad faith.  Do you think I want to steal the confounded
things?”  In reply to such a challenge Peter could only hastily declare
that he was guilty of no discourteous suspicion—he only wanted a limit
named, a pledge of every precaution against accident.  Mr. Locket
admitted the justice of the demand, assured him he would restore the
property within three days, and completed, with Peter’s assistance, his
little arrangements for removing it discreetly.  When he was ready, his
treacherous reticule distended with its treasures, he gave a lingering
look at the inscrutable davenport.  “It’s how they ever got into that
thing that puzzles one’s brain!”

“There was some concatenation of circumstances that would doubtless seem
natural enough if it were explained, but that one would have to remount
the stream of time to ascertain.  To one course I have definitely made up
my mind: not to make any statement or any inquiry at the shop.  I simply
accept the mystery,” said Peter, rather grandly.

“That would be thought a cheap escape if you were to put it into a
story,” Mr. Locket smiled.

“Yes, I shouldn’t offer the story to _you_.  I shall be impatient till I
see my papers again,” the young man called out, as his visitor hurried
downstairs.

That evening, by the last delivery, he received, under the Dover
postmark, a letter that was not from Miss Teagle.  It was a slightly
confused but altogether friendly note, written that morning after
breakfast, the ostensible purpose of which was to thank him for the
amiability of his visit, to express regret at any appearance the writer
might have had of meddling with what didn’t concern her, and to let him
know that the evening before, after he had left her, she had in a moment
of inspiration got hold of the tail of a really musical idea—a perfect
accompaniment for the song he had so kindly given her.  She had scrawled,
as a specimen, a few bars at the end of her note, mystic, mocking musical
signs which had no sense for her correspondent.  The whole letter
testified to a restless but rather pointless desire to remain in
communication with him.  In answering her, however, which he did that
night before going to bed, it was on this bright possibility of their
collaboration, its advantages for the future of each of them, that Baron
principally expatiated.  He spoke of this future with an eloquence of
which he would have defended the sincerity, and drew of it a picture
extravagantly rich.  The next morning, as he was about to settle himself
to tasks for some time terribly neglected, with a sense that after all it
was rather a relief not to be sitting so close to Sir Dominick Ferrand,
who had become dreadfully distracting; at the very moment at which he
habitually addressed his preliminary invocation to the muse, he was
agitated by the arrival of a telegram which proved to be an urgent
request from Mr. Locket that he would immediately come down and see him.
This represented, for poor Baron, whose funds were very low, another
morning sacrificed, but somehow it didn’t even occur to him that he might
impose his own time upon the editor of the Promiscuous, the keeper of the
keys of renown.  He had some of the plasticity of the raw contributor.
He gave the muse another holiday, feeling she was really ashamed to take
it, and in course of time found himself in Mr. Locket’s own chair at Mr.
Locket’s own table—so much nobler an expanse than the slippery slope of
the davenport—considering with quick intensity, in the white flash of
certain words just brought out by his host, the quantity of happiness, of
emancipation that might reside in a hundred pounds.

Yes, that was what it meant: Mr. Locket, in the twenty-four hours, had
discovered so much in Sir Dominick’s literary remains that his visitor
found him primed with an offer.  A hundred pounds would be paid him that
day, that minute, and no questions would be either asked or answered.  “I
take all the risks, I take all the risks,” the editor of the Promiscuous
repeated.  The letters were out on the table, Mr. Locket was on the
hearthrug, like an orator on a platform, and Peter, under the influence
of his sudden ultimatum, had dropped, rather weakly, into the seat which
happened to be nearest and which, as he became conscious it moved on a
pivot, he whirled round so as to enable himself to look at his tempter
with an eye intended to be cold.  What surprised him most was to find Mr.
Locket taking exactly the line about the expediency of publication which
he would have expected Mr. Locket not to take.  “Hush it all up; a barren
scandal, an offence that can’t be remedied, is the thing in the world
that least justifies an airing—” some such line as that was the line he
would have thought natural to a man whose life was spent in weighing
questions of propriety and who had only the other day objected, in the
light of this virtue, to a work of the most disinterested art.  But the
author of that incorruptible masterpiece had put his finger on the place
in saying to his interlocutor on the occasion of his last visit that, if
given to the world in the pages of the Promiscuous, Sir Dominick’s
aberrations would sell the edition.  It was not necessary for Mr. Locket
to reiterate to his young friend his phrase about their making a
sensation.  If he wished to purchase the “rights,” as theatrical people
said, it was not to protect a celebrated name or to lock them up in a
cupboard.  That formula of Baron’s covered all the ground, and one
edition was a low estimate of the probable performance of the magazine.

Peter left the letters behind him and, on withdrawing from the editorial
presence, took a long walk on the Embankment.  His impressions were at
war with each other—he was flurried by possibilities of which he yet
denied the existence.  He had consented to trust Mr. Locket with the
papers a day or two longer, till he should have thought out the terms on
which he might—in the event of certain occurrences—be induced to dispose
of them.  A hundred pounds were not this gentleman’s last word, nor
perhaps was mere unreasoning intractability Peter’s own.  He sighed as he
took no note of the pictures made by barges—sighed because it all might
mean money.  He needed money bitterly; he owed it in disquieting
quarters.  Mr. Locket had put it before him that he had a high
responsibility—that he might vindicate the disfigured truth, contribute a
chapter to the history of England.  “You haven’t a right to suppress such
momentous facts,” the hungry little editor had declared, thinking how the
series (he would spread it into three numbers) would be the talk of the
town.  If Peter had money he might treat himself to ardour, to bliss.
Mr. Locket had said, no doubt justly enough, that there were ever so many
questions one would have to meet should one venture to play so daring a
game.  These questions, embarrassments, dangers—the danger, for instance,
of the cropping-up of some lurking litigious relative—he would take over
unreservedly and bear the brunt of dealing with.  It was to be remembered
that the papers were discredited, vitiated by their childish pedigree;
such a preposterous origin, suggesting, as he had hinted before, the
feeble ingenuity of a third-rate novelist, was a thing he should have to
place himself at the positive disadvantage of being silent about.  He
would rather give no account of the matter at all than expose himself to
the ridicule that such a story would infallibly excite.  Couldn’t one see
them in advance, the clever, taunting things the daily and weekly papers
would say?  Peter Baron had his guileless side, but he felt, as he
worried with a stick that betrayed him the granite parapets of the
Thames, that he was not such a fool as not to know how Mr. Locket would
“work” the mystery of his marvellous find.  Nothing could help it on
better with the public than the impenetrability of the secret attached to
it.  If Mr. Locket should only be able to kick up dust enough over the
circumstances that had guided his hand his fortune would literally be
made.  Peter thought a hundred pounds a low bid, yet he wondered how the
Promiscuous could bring itself to offer such a sum—so large it loomed in
the light of literary remuneration as hitherto revealed to our young man.
The explanation of this anomaly was of course that the editor shrewdly
saw a dozen ways of getting his money back.  There would be in the
“sensation,” at a later stage, the making of a book in large type—the
book of the hour; and the profits of this scandalous volume or, if one
preferred the name, this reconstruction, before an impartial posterity,
of a great historical humbug, the sum “down,” in other words, that any
lively publisher would give for it, figured vividly in Mr. Locket’s
calculations.  It was therefore altogether an opportunity of dealing at
first hand with the lively publisher that Peter was invited to forego.
Peter gave a masterful laugh, rejoicing in his heart that, on the spot,
in the _repaire_ he had lately quitted, he had not been tempted by a
figure that would have approximately represented the value of his
property.  It was a good job, he mentally added as he turned his face
homeward, that there was so little likelihood of his having to struggle
with that particular pressure.




VI.


WHEN, half an hour later, he approached Jersey Villas, he noticed that
the house-door was open; then, as he reached the gate, saw it make a
frame for an unexpected presence.  Mrs. Ryves, in her bonnet and jacket,
looked out from it as if she were expecting something—as if she had been
passing to and fro to watch.  Yet when he had expressed to her that it
was a delightful welcome she replied that she had only thought there
might possibly be a cab in sight.  He offered to go and look for one,
upon which it appeared that after all she was not, as yet at least, in
need.  He went back with her into her sitting-room, where she let him
know that within a couple of days she had seen clearer what was best; she
had determined to quit Jersey Villas and had come up to take away her
things, which she had just been packing and getting together.

“I wrote you last night a charming letter in answer to yours,” Baron
said.  “You didn’t mention in yours that you were coming up.”

“It wasn’t your answer that brought me.  It hadn’t arrived when I came
away.”

“You’ll see when you get back that my letter is charming.”

“I daresay.”  Baron had observed that the room was not, as she had
intimated, in confusion—Mrs. Ryves’s preparations for departure were not
striking.  She saw him look round and, standing in front of the fireless
grate with her hands behind her, she suddenly asked: “Where have you come
from now?”

“From an interview with a literary friend.”

“What are you concocting between you?”

“Nothing at all.  We’ve fallen out—we don’t agree.”

“Is he a publisher?”

“He’s an editor.”

“Well, I’m glad you don’t agree.  I don’t know what he wants, but,
whatever it is, don’t do it.”

“He must do what _I_ want!” said Baron.

“And what’s that?”

“Oh, I’ll tell you when he has done it!”  Baron begged her to let him
hear the “musical idea” she had mentioned in her letter; on which she
took off her hat and jacket and, seating herself at her piano, gave him,
with a sentiment of which the very first notes thrilled him, the
accompaniment of his song.  She phrased the words with her sketchy
sweetness, and he sat there as if he had been held in a velvet vise,
throbbing with the emotion, irrecoverable ever after in its freshness, of
the young artist in the presence for the first time of “production”—the
proofs of his book, the hanging of his picture, the rehearsal of his
play.  When she had finished he asked again for the same delight, and
then for more music and for more; it did him such a world of good, kept
him quiet and safe, smoothed out the creases of his spirit.  She dropped
her own experiments and gave him immortal things, and he lounged there,
pacified and charmed, feeling the mean little room grow large and vague
and happy possibilities come back.  Abruptly, at the piano, she called
out to him: “Those papers of yours—the letters you found—are not in the
house?”

“No, they’re not in the house.”

“I was sure of it!  No matter—it’s all right!” she added.  She herself
was pacified—trouble was a false note.  Later he was on the point of
asking her how she knew the objects she had mentioned were not in the
house; but he let it pass.  The subject was a profitless riddle—a puzzle
that grew grotesquely bigger, like some monstrosity seen in the darkness,
as one opened one’s eyes to it.  He closed his eyes—he wanted another
vision.  Besides, she had shown him that she had extraordinary senses—her
explanation would have been stranger than the fact.  Moreover they had
other things to talk about, in particular the question of her putting off
her return to Dover till the morrow and dispensing meanwhile with the
valuable protection of Sidney.  This was indeed but another face of the
question of her dining with him somewhere that evening (where else should
she dine?)—accompanying him, for instance, just for an hour of Bohemia,
in their deadly respectable lives, to a jolly little place in Soho.  Mrs.
Ryves declined to have her life abused, but in fact, at the proper
moment, at the jolly little place, to which she did accompany him—it
dealt in macaroni and Chianti—the pair put their elbows on the crumpled
cloth and, face to face, with their little emptied coffee-cups pushed
away and the young man’s cigarette lighted by her command, became
increasingly confidential.  They went afterwards to the theatre, in cheap
places, and came home in “busses” and under umbrellas.

On the way back Peter Baron turned something over in his mind as he had
never turned anything before; it was the question of whether, at the end,
she would let him come into her sitting-room for five minutes.  He felt
on this point a passion of suspense and impatience, and yet for what
would it be but to tell her how poor he was?  This was literally the
moment to say it, so supremely depleted had the hour of Bohemia left him.
Even Bohemia was too expensive, and yet in the course of the day his
whole temper on the subject of certain fitnesses had changed.  At Jersey
Villas (it was near midnight, and Mrs. Ryves, scratching a light for her
glimmering taper, had said: “Oh, yes, come in for a minute if you
like!”), in her precarious parlour, which was indeed, after the
brilliances of the evening, a return to ugliness and truth, she let him
stand while he explained that he had certainly everything in the way of
fame and fortune still to gain, but that youth and love and faith and
energy—to say nothing of her supreme dearness—were all on his side.  Why,
if one’s beginnings were rough, should one add to the hardness of the
conditions by giving up the dream which, if she would only hear him out,
would make just the blessed difference?  Whether Mrs. Ryves heard him out
or not is a circumstance as to which this chronicle happens to be silent;
but after he had got possession of both her hands and breathed into her
face for a moment all the intensity of his tenderness—in the relief and
joy of utterance he felt it carry him like a rising flood—she checked him
with better reasons, with a cold, sweet afterthought in which he felt
there was something deep.  Her procrastinating head-shake was prettier
than ever, yet it had never meant so many fears and pains—impossibilities
and memories, independences and pieties, and a sort of uncomplaining ache
for the ruin of a friendship that had been happy.  She had liked him—if
she hadn’t she wouldn’t have let him think so!—but she protested that she
had not, in the odious vulgar sense, “encouraged” him.  Moreover she
couldn’t talk of such things in that place, at that hour, and she begged
him not to make her regret her good-nature in staying over.  There were
peculiarities in her position, considerations insurmountable.  She got
rid of him with kind and confused words, and afterwards, in the dull,
humiliated night, he felt that he had been put in his place.  Women in
her situation, women who after having really loved and lost, usually
lived on into the new dawns in which old ghosts steal away.  But there
was something in his whimsical neighbour that struck him as terribly
invulnerable.




VII.


“I’VE had time to look a little further into what we’re prepared to do,
and I find the case is one in which I should consider the advisability of
going to an extreme length,” said Mr. Locket.  Jersey Villas the next
morning had had the privilege of again receiving the editor of the
Promiscuous, and he sat once more at the davenport, where the bone of
contention, in the shape of a large, loose heap of papers that showed how
much they had been handled, was placed well in view.  “We shall see our
way to offering you three hundred, but we shouldn’t, I must positively
assure you, see it a single step further.”

Peter Baron, in his dressing-gown and slippers, with his hands in his
pockets, crept softly about the room, repeating, below his breath and
with inflections that for his own sake he endeavoured to make humorous:
“Three hundred—three hundred.”  His state of mind was far from hilarious,
for he felt poor and sore and disappointed; but he wanted to prove to
himself that he was gallant—was made, in general and in particular, of
undiscourageable stuff.  The first thing he had been aware of on stepping
into his front room was that a four-wheeled cab, with Mrs. Ryves’s
luggage upon it, stood at the door of No. 3.  Permitting himself, behind
his curtain, a pardonable peep, he saw the mistress of his thoughts come
out of the house, attended by Mrs. Bundy, and take her place in the
modest vehicle.  After this his eyes rested for a long time on the
sprigged cotton back of the landlady, who kept bobbing at the window of
the cab an endlessly moralising old head.  Mrs. Ryves had really taken
flight—he had made Jersey Villas impossible for her—but Mrs. Bundy, with
a magnanimity unprecedented in the profession, seemed to express a belief
in the purity of her motives.  Baron felt that his own separation had
been, for the present at least, effected; every instinct of delicacy
prompted him to stand back.

Mr. Locket talked a long time, and Peter Baron listened and waited.  He
reflected that his willingness to listen would probably excite hopes in
his visitor—hopes which he himself was ready to contemplate without a
scruple.  He felt no pity for Mr. Locket and had no consideration for his
suspense or for his possible illusions; he only felt sick and forsaken
and in want of comfort and of money.  Yet it was a kind of outrage to his
dignity to have the knife held to his throat, and he was irritated above
all by the ground on which Mr. Locket put the question—the ground of a
service rendered to historical truth.  It might be—he wasn’t clear; it
might be—the question was deep, too deep, probably, for his wisdom; at
any rate he had to control himself not to interrupt angrily such dry,
interested palaver, the false voice of commerce and of cant.  He stared
tragically out of the window and saw the stupid rain begin to fall; the
day was duller even than his own soul, and Jersey Villas looked so
sordidly hideous that it was no wonder Mrs. Ryves couldn’t endure them.
Hideous as they were he should have to tell Mrs. Bundy in the course of
the day that he was obliged to seek humbler quarters.  Suddenly he
interrupted Mr. Locket; he observed to him: “I take it that if I should
make you this concession the hospitality of the Promiscuous would be by
that very fact unrestrictedly secured to me.”

Mr. Locket stared.  “Hospitality—secured?”  He thumbed the proposition as
if it were a hard peach.

“I mean that of course you wouldn’t—in courtsey, in gratitude—keep on
declining my things.”

“I should give them my best attention—as I’ve always done in the past.”

Peter Baron hesitated.  It was a case in which there would have seemed to
be some chance for the ideally shrewd aspirant in such an advantage as he
possessed; but after a moment the blood rushed into his face with the
shame of the idea of pleading for his productions in the name of anything
but their merit.  It was as if he had stupidly uttered evil of them.
Nevertheless be added the interrogation:

“Would you for instance publish my little story?”

“The one I read (and objected to some features of) the other day?  Do you
mean—a—with the alteration?” Mr. Locket continued.

“Oh, no, I mean utterly without it.  The pages you want altered contain,
as I explained to you very lucidly, I think, the very _raison d’être_ of
the work, and it would therefore, it seems to me, be an imbecility of the
first magnitude to cancel them.”  Peter had really renounced all hope
that his critic would understand what he meant, but, under favour of
circumstances, he couldn’t forbear to taste the luxury, which probably
never again would come within his reach, of being really plain, for one
wild moment, with an editor.

Mr. Locket gave a constrained smile.  “Think of the scandal, Mr. Baron.”

“But isn’t this other scandal just what you’re going in for?”

“It will be a great public service.”

“You mean it will be a big scandal, whereas my poor story would be a very
small one, and that it’s only out of a big one that money’s to be made.”

Mr. Locket got up—he too had his dignity to vindicate.  “Such a sum as I
offer you ought really to be an offset against all claims.”

“Very good—I don’t mean to make any, since you don’t really care for what
I write.  I take note of your offer,” Peter pursued, “and I engage to
give you to-night (in a few words left by my own hand at your house) my
absolutely definite and final reply.”

Mr. Locket’s movements, as he hovered near the relics of the eminent
statesman, were those of some feathered parent fluttering over a
threatened nest.  If he had brought his huddled brood back with him this
morning it was because he had felt sure enough of closing the bargain to
be able to be graceful.  He kept a glittering eye on the papers and
remarked that he was afraid that before leaving them he must elicit some
assurance that in the meanwhile Peter would not place them in any other
hands.  Peter, at this, gave a laugh of harsher cadence than he intended,
asking, justly enough, on what privilege his visitor rested such a demand
and why he himself was disqualified from offering his wares to the
highest bidder.  “Surely you wouldn’t hawk such things about?” cried Mr.
Locket; but before Baron had time to retort cynically he added: “I’ll
publish your little story.”

“Oh, thank you!”

“I’ll publish anything you’ll send me,” Mr. Locket continued, as he went
out.  Peter had before this virtually given his word that for the letters
he would treat only with the Promiscuous.

The young man passed, during a portion of the rest of the day, the
strangest hours of his life.  Yet he thought of them afterwards not as a
phase of temptation, though they had been full of the emotion that
accompanies an intense vision of alternatives.  The struggle was already
over; it seemed to him that, poor as he was, he was not poor enough to
take Mr. Locket’s money.  He looked at the opposed courses with the
self-possession of a man who has chosen, but this self-possession was in
itself the most exquisite of excitements.  It was really a high revulsion
and a sort of noble pity.  He seemed indeed to have his finger upon the
pulse of history and to be in the secret of the gods.  He had them all in
his hand, the tablets and the scales and the torch.  He couldn’t keep a
character together, but he might easily pull one to pieces.  That would
be “creative work” of a kind—he could reconstruct the character less
pleasingly, could show an unknown side of it.  Mr. Locket had had a good
deal to say about responsibility; and responsibility in truth sat there
with him all the morning, while he revolved in his narrow cage and,
watching the crude spring rain on the windows, thought of the dismalness
to which, at Dover, Mrs. Ryves was going back.  This influence took in
fact the form, put on the physiognomy of poor Sir Dominick Ferrand; he
was at present as perceptible in it, as coldly and strangely personal, as
if he had been a haunting ghost and had risen beside his own old
hearthstone.  Our friend was accustomed to his company and indeed had
spent so many hours in it of late, following him up at the museum and
comparing his different portraits, engravings and lithographs, in which
there seemed to be conscious, pleading eyes for the betrayer, that their
queer intimacy had grown as close as an embrace.  Sir Dominick was very
dumb, but he was terrible in his dependence, and Peter would not have
encouraged him by so much curiosity nor reassured him by so much
deference had it not been for the young man’s complete acceptance of the
impossibility of getting out of a tight place by exposing an individual.
It didn’t matter that the individual was dead; it didn’t matter that he
was dishonest.  Peter felt him sufficiently alive to suffer; he perceived
the rectification of history so conscientiously desired by Mr. Locket to
be somehow for himself not an imperative task.  It had come over him too
definitely that in a case where one’s success was to hinge upon an act of
extradition it would minister most to an easy conscience to let the
success go.  No, no—even should he be starving he couldn’t make money out
of Sir Dominick’s disgrace.  He was almost surprised at the violence of
the horror with which, as he shuffled mournfully about, the idea of any
such profit inspired him.  What was Sir Dominick to him after all?  He
wished he had never come across him.

In one of his brooding pauses at the window—the window out of which never
again apparently should he see Mrs. Ryves glide across the little garden
with the step for which he had liked her from the first—he became aware
that the rain was about to intermit and the sun to make some grudging
amends.  This was a sign that he might go out; he had a vague perception
that there were things to be done.  He had work to look for, and a
cheaper lodging, and a new idea (every idea he had ever cherished had
left him), in addition to which the promised little word was to be
dropped at Mr. Locket’s door.  He looked at his watch and was surprised
at the hour, for he had nothing but a heartache to show for so much time.
He would have to dress quickly, but as he passed to his bedroom his eye
was caught by the little pyramid of letters which Mr. Locket had
constructed on his davenport.  They startled him and, staring at them, he
stopped for an instant, half-amused, half-annoyed at their being still in
existence.  He had so completely destroyed them in spirit that he had
taken the act for granted, and he was now reminded of the orderly stages
of which an intention must consist to be sincere.  Baron went at the
papers with all his sincerity, and at his empty grate (where there lately
had been no fire and he had only to remove a horrible ornament of
tissue-paper dear to Mrs. Bundy) he burned the collection with infinite
method.  It made him feel happier to watch the worst pages turn to
illegible ashes—if happiness be the right word to apply to his sense, in
the process, of something so crisp and crackling that it suggested the
death-rustle of bank-notes.

When ten minutes later he came back into his sitting-room, he seemed to
himself oddly, unexpectedly in the presence of a bigger view.  It was as
if some interfering mass had been so displaced that he could see more sky
and more country.  Yet the opposite houses were naturally still there,
and if the grimy little place looked lighter it was doubtless only
because the rain had indeed stopped and the sun was pouring in.  Peter
went to the window to open it to the altered air, and in doing so beheld
at the garden gate the humble “growler” in which a few hours before he
had seen Mrs. Ryves take her departure.  It was unmistakable—he
remembered the knock-kneed white horse; but this made the fact that his
friend’s luggage no longer surmounted it only the more mystifying.
Perhaps the cabman had already removed the luggage—he was now on his box
smoking the short pipe that derived relish from inaction paid for.  As
Peter turned into the room again his ears caught a knock at his own door,
a knock explained, as soon as he had responded, by the hard breathing of
Mrs. Bundy.

“Please, sir, it’s to say she’ve come back.”

“What has she come back for?” Baron’s question sounded ungracious, but
his heartache had given another throb, and he felt a dread of another
wound.  It was like a practical joke.

“I think it’s for you, sir,” said Mrs. Bundy.  “She’ll see you for a
moment, if you’ll be so good, in the old place.”

Peter followed his hostess downstairs, and Mrs. Bundy ushered him, with
her company flourish, into the apartment she had fondly designated.

“I went away this morning, and I’ve only returned for an instant,” said
Mrs. Ryves, as soon as Mrs. Bundy had closed the door.  He saw that she
was different now; something had happened that had made her indulgent.

“Have you been all the way to Dover and back?”

“No, but I’ve been to Victoria.  I’ve left my luggage there—I’ve been
driving about.”

“I hope you’ve enjoyed it.”

“Very much.  I’ve been to see Mr. Morrish.”

“Mr. Morrish?”

“The musical publisher.  I showed him our song.  I played it for him, and
he’s delighted with it.  He declares it’s just the thing.  He has given
me fifty pounds.  I think he believes in us,” Mrs. Ryves went on, while
Baron stared at the wonder—too sweet to be safe, it seemed to him as
yet—of her standing there again before him and speaking of what they had
in common.  “Fifty pounds! fifty pounds!” she exclaimed, fluttering at
him her happy cheque.  She had come back, the first thing, to tell him,
and of course his share of the money would be the half.  She was rosy,
jubilant, natural, she chattered like a happy woman.  She said they must
do more, ever so much more.  Mr. Morrish had practically promised he
would take anything that was as good as that.  She had kept her cab
because she was going to Dover; she couldn’t leave the others alone.  It
was a vehicle infirm and inert, but Baron, after a little, appreciated
its pace, for she had consented to his getting in with her and driving,
this time in earnest, to Victoria.  She had only come to tell him the
good news—she repeated this assurance more than once.  They talked of it
so profoundly that it drove everything else for the time out of his
head—his duty to Mr. Locket, the remarkable sacrifice he had just
achieved, and even the odd coincidence, matching with the oddity of all
the others, of her having reverted to the house again, as if with one of
her famous divinations, at the very moment the trumpery papers, the
origin really of their intimacy, had ceased to exist.  But she, on her
side, also had evidently forgotten the trumpery papers: she never
mentioned them again, and Peter Baron never boasted of what he had done
with them.  He was silent for a while, from curiosity to see if her fine
nerves had really given her a hint; and then later, when it came to be a
question of his permanent attitude, he was silent, prodigiously,
religiously, tremulously silent, in consequence of an extraordinary
conversation that he had with her.

This conversation took place at Dover, when he went down to give her the
money for which, at Mr. Morrish’s bank, he had exchanged the cheque she
had left with him.  That cheque, or rather certain things it represented,
had made somehow all the difference in their relations.  The difference
was huge, and Baron could think of nothing but this confirmed vision of
their being able to work fruitfully together that would account for so
rapid a change.  She didn’t talk of impossibilities now—she didn’t seem
to want to stop him off; only when, the day following his arrival at
Dover with the fifty pounds (he had after all to agree to share them with
her—he couldn’t expect her to take a present of money from him), he
returned to the question over which they had had their little scene the
night they dined together—on this occasion (he had brought a portmanteau
and he was staying) she mentioned that there was something very
particular she had it on her conscience to tell him before letting him
commit himself.  There dawned in her face as she approached the subject a
light of warning that frightened him; it was charged with something so
strange that for an instant he held his breath.  This flash of ugly
possibilities passed however, and it was with the gesture of taking still
tenderer possession of her, checked indeed by the grave, important way
she held up a finger, that he answered: “Tell me everything—tell me!”

“You must know what I am—who I am; you must know especially what I’m not!
There’s a name for it, a hideous, cruel name.  It’s not my fault!  Others
have known, I’ve had to speak of it—it has made a great difference in my
life.  Surely you must have guessed!” she went on, with the thinnest
quaver of irony, letting him now take her hand, which felt as cold as her
hard duty.  “Don’t you see I’ve no belongings, no relations, no friends,
nothing at all, in all the world, of my own?  I was only a poor girl.”

“A poor girl?” Baron was mystified, touched, distressed, piecing dimly
together what she meant, but feeling, in a great surge of pity, that it
was only something more to love her for.

“My mother—my poor mother,” said Mrs. Ryves.

She paused with this, and through gathering tears her eyes met his as if
to plead with him to understand.  He understood, and drew her closer, but
she kept herself free still, to continue: “She was a poor girl—she was
only a governess; she was alone, she thought he loved her.  He did—I
think it was the only happiness she ever knew.  But she died of it.”

“Oh, I’m so glad you tell me—it’s so grand of you!” Baron murmured.
“Then—your father?”  He hesitated, as if with his hands on old wounds.

“He had his own troubles, but he was kind to her.  It was all misery and
folly—he was married.  He wasn’t happy—there were good reasons, I
believe, for that.  I know it from letters, I know it from a person who’s
dead.  Everyone is dead now—it’s too far off.  That’s the only good
thing.  He was very kind to me; I remember him, though I didn’t know
then, as a little girl, who he was.  He put me with some very good
people—he did what he could for me.  I think, later, his wife knew—a lady
who came to see me once after his death.  I was a very little girl, but I
remember many things.  What he could he did—something that helped me
afterwards, something that helps me now.  I think of him with a strange
pity—I _see_ him!” said Mrs. Ryves, with the faint past in her eyes.
“You mustn’t say anything against him,” she added, gently and gravely.

“Never—never; for he has only made it more of a rapture to care for you.”

“You must wait, you must think; we must wait together,” she went on.
“You can’t tell, and you must give me time.  Now that you know, it’s all
right; but you had to know.  Doesn’t it make us better friends?” asked
Mrs. Ryves, with a tired smile which had the effect of putting the whole
story further and further away.  The next moment, however, she added
quickly, as if with the sense that it couldn’t be far enough: “You don’t
know, you can’t judge, you must let it settle.  Think of it, think of it;
oh you will, and leave it so.  I must have time myself, oh I must!  Yes,
you must believe me.”

She turned away from him, and he remained looking at her a moment.  “Ah,
how I shall work for you!” he exclaimed.

“You must work for yourself; I’ll help you.”  Her eyes had met his eyes
again, and she added, hesitating, thinking: “You had better know,
perhaps, who he was.”

Baron shook his head, smiling confidently.  “I don’t care a straw.”

“I do—a little.  He was a great man.”

“There must indeed have been some good in him.”

“He was a high celebrity.  You’ve often heard of him.”

Baron wondered an instant.  “I’ve no doubt you’re a princess!” he said
with a laugh.  She made him nervous.

“I’m not ashamed of him.  He was Sir Dominick Ferrand.”

Baron saw in her face, in a few seconds, that she had seen something in
his.  He knew that he stared, then turned pale; it had the effect of a
powerful shock.  He was cold for an instant, as he had just found her,
with the sense of danger, the confused horror of having dealt a blow.
But the blood rushed back to its courses with his still quicker
consciousness of safety, and he could make out, as he recovered his
balance, that his emotion struck her simply as a violent surprise.  He
gave a muffled murmur: “Ah, it’s you, my beloved!” which lost itself as
he drew her close and held her long, in the intensity of his embrace and
the wonder of his escape.  It took more than a minute for him to say over
to himself often enough, with his hidden face: “Ah, she must never, never
know!”

She never knew; she only learned, when she asked him casually, that he
had in fact destroyed the old documents she had had such a comic caprice
about.  The sensibility, the curiosity they had had the queer privilege
of exciting in her had lapsed with the event as irresponsibly as they had
arisen, and she appeared to have forgotten, or rather to attribute now to
other causes, the agitation and several of the odd incidents that
accompanied them.  They naturally gave Peter Baron rather more to think
about, much food, indeed, for clandestine meditation, some of which, in
spite of the pains he took not to be caught, was noted by his friend and
interpreted, to his knowledge, as depression produced by the long
probation she succeeded in imposing on him.  He was more patient than she
could guess, with all her guessing, for if he was put to the proof she
herself was not left undissected.  It came back to him again and again
that if the documents he had burned proved anything they proved that Sir
Dominick Ferrand’s human errors were not all of one order.  The woman he
loved was the daughter of her father, he couldn’t get over that.  What
was more to the point was that as he came to know her better and
better—for they did work together under Mr. Morrish’s protection—his
affection was a quantity still less to be neglected.  He sometimes
wondered, in the light of her general straightness (their marriage had
brought out even more than he believed there was of it) whether the
relics in the davenport were genuine.  That piece of furniture is still
almost as useful to him as Mr. Morrish’s patronage.  There is a
tremendous run, as this gentlemen calls it, on several of their songs.
Baron nevertheless still tries his hand also at prose, and his offerings
are now not always declined by the magazines.  But he has never
approached the Promiscuous again.  This periodical published in due
course a highly eulogistic study of the remarkable career of Sir Dominick
Ferrand.




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SIR DOMINICK FERRAND***


******* This file should be named 2716-0.txt or 2716-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/7/1/2716


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

