 also what a specialle desire and affeccion, you beare to Eloquence: I therefore, commende to your Lordshippes tuicion and patronage, this treatise of Rhetorique, to the ende that ye may get some furtheraunce by the same, and I also be discharged of my faithfull promise, this last yere made vnto you. For, where as it pleased you, emong other talke of learnyng, earnestlie to wishe, that ye might one daie see the Preceptes of Rhetorique, sette foorthe by me in Englishe, as I had erste doen the rules of Logique: hauyng in my Countrie this laste Sommer, a quiet time of vacacion, with the right worshipfull sir Edward Dimmoke knight: I traueiled so moche, as my leasure might serue thereunto, not onelie to declare my good harte, to the satisfiyng of your requeste in that behalfe, but also through that your mocion, to helpe the towardnes of some other, not so well furnished as your Lordshippe is. For, as touchyng your self, by the tyme that perfecte experience, of manifolde and weightie matters of the common weale, shall haue encreased the eloquence, whiche alredie doeth naturallie flowe in you: I doubte nothyng, but you will so farre bee better then this my booke, that I shall not onelie bloushe to chalenge you for a Scholer, in the Arte of Rhetorique, by me rudelie sette forthe: but also bee driuen to sette this simple treatise, to your Lordship to schole, that it maie learne Rhetorique of your daielie talke, findyng you soche an Oratour in your speache, as greate Clarkes dooe declare, what an Oratour should bee. In the meane season, I shall right humblie beseche your good Lordshippe, so to bee a Patrone and defendour, of these my labours, to you dedicated: as I shall bee a continuall peticioner vnto almightie God for your preseruacion, and longe continuaunce. Greate maie their boldenesse bee thought, that seke without feare to set forthe their knowlege: and suffer their doynges to be seen, thei care not to whom. For not onelie thereby dooe thei bryng men to thinke, that thei stande moche in their owne conceipt, but also thei seme to assure them selues, that all men will like, whatsoeuer thei write. Wherein thei commit twoo greate faultes: the one is, that thei are proude: the other is, that thei are fonde. For, what greater pride can there be, then for anyman, to thinke himself to be wiser then all men liuing? or what greater folie can be imamagined, then for one to thinke, that all men will like what soeuer he writeth? Soche are thei for the moste parte by all likelihode, that dooe sette forthe bookes. Wherein thei dooe bothe betraie theim selues, and also giue greate occasion to the worlde, to talke largelie of theim. But all those that doe write, are not soche as I saie, nor meane not as I thinke, as the whiche are wise and learned men, writyng onely vnder the correccion of others, to edifie their neighboure, and not sekyng in any wise their owne glorie. Neither all that be readers, will talke their pleasures, but rather staie their iudgementes, and waie thinges with reason. Some perhappes maie like the writer, if his dooynges bee good, but the moste parte vndoubtedlie, must of force bee offended, as the whiche are corrupte of iudgement, bicause thei are nought. Then soche as seeke the greateste praise, for writing of bookes, should dooe beste in my simple minde, to write foolishe toies, for then the moste part, would beste esteme them. And herein perhappes maie I get some aduauntage, that in my young yeres, haue been bolde to sette forthe my simple fansies. For in folie I dare compare with the proudest, and in pride I dare match with him, that is most folishe: not doubting but to finde soche felowes, that not onelie will seeke to bee eguall vnto me, and perhappes excell me, but also soche Oratore, bringeth in one Lucilius, a pleasaunt and merie conceited manne, who saieth, that he would not haue soche thinges as he wrote to bee redde, either of those that were excellentlie learned, or of theim that were altogether ignoraunt. For that the one would thinke more of his doynges, and haue a farther meanyng with him, then euer the aucthour self thought: thother taking the booke in his hand, would vnderstande nothing at all, beyng as meete to reade aucthours, as an Asse to plaie on the Organnes. This man in thus saiyng had some reason. But I being somewhat acquainted with the worlde, haue founde out an other sorte of men, whom of all others, I would be lothe should reade any of my dooynges: especiallie soche thinges as either touched Christ, or any good doctrine. And those are soche malicious folke, that loue to finde faultes in other mennes matters, and seuen yeres together will kepe theim in store, to the vtter vndoyng of their christian brother: not minding to reade for their better learning, but seking to depraue whatsoeuer thei finde, & watching their time, will take best aduauntage, to vndoe their neighbour. Soche menne I saie of all others, would I bee lothe to haue the sight, of any mine earnest doynges, if I could tell how to forbid theim, or how to hinder theim of their purpose. Twoo yeres past, at my being in Italie, I was charged in Roome toune, to my greate daunger and vtter vndoyng (if Gods goodnes had not been the greater) to haue written this booke of Rhetorique, and the Logike also, for the which I was coumpted an heretike, notwithstanding the absolucion, graunted to all the Realme, by Pope Iulie the thirde, for all former offences or practises, deuised against the holie mother Church, as thei call it. A straunge matter, that thinges doen in Englande seuen yeres before, and the same vniuersallie forgiuen, should afterwardes be laied to a mannes charge in Roome. But what can not malice doe? Or what will not the wilfull deuise, to satisfie their mindes, for vndoyng of others? God bee my Iudge, I had then as little feare (although death was presente, and the tormente at hande, whereof I felte some smarte) as euer I had in all my life before. For when I sawe those that did seke my death, to be so maliciouslie sette, to make soche poore shiftes, for my rediar dispatche, and to burden me with those backe reckoninges: I tooke soche courage, and was so bolde, that the Iudges then did moche meruaile at my stoutnesse, and thinkyng to bring doune my greate harte, tolde me plainlie, that I was in farther perille, then whereof I was aware, and sought thereupon to take aduauntage of my woordes, and to bring me in daunger by all meanes possible. And after long dabatyng with me, thei willed me at any hand, to submit my self to the holie Father, & the deuoute Colledge of Cardinalles. For otherwise there was no remedie. With that being fully purposed, not to yelde to any submission, as one that little trusted their colourable deceipte: I was as ware as I could be, not to vtter any thing for myne owne harme, for feare I should come in their dauger. For then either should I haue died, or els haue denied, bothe openlie & shamefullie, the knowen truthe of Christ and his Gospell. In the ende by Gods grace, I was wonderfullie deliuered, through plain force of the worthie Romaines (an enterprise heretofore in that sort neuer attempted) being then without hope of life, and moche lesse of libertie. And now that I am come home, this boke is shewed me, and I desired to loke vpon it, to amende it, where I thought meete. Amende it [quoth] I? Naie, let the booke firste amende it self, and make me amendes. For surely I haue no cause, to acknowlege it for my boke, bicause I haue so smarted for it. For, where I haue been euill handeled, I haue moche a doe, to shewe my self frendlie. If the soonne were the occasion, of the fathers imprisonmente, would not the Father bee offended with him thinke you? Or at the leaste, would he not take heede, how hereafter he had to dooe with him? If others neuer get more by bookes, then I haue doen: it were better be a Carter, then a Scholer, for worldly profite. A burnte childe feareth the fire, and a beaten Dogge, escheweth the whippe. Nowe therefore, I will none of this booke from henceforthe, I will none of him I saie: take him that liste, and weare him that will. And by that tyme thei haue paied for him so dearelie as I haue dooen, thei will bee as wearie of him, as I haue been. Who that toucheth pitch shall be filed with it, and he that goeth in the Sonne, shalbe Sonne burnt, although he thinke not of it. So thei that wil reade this, or soche like Bookes, shall in the ende, bee as the Bookes are. What goodnesse is in this treatise, I can not without vaine glorie reporte, neither will I medle with it, either hotte or colde. As it was, so it is, and so be it still hereafter for me: so that I heare no more of it, and that it be not yet ones againe caste in my dishe. But this I saie to others, as I am assured that shall laughe, that will reade it: so if the worlde should tourne (as God forbid) thei were moste like to wepe, that in all poinctes would folowe it. I would be lothe that any man should hurte hymself, for my dooynges. And therefore to auoide the worste for all partes, the beste were neuer ones to looke on it: for then I am assured, no manne shall take harme by it. But I thinke some will reade it, before whom I dooe washe my handes, if any harme should come to them hereafter, and let theim not saie, but that thei are warned, I neuer harde a manne yet troubled for ignoraunce in religion. And yet me thinkes, it is a great an heresie, not to knowe God, as to erre in the knowledge of God. But some, perhappes maie saie vnto me: Sir, you ar moche to be blamed, that are so fearefull, and doe caste soche perils before hande, to discourage menne from well dooyng. I answere: My minde is not to discourage any man, but onely to shewe, how I haue been tried for this Bookes sake, tanq per ignem. For in deede the prison was one fire, when I cam out of it, and whereas I feared fire moste (as who is he that doeth not feare it?) I was deliuered by fire and sworde together. And yet now thus fearfull am I, that hauing been thus swinged and restrained of libertie: I would first rather hasarde my life presentlie hereafter, to dye vppon a Turke: then to abide again without hope of libertie, soche painfull imprisonmente for euer. So that I haue now gotte courage with sufferyng damage, and made my self as you see, verie willyng from henseforthe to dye: beyng then brought onely but in feare of death. Thei that loue sorowe vpon sorowe: God sende it theim. I for my parte, had rather be without sense of grief, then for euer to liue in grief. And I thinke the troubles before death, beeyng longe suffered, and without hope continued, are worse a greate deale, then present death it self can be: especially to him that maketh little accoumpte of this life, and is well armed with a constaunte minde to Godwarde. Thus I haue talked of my self, more then I needed, some will saie, and yet not more (maie I well saie) then I haue needed in deede. For I was without all helpe, and without all hope, not onelie of libertie, but also of life, and therefore what thinge needed I notte? Or with what woordes sufficientlie, could I sette forthe my neede? GOD be praised,and thankes be giuen to him onely, that not onelie hath deliuered me, out of the Lions mouth: but also hath brought Englande, my deare Countrie, out of greate thraldome, and forrein bondage. And GOD saue the Quenes Maiestie, the Realme, and the scatered flocke of Christ, and graunte, O mercifull God, an vniuersall quietnes of minde, perfite agremet in doctrine, and amendemente of our liues, that we maie be all one Sheepefold, and haue one Pastour Iesus, to who with the Father, and the holie Ghost, be honour and glorie, world without ende. Amen. This seueth of December. Anno Domimi. 1560. laste repaired by GOD again. Man (in whom is poured the breathe of life) was made at his firste beyng an euerliuyng creature, vnto the likenes of God, endued with reason, and appoynted Lord ouer all other thinges liuing. But after the faule of our first father, sinne so crepte in, that our knowlege was moche darkened, and by corruptio of this our fleshe, mannes reason and entendement were bothe ouerwhelmed. At what tyme God beeing sore greued with the folie of one manne, pitied of his mere goodnesse, the whole state and posteritie of mankinde. And therefore (whereas through the wicked suggestion of our Ghostlie enemie, the ioyfull fruition of Goddes glorie was altogether loste:) it pleased our heauenly Father to repaire mankinde of his free mercie, and to graunte an euerliuyng enheritaunce vnto all soche as woulde by constaunte faithe seeke earnestlie there after. Longe it was, ere that manne knewe himself, beeing destitute of Goddes grace, so that all thinges waxed sauage, the earth vntilled, societie neglected Goddes will not knowen, man againste man, one againste an other, and all againste order. Some liued by spoile, some like brute Beastes, grased vpon the grounde, some wente naked, some romed lime Woodoses, none did any thinge by reason, but moste did what thei could, by manhode. None almoste considered the euerliuyng GOD, but all liued moste commonly after their own lust. By death thei thought that all thinges ended, by life thei looked for none other liuing. None remembred the true obseruation of Wedlocke, none tendered the education of their children, Lawes were not regarded, true dealinge was not once vsed. For vertue, vyce bare place, for right and equitie, might vsed aucthoritie. And therefore where as man throughe reason mighte haue vsed order: manne throughe follie fell into erroure. And thus for lacke of skill, and for wante of grace, euill so preuayled, that the Deuyll was mooste estemed, and GOD either almost vnknowen emong theim all, or elles nothing feared emong so manye. Therefore euen nowe when man was thus paste all hope of amendemente, God stille tenderinge his owne workemanship, stirred vp his faithfull and elect, to perswad with reason, all men to societye. And gaue his appoincted ministers knowledge bothe to se the natures of men, and also graunted them the gifte of vtteraunce, that they mighte wyth ease wynne folke at their will, and frame theim by reason to all good order. And therefore, where as Menne lyued Brutyshlye in open feldes, hauing neither house to shroude them in, nor attyre to cloth their backes, nor yet anye regard to seeke their beste auayle: these appoynted of God called theim together by vtteraunce of speache, and perswaded wyth them what was good, what was hadde, and what was gainefull for mankinde. And althoughe at firste, the rude coulde hardelye learne, and either for stranngenes of the thing, would not gladlie receiue the offer, or ells for lacke of knowledg could not perceiue the goodnes: yet being some what drawen and delighted with the pleasauntnes of reaso, and the swetenes of vtteraunce: after a certaine space, they became throughe nurture and good aduisement, of wilde, sober: of cruel, gentle: of foles, wise: and of beastes, men: Soche force hathe the tongue and soche is the power of eloquence and reason, that most men are forced euen to yelde in that, whiche most standeth againste their will. And therefore the Poetes do feyne that Hercules being a man of great wisdome, had all men lincked together by the eares in a chaine, to draw them and leade them euen as he lusted. For his witte was so greate, his tongue so eloquent, and his experience soch, that no one man was able to withstande his reason, but euery one was rather driuen to do that whiche he woulde, and to will that which he did: agreyng to his aduise bothe in word & worke, in all that euer they were able. Neither can I see that menne coulde haue been brought, by anye other meanes to lyue together in felowshyppe of life, to mayntayne Cities, to deale trulye, and willyngelye to obeye one an other, if menne at the firste had not by Arte and eloquence perswaded that, which they ful oft found out by reason. For what manne I praye you beinge better able to maintayne him self by valeaunte courage, then by liuing in base subiection: would not rather loke to rule like a lord, then to lyue lyke an vnderlynge: if by reason he were not perswaded, that it behoueth euery man, to lyue in his owne vocation: and not to seke anye hygher rowme, then wherevnto he was at the first appoynted? Who woulde digge and delue from morne till euening? Who woulde trauaile and toyle with the sweate of his browes? Yea, who woulde for his kinges pleasure aduenture and hasarde his life, if witte hadde not so wonne men, that they thought nothinge more nedefull in this world, nor anye thing wherunto they were more bounden: then here to liue in their duty, and to traine their whole life, accordinge to their calling. Therefore wher as menne are in manye thinges weake by Nature, and subiecte to moche infirmitye: I thinke in this one pointe they passe all other Creatures liuing, that they haue the gifte of speache and reason. And emonge all other, I thinke him most worthye fame, and emongest menne to be taken for halfe a God: that therin doeth chiefelye, and aboue al other, excell menne, wherin men do excell beastes. For he that is emong the reasonable, of all moste reasonable, and emonge the wittye, of all moste wittye, and emonge the eloquente, of all mooste eloquente: him thincke I emonge all menne, not onely to be taken for a singuler manne, but rather to be counted for halfe a God. For in sekynge the excellencye hereof, the soner he draweth to perfection, the nygher he commeth to GOD who is the chief wisedome, and therefore called God because he is most wise, or rather wisedome it self. vnto all soche as call vnto hym with stretched handes, and humble harte, neuer wantyng to those, that wante not to them selues: I purpose by his grace and especiall assistence, to set forthe preceptes of eloquence, and to shewe what obseruation the wise haue vsed, in handelyng of their matters: that the vnlearned by seyng the practise of others, maie haue some knowledge theim selues, and learne by their neighbors deuise, what is necessarie for the selues in their owne case. supplicibus. Retoricen logice soror, est affata sororem: Quem didicit nuper, sermo Britannus erat. Retorice tacuit, magno perculsa dolore: Nam nondum nostro nouerat ore loqui. Audijt haec, Logices, Vuilsonus forte, magister Qui fuerat, nostros addideratq; sonos: Retoricen mutam, verbis solatus amicis Seuocat, & rogitat num esse Britanna velit? Deiiciens oculos respondit velle libenter, Sed se, qua possit, non reperire, via. Ipse vias (inquit) tradam, legesq loquendi: Quomodo perfecte verba Britanna loces. Liberat ille fidem, nostro sermone politur Retorice, nostra est vtraque facta soror. Anglia nobilium si charus sermo sororum Est tibi, sermonis charus & author erit, Anglia si doceat, quod Grecia docta: quid obstat Quo minus ex Anglis Anglia, vera sciat. Non (quia Greca potes, vell calles verba Latina) Doctus es, aut sapiens: sed quia verba vides. Aurea secreto tegitur sapientia sensu. Abdita sensa tenes Anglus: es ergo sciens. Sed mea Rhetoricen nequeat cum lingua polire: Cui vacat, hoc vnum quod valet, oro velit. Rhetorique is an arte to set forthe by vtteraunce of wordes, matter at large, or (as Cicero doeth saie) it is a learned, or rather an artificiall declaracion of the minde, in the handelyng of any cause, called in contencion, that maie through reason largely be discussed. . questions, whiche by lawe and mannes ordinaunce are enacted, and appoincted for the vse and profite of man, soche as are thought apt for the tongue to sette forward. Now Astronomie is rather learned by demonstracion, then taught by any great vtterauce. Aritmetique smally nedeth thuse of eloquence, seyng it maie be had wholy by 2 nombryng onely. Geometrie rather asketh a good square, then a cleane flowyng tongue, to set out the arte. Therfore an Orators professio, is to speake onely, of all soche matters as maie largely be expouded, for mannes behoue, and maie with moche grace be set out, for all men to heare them. Euery question, or demaunde in thinges, is of twoo sortes. Either it is an infinite questio, and without ende, or els it is definite, and comprehended within some ende. . propounded, without the comprehension of time, place, and persone, or any soche like: that is to saie, when no certaine thing is named, but onely wordes are generally spoken. As thus, whether it be beste to marie, or to liue single. Whiche is better, a Courtiers life, or a Scholers life. . matter, with the appointment, and namyng of place, time and persone. As thus. Whether now it bee best here in Englande, for a Prieste of Marie, or to liue single. Whether it were meete for the kynges maiestie, that now is, to marie with a straunger, or to marie with one of his own subiectes. 5 Now the definite question (as the whiche concerneth some one persone) is moste agreyng to the purpose of an Orator, consideryng particuler matters in the Lawe, are euer debated betwixte certaine persones, the one affirmyng for his parte, and the other deniyng, as fast again for his parte. 6 Thinges generally spoken, without all circumstaunces, are more proper vnto the Logician, who talketh of thinges vniuersally, without respecte of persone, time, or place. And yet notwithstading, Tullie doeth saie, that whosoeuer will talke of a particuler matter, must remember that within the same also, is comprehended a generall. As for example. If I shall aske this question, whether it be lawfull for William Conquerour to inuade Englande, and winne it by force of armour, I must also consider this, whether it be lawfull for any man, to vsurpe power, or it bee not lawfull. That if the greater can not be borne withall, the lesse ca not be neither. And in this respecte, a generall question agreeth well to an Orators profession, and ought well to bee knowen, for the better furtheraunce of his matter, notwithstandyng the particuler question, is euer called in controuersie, and the generalle onely thereupon considered, to comprehende and compasse thesame, as the whiche is more generall. Three thinges are required of an Orator. 7 --- . To teache. Firste therefore, an Orator muste labour to tell his tale, that the hearers maie well knowe what he meaneth, and vnderstande him wholie, the whiche he shall with ease doe, if he vtter his minde in plain 8 woordes, soche as are vsuallie receiued, and tell it orderlie, without goyng aboute the busshe; That if he doe not this, he shall neuer doe the other. For what man can bee delited, or yet be perswaded, with the onelie hearyng of those thynges, whiche he knoweth not what thei meane. The tongue is ordeined to expresse the minde, that one might vnderstade an others meanyng: Now what auaileth to speake, when none can tell, what the speaker meaneth? Therfore Phauorinus the Philosophier (as Gellius telleth the tale) did hit a young man ouer the thumbes, verie handsomely for vsyng ouer old, and ouer straunge wordes. Sirha ([quoth] he) when our old greate auncesters and graundsires wer aliue, thei spake 9 . plainly in their mothers tongue, and vsed olde language, soche as was spoken then, at the buildyng of Roome. But you talke me soche a Latine, as though you spake with the euen now, that wer twoo or three thousande yeres ago, and onely bicause you would haue no man, to vnderstand what you saie. Now were it not better for thee a thousande folde (thou foolishe fellowe) in sekyng to haue thy desire, to holde thy peace, and speake nothing at all? For then by that meanes, fewe should knowe what were thy meaning. But thou saiest, the olde antiquitie dooeth like thee beste, bicause it is good, sober, and modest. Ah, liue man as thei did before thee, and speake thy minde now, as men doe at this daie. And remember that, whiche Cesar saieth, beware as long as thou liuest, of straunge woordes, as thou wouldest take hede and eschue greate rockes in the sea. The nexte parte that he hath to plaie, is to chere his gestes, and to make them take pleasure, with hearyng of thinges 10 wittely deuised, and pleasauntlie set forthe. Therefore euery Orator, should earnestlie labour to file his tongue, that his wordes maie slide with ease, and that in his deliueraunce, he maie haue soche grace, as the sound of a Lute, or any soche instrument doeth giue. Then his sentencies must be well framed, and his wordes aptlie vsed, throughout the whole discourse of his Oracion. Thirdlie, soche quicknesse of witte must bee shewed, and soche pleasaunte sawes so well applied, that the eares maie finde moche delite, whereof I will speake largely, when I shall entreate of mouing laughter. And assuredlie nothyng is more needefull, then to quicken these heauie loden wittes of ours, and moche to cherishe, these our lompishe and vnweldie natures, for excepte men finde delight, thei will not longe abide: delight them, and winne theim: wearie theim, and you lose them for euer. And that is the reason, that men 11 commenly tary the eande of a mery plaie, and can not abide the halfe hearyng of a sower checkyng Sermon. Therefore euen these aunciente Preachers, muste now and then plaie the fooles in the pulpite, to serue the tickle eares of their fletyng 12 audience, or els thei are like some tymes to preache to the bare walles, for though the spirite be apte, and our will prone, yet our fleshe is so heauie, & humours so ouerwhelme vs, that we can not without refreshing, long abide to heare any one thinge. Thus we see, that to delight is needefull, without the whiche, weightier matters will not be heard at all, and therefore hym cunne I thanke, that bothe can and will euer, mingle swete, emong the sower, be he Preacher, 13 Lawier, yea, or Cooke either hardely, when he dresseth a good dishe of meate: now I nede not to tell that scurrilitie, 14 or Alehouse iestyng, would bee thought odious, or grosse mirthe would bee deamed madnesse: considering that euen the meane witted doe knowe that all redie, and as for other, that haue no witte, thei will neuer learne it therefore God spede theim. Now when these twoo are dooen, he must perswade, and moue the affeccions of his hearers in soche wise 15 that thei shall be forced to yeld vnto his saiyng, whereof (bicause the matter is large, and maie more aptly be declared when I shall speake of Amplificacion) I will surcease to speake any thing thereof at this time. Firste nedefull it is that he, whiche desireth to excell in this gifte of Oratorie, and longeth to proue an eloquent manne, must naturally haue a witte, and an aptnesse thereunto: then muste he to his booke, and learne to be well stored with knowlege, that he maie be able to minister matter, for all causes necessary. The which when he hath gotte plentifullie, he must vse moche exercise, bothe in writing, and also in speaking. For though he haue a witte and learnyng together, yet shall thei bothe little auaile, 16 without moche practise. What maketh the Lawier to haue soche vtteraunce? Practise. What maketh the Preacher to speake so roundlie? Practise. Yea, what maketh women go so faste awaie with their woordes? Marie practise I warraunt you. Therefore in all faculties, diligent practise, and earneste exercise, are the onely thinges, that make men proue excellente. Many men knowe the arte very well, and be in all pointes throughly grounded, and acquainted with the preceptes, and yet it is not their hap to proue eloquente. And the reason is, that eloquence it self, came not vp first by wise men seing by moche obseruacion, and diligent practise, the compasse of diuers causes, compiled thereupon preceptes and lessons, worthie to be knowen and learned of all me. Therefore before arte was inuented, eloquence was vsed, and through practise made parfecte, the whiche in all thinges, is a soueraigne meane, moste highlie to excell. Now before we vse either to write, or speake eloquentlie, we muste dedicate our mindes whollie, to followe the moste 18 wise and learned menne, and seke to fashion, aswell their speache and gesturing, as their wit or enditing. The which when we earnestly minde to doe, we can not but in time appere somewhat like theim. For if thei that walke moche in the Sonne, and thinke not of it, are yet for the moste parte Sonne burnt, it can not be but that thei, whiche wittinglie and willinglie, trauaile to counterfecte other, muste needes take some colour of the, and bee like vnto them, in some one thing or other, according to the Prouerbe, by companiyng with the wise, a man shall learne wisedome. together, by the learned and wise menne, that those whiche are ignorant, might iudge of the learned, and labour (when tyme should require) to followe their workes accordingly. Again, the art helpeth well to dispose, and order matters of our owne inuencion, the whiche we maie followe, aswell in speaking, as in writing, for though many by nature without art, haue proued worthy men, yet is art a surer guide, then nature, consideryng 20 we se as liuelie by the art, what we doe, as though we red a thing in writing, whereas natures doinges are not so open to all men. Againe, those that haue good wittes, by nature, shall better encrease them by art, and the blunt also shall be whetted through art, that want nature to help the forward. Any one that will largelie handle any matter, muste fasten his minde, firste of all vpon these fiue especiall poinctes that followe, and learne theim euery one. 21 --- 22 searchyng out of thynges true, or thynges likelie, the whiche maie reasonablie sette forthe a matter, and make it appere probable. The places of Logique, giue good occasion to finde out plentifull matter. And therefore, thei that will proue any cause,  & seke onelie to teach therby the truth, must searche out the places of Logique, and no doubte thei shall finde moche plentie. But what auaileth moche treasure and apte matter, if man can not applie it to his purpose. Therefore, in the seconde place is mencioned, the settelyng or orderyng of thinges inuented  23 for this purpose, called in Latine, Dispositio, the whiche is nothing els, but an apte bestowyng, and orderlie placyng of thinges, declaryng where euery argument shall be set, and in what maner euery reason shall be applied, for confirmacion of the purpose. But yet what helpeth it, though we can finde good reasons, and knowe howe to place theim, if wee haue not apte wordes, and picked sentences, to commende the whole matter. Therefore, this poincte muste nedes followe, to beutifie 24 the cause, the whiche beeyng called Elocucion, is an appliyng of apt woordes and sentences to the matter, founde out to confirme the cause. When all these are had together, it auaileth little, if man haue no Memorie, to conteine them. 25 The Memorie therefore must bee cherished, the whiche is a fast holding, bothe of matter and wordes couched together, to confirme any cause. Be it now that one haue all these fower, yet if he wante the fift, all the other doe little profite. For though a man can finde out good matter, and good woordes, though he can handsomelie set them together, and carie them very well awaie in his minde, yet it is to no purpose, if he haue no vtteraunce, when he should speake his minde, and shewe men 26 what he hath to saie. Utteraunce therefore, is a framyng of the voice, countenaunce, and gesture, after a comely maner. Thus we see, that euery one of these muste go together, to make a perfecte Orator, and that the lacke of one, is an hinderaunce of the whole, and that as well all maie be wanting, as one, if we looke to haue an absolute Orator. ------ of the Oracion, whereby the wille of the standers by, or of the Iudge is sought for, and required to heare the matter. matter, and an euidente settyng foorthe of all thinges, that belonge vnto thesame, with a brief rehearsall, grounded vpon some reason. a small roume, the somme of the whole matter. and rest vpon, and wherein we sticke, and stand in trauers, shewing what we haue to saie, in our owne behalfe. with assured and constaunt profes. soche reasons as make against vs. spoken before, and a lapping vp of it altogether. Now, bicause in euery one of these, greate hede ought to be bad, and moche arte must bee vsed, to content and like all parties: I purpose in the second booke to set forthe at large, euery one of these, that bothe we maie knowe in all partes, what to followe, and what to eschue. And first, when tyme shall be to talke of any matter, I would aduise euery man, to consider the nature of the cause self, that the rather he might frame his whole Oracion thereafter. 35 Either it is an honeste thing, whereof we speake, or els it is filthie and vile, or els betwixte bothe, and doubtfull, what is to be called, or els it is some trifling matter, that is of small weight. 36 That is called an honest matter, when either we take in hande soche a cause, that all menne would maintaine, or els gainsaie soche a cause, that no man can well like. 37 Then dooe we holde and defende a filthie matter, when either wee speake againste our owne conscience, in an euill matter, or els withstande an vpright truthe. 38 The cause then is doubtfull, when the matter is half honest, and halfe vnhoneste. 39 Soche are trifling causes, when there is no weight in the as if one should phantasie, to praise a Gose, before any other beast liuyng (as I knowe who did) or of fruicte to commende Nuttes chiefly, as Ouid did, or the feuer quartaine, as Phauorinus did, or the Gnatte as Uirgill did, or the battaill of Frogges, as Homere did, or dispraise beardes, or commennde shauen heddes. in iudgemet. in hande, when wee firste enter vpon any matter, but also it is wisedome to 40 consider the tyme, the place, the man for whom we speake, the man against whom we speake, the matter wherof we speake, and the Iudges before whom we speake, the reasons that beste serue to further our cause, and those reasons also, that maie seme somwhat to hinder our cause, and in nowise to vse any soche at all, or els warely to mitigate by protestacion, the euill that is in them, and alwaies to vse whatsoeuer can bee sayed, to wynne the chief hearers good 41 willes, and perswade theim to our purpose. If the cause go by fauour, and that reason cannot so muche auaile, as good will shalbe able to do; or els if mouing affectios can do more good, then bringyng in of good reasons, it is meete alwaies to vse that waie, whereby we maie by good helpe, get the ouer hande. That if mine aduersaries reasons, by me beyng awne reasons confirmed, can be able to doe good: I shoulde wholy bestowe my time, & trauaill to weaken & make sleder, all that euer he bringeth with him. But if I can with more ease, proue mine awne saiynges, either with witnesses, or with wordes, then be able to cofute his with reason, I must labour to withdrawe mennes mindes, from myne aduersaries 43 foundacion, and require the wholy to herken vnto that whiche I haue to saie, beyng of it self so iust and so reasonable, that none ca rightly speake against it, and shewe theim that greate pitie it were, for lacke of the onely hearing, that a true matter, should want true dealing. Ouer and besides all these, there remain twoo lessons, the whiche wisemenne haue alwaies obserued, and therefore ought of al men, assuredlie to be learned. The one is, that if any matter bee laied 44 against vs, whiche by reason can hardely be auoyded, or the whiche is so open, that none almoste can deny, it were wisedome in confuting all the other reasons, to passe ouer this one, as though we sawe it not, and therefore speake neuer a worde of it. Or els if necessitie shall force a man to saie some what, he may make an outward bragge, as though ther wer 45 no matter in it, euer so speaking of it, as though he would stande to the trial, making men to beleue, he would fight in the cause, when better it were (if necessitie so required) to run clene awaie. And therein though a man do flie and giue place, euermore the gladder, the lesse rauing there is or stirring in this matter: yet he flieth wisely, and for this ende, that beyng fensed otherwise, & strongly appoincted, he maie take his aduersarye at the best aduauntage, or at the least, werie him with muche lingering, and make him with ofte suche fliyng, to forsake his chief defence. The other lesson is, that whereas we purpose alwaies to haue the victorie, wee should so speake, that we maye labour rather not to hinder, or hurt our cause, then to seke meanes 46 to further it. And yet I speake not this, but that bothe these are right necessarie, and euery one that wil doo good, muste take peines in theim bothe, but yet notwithstanding, it is a fouler faulte a greate deale, for an Orator to be founde hurting his awne cause, then it should turne to his rebuke, if he had not furthered his whole entent. Therefore not onely is 47 reason, to leaue vnspoken so muche as is nedelesse, the which although the wisest can do, and nede no teaching, yet these common wittes offende muche nowe and then, in this 48 behalfe. Some man beyng stirred, shal hurt more our cause then twentie other. Tauntyng wordes before some menne, will not be borne at all. Sharpe rebuking of our aduersarie or frumpes geue before some persones: cannot be suffered at 49 all. Yea, sometymes a man must not speake all that he knoweth, for if he doo, he is like to finde small fauour, although he haue iuste cause to speake, and maie with reason declare his minde at large. And albeit that witlesse folke, can soner rebuke that, which is fondly spoken, then redely praise that whiche is wisely kept close, yet the necessitie of the matter, must rather be marked, then the fonde iudgemet of the people estemed. What a sore saiyng where this? Whe a lawier should take in hande a matter, concernyng life and death, and another should aske howe he hath sped, to heare tel that the lawyer, hath not onely cast awaie his client, but vndoen hymselfe also, in speakyng thinges inconsiderately, as no doubt it often happeneth, that wise men, and those also that bee none euill men neither, maie vnwares speake thinges, whiche afterward they sore repent, & would cal backe again with losse of a greate somme. Now what a foly it is, not to remember the tyme and the men. Or who will speake that whiche he knoweth will not be liked, if he purpose to finde fauour at their handes, before whom he speaketh, what ma of reason will praise that before the Iudges, (before whom he knoweth the determinacion of his cause resteth) whiche the Iudges self cannot abide to heare spoke at all? Or doeth not he muche hinder his awne matter, that without al curtesie or preface made, will largely speake euill of those men, who the hearers of his cause, tenderly doo fauour? Or be it that there be some notable faulte in thine aduersarye, with whiche ye Iudges also are infected, were it not foly for thee, to charge thine aduersary with thesame. Cosidering ye Iudges thereby maie thinke, thou speakest against theim also, & so thou maiest perhappes, lose their fauour in seking suche defence, made without all discrecio. And in framing reasons, to confirme the purpose, if any be spoke plainly false, or els contrarye to that, whiche was spoken before, dooeth it not muche hinder a good matter. Therefore in all causes, this good hede oughte to bee had, that alwaies we labour to do some good, in furthering of our cause, or if we cannot so do, at the least that we doo no harme at all. matter. is conteined, within one of these .iij. causes. Either the matter cosisteth in praise, or dispraise of a thing, or els in cosulting, whether the cause be profitable, or vnprofitable, or lastely, whether the matter be righte, or wrong. And yet this one thing is to be learned that in euery one of these foure causes, these three seuerall endes, maie euery of them be conteined, in any one of them. And therefore he that shall haue cause, to praise any one body, shall haue iust cause to speake of iustice, to entreate of profit, and ioyntly to talke of one thyng with another. But because these three causes, are commonly and for the moste part, seuerally parted, I will speake of them, one after another, as they are sette furthe by wise mennes iudgements, and particularly declare their properties, all in order. dispraise of some one man, or of some one thyng, or of some one deed doen. There are diuerse thinges, whiche are praised, and dispraised, as menne, countries, citees, places, beastes, hilles, riuers, houses, castles, deedes dooen by worthy men, and pollicies inuented by great warriers, but moste commonly men are praised, for diuerses respectes, before any of the other thinges are taken in hande. Nowe in praisyng a noble personage, and in settyng furthe at large his worthinesse, Quintilian geueth warnyng, 52 to vse this threfolded order. ------ Before a mannes life, are considered these places. --- into the giftes of good thynges of the minde, the body, and of fortune. Now the giftes of the body, and of fortune, are not praise worthy, of their awn nature: but euen as thei are vsed, either to, or fro, so they are either praised, or dispraised. Giftes of the minde, deserue the whole trumpe, and sounde commendacion aboue all other, wherein wee maie vse the rehersall of vertues, as they are in order, and beginning at his infancie, tell all his doynges, till his last age. 53 --------- The bringing vp, ye behauour of his life. Whereunto   what company he vseth, are referred   how he liueth. either abrode, or at home. deuises in behoue of the publique wele death. Now to open all these places more largley, as well those that are before a mannes life, as suche as are in his life, and after his death, that the reader maie further se the profite, I will do the best I can. The house wherof a noble personage came, declares the state and nature of his auncesters, his alliaunce, and his kynsfolke. So that suche worthy feactes, as they haue heretofore doen, and all suche honors, as they haue had, for suche their good seruice, redowndes wholy to the encrease and amplifiyng of his honour, that is now liuyng. some Countrey brengeth more honor with it, then another doth. To be a Frenche manne, descendyng there of a noble house, is more honor then to be an Irishe manne: to bee an Englishe manne borne, is muche more honour, then to be a Scotte, because that by these men, worthy prowesses haue been dooen, and greater affaires by theim attempted, then haue been doen by any other. encrease of honour: As it is muche better, to bee borne in Paris, then in Picardie, in London, then in Lincolne. For that bothe the ayre is better, the people more ciuill, and the wealth muche greater, and the menne for the moste parts more wise. and constancie. To be borne a woman, declares weakenes of spirite, neshenes of body, and fikilnesse of mynde. muste be considered, his plaie felowes obserued, his teacher and other his seruauntes, called in remembraunce. Howe euery one of these lyued then, with whom they haue lyued afterwardes, and how they liue now. he moste deliteth, I maie commende hym for his learnyng, for his skill in the Frenche, or in the Italian, for his knowlege in Cosmographie: for his skill in the lawes, in the histories of all contreis, and for his gifte of endityng. Again, I maie commende hym for plaiyng at weapons, for runnyng vpon a greate horse, for chargyng his staffe at the Tilte, for vautyng, for plaiyng vpon instrumentes, yea, and for paintyng, or drawyng of a platte, as in old tyme noble princes, muche delited therein. countrey, either in withstandyng the outwarde enemie, or els in aswagyng the rage of his awne coutreyme at home. 60 His wise counsaill, and good aduise geuen, settes furthe the godnesse of his witte. may muche commende his worthinesse. As his strong harte, and cherefull pacience euen to the ende, cannot want greate praise. The loue of all men towardes hym, and the lamentyng generally for his lacke, helpe well moste highly to set furthe his honour. 62 After a mannes death, are considered his tombe, his cote armour set vp, and all suche honours, as are vsed in funeralles. If any one liste, to put these preceptes in practise, he maie doo, as hym liketh best. And surely I do thynke, that nothyng so muche furthereth knowlege, as daiely exercise, and enuryng our selfes to do that in dede, whiche we know in woorde. And because examples geue greate lighte, after these preceptes are set furthe, I will commende two noble 63 gentlemen, Henry Duke of Suffolk, and his brother lorde Charles Duke with hym. Better or more wisely can none do then they whiche neuer bestowe praise, but vppon those that best deserue praise, rather myndyng discretely, what they ought to dooe, then vainly deuisyng what they best can doo, sekyng rather to praise menne, suche as are founde worthy, then curiously findyng meanes to praise matters, such as neuer wer in any. For they which speake otherwise then truthe is, mynd not the commendacion of the persone, 64 commendyng whoredome, Phauorinus the Philosophier, extollyng the feuer Quartaine, thought not to speake as the cause required, but woulde so muche saie as their wit woulde geue, not weighyng the state of the cause, but myndyng the vaunte of their brain, lokyng how muche could be said, not passyng howe litle shoulde be saied. But I bothe knowyng the might of Gods hand, for suche as loue fables, and the shame that in yearth redoundeth to euill reporters, will not comende that or those, which neede no good praise, but will commende them, that no man iustly can dispraise, nor yet any one is well able worthely to praise. Their towardnes was suche, and their giftes so great, that I knowe none whiche loue learnyng, but hath sorowed the lacke of their beeyng, and I knowe that the onely naming of theim, will stirre honest hartes, to speake well of the. I will speake of twoo brethren, that lately departed, the one Henry Duke 67 of Suffolke, and the other Lord Charles his brother, whom God thinkyng meter for heaue, then to liue vpo yearth, toke from vs in his anger, for the betteryng of our doinges, and amendement of our euill liuing. These twoo gentleme were borne in noble England, bothe by father and mother, of an high parentage. The father called Duke Charles, by mariage beyng brother, to the worthy kyng of famous memorie, Henry theigh, was in suche fauour, and did suche seruice, that all Englande at this houre, doeth finde his lacke, and Fraunce yet doeth feele, that suche a Duke there was, whom in his life tyme, the godly loued: the euill, feared, the wise men, honored for his wit, and the simple, vsed alwaies for their counsaill. Their mother, of birthe noble, and witte great, of nature gentle, and mercifull to the poore, & to the godly, and especially to the learned, an earnest good patronesse, and moste helpyng Ladye aboue all other. In theyr youthe their father died, the eldest of them beyng not past. ix. yeres of age. After whose death, their mother knowyng, that welth with out wit, is like a sworde in a naked manes hand, and assuredly certain, that knowlege would confirme iudgement, prouided so for their bringing vp, in all vertue and learnyng, that .ij. like were not to be had, within this realme again. When they began bothe, to ware somewhat in yeres, beyng in their primetide,and spryng of their age, thelder waityng of the kynges maiestie that nowe is, was generally well estemed, and suche hope was conceiued of his towardnes, bothe for learnyng, and all other thinges, that fewe wer like vnto hym in all the courte. The other kepyng his boke, emong the Cambrige me, profited (as thei all well knowe) both in vertue and learning, to their greate admiracion. For the Greke, the Latine, and the Italian, I knowe he could dooe more, then would be thought true by my report. I leaue to speke of his skill in pleasaunt instrumentes, neither will I vtter his aptnes in Musike, and hys toward nature, to all exercises of the body. But his elder brother in this tyme (besides his other giftes of the mynde whiche passed all other, and were almoste incredible (folowyng his fathers nature, was so delited with ridyng, and runnyng in armour vppon horsebacke,and was so comely for that feacte, and coulde do so well in chargyng his staffe, beyng but .xiiij. yeres of age, that menne of warre, euen at this houre, mone muche the wat of suche a worthy getlema. Yea, the Frenche men that first wondered at his learnyng, when he was there emong theim, and made a notable Oracion in Latine: were muche more astonied when they sawe his comely ridyng, and litle thought to finde these twoo ornamentes, ioyned bothe in one, his yeres especially beyng so tender, and his practise of so small tyme. Afterward comming from the courte, as one that was desierous to be emog the learned, he laie in Cambrige together with his brother, where they bothe so profited, and so gently vsed themselfes, that all Cambrige did reuerence, bothe him and his brother, as two iewelles sent fro God. Thelders nature was soche, that he thought himself best, whe he was emong the wisest, and yet contempned none, but thankefully vsed all, gentle in behauor without childishines, stoute of stomacke without all pride, bolde with all warenesse, and frendly with good aduisement. The yonger beeyng not so ripe in yeres, was not so graue in looke, rather cherefull, then sadde: rather quicke, the auncient: but yet if his brother were sette a side, not one that went beyonde hym. A childe that by his awne inclinacion, so moche yelded to his ruler, as fewe by chastement haue doen the like, pleasaunt of speeche, prompte of witte, stirring by nature, hault without hate, kinde without crafte, liberall of harte, gentle in behauiour, forward in all thynges, gredy of learning, and lothe to take a foyle, in any open assembly. They bothe in all attemptes,sought to haue the victory, and in exercise of witte, not onely the one with the other, did ofte stande in contencion, but also they bothe would matche with the best, and thought themselfes moste happie, when they might haue any iust occasion, to put their wittes in triall. And now whem this grene fruicte began to wae ripe, and all menne longed to haue tast, of soche their greate forwardnesse: God preuenting mannes expectacion, toke theim bothe aboute one houre, and in so shorte tyme, that firste thei wer knowen to be dedde, or any abrode could tell they were sicke. I neede not to reherse, what bothe they spake, before their departure (considering, I haue seuerally written, bothe in Latine and in Englishe, of the same matter) neither will I heape here so moche together as I can, bicause I should rather renewe great sorowe to many, then do moste men any great good, who loued them so wel genereally, that fewe for a greate space after, spake of these twoo gentle menne, but they shewed teares, with the onely vtterauce of their wordes, & some through ouer moche sorowing wer fain to forbeare speaking. God graunt vs all so to liue, that the good men of this world, maie be alwayes lothe to forsake vs, & God maie still be glad to haue vs, as no doubt these twoo children so dyed, as all men shoulde wishe to liue, and so they liued bothe, as all shoulde wishe to die. Seyng therefore these twoo wer soche, bothe for birthe, nature, and all other giftes of grace, that the like are hardely founde behynde theim: let vs so speake of theim, that our good report maie warne vs, to folowe theyr godly natures, and that lastly, we maie enioye that enheritaunce, wereunto God hath prepared them and vs (that feare him) from the beginnyng. Amen. ------ The Conclusion. sone do it, if he can praise a good man. For (as Aristotle doeth saie) of contraries, there is one and the same doctrine, and therefore he that can do the one, shall sone be able to do the other. The kynd demonstratiue of some thyng doen is this, when a man is commended or dispraised, for any acte 68 committed in his life. in nomber. ------ Seuen circumstaunces, whiche are to bee considered in diuerse matters. ------ vij. At what tyme he did it. Who, what, and where, by what helpe, and by whose: Why, how, and when, do many thynges disclose. These places helpe wonderfully, to set out any matter, and to amplifie it to the vttermoste, not onely in praisyng, or dispraisyng, but also in al other causes where any aduisement is to be vsed. Yet this one thing is to be learned, yt it shal not be necessarie to vse theim altogether, eue as they stande in order: but rather as tyme & place shall best require, thei maie be vsed in any parte of the Oractio, eue as it shall please him ye hath the vsyng of them. Again, if any manne bee disposed, to rebuke any offence, he maie vse the places contrary vnto theim that are aboue rehersed, and apply these circumstaunces euen as they are, to the profe to his purpose. gathered and made by obseruacion of circumstaunces. and framyng hym of claie  69 in soche a comely wise, as we all now se, hath from the beginnyng, been so carefull ouer his electe and chosen, that in al daungers, he is euer redy to assist his people, kepyng theim harmelesse, whe they were often paste all mannes hope. And emong all other his fatherly goodnesse, it pleased hym to shewe his power, in his chosen seruaunt 70 Dauid, that all mighte learne to know his mighte, & reken with themselfes, that though man geue the stroke, yet God it is that geueth the ouerhande. For wheras Dauid was of small stature weake of body, poore of birthe, and base in the sighte of the worldlynges, God called hym firste to matche with an houge monster, a litle body, againste a mightie Gyaunt, an abiecte Israelite, against a moste valiaunt Philistine, with whom no Israelite durst encouter. These Philistines mynded the murder and ouerthrowe, of all the Israelites, trustyng in their awne strength so moche, that thei feared no perill, but made an accompte, that all was theirs before hande. Now when bothe these armies were in sight, the Philistines vpon an hill of the one side, and the Israelites vppon an hill, of the other side, a vale beyng betwixte theim bothe, there marched out of the Campe, a base borne Philistine, called Goliah of Geth, a manne of sixe cubites high. This soldiour, when through the bignes and stature of his body, and also with greate bragges, & terrible threatenynges, he had wonderfully abashed the whole armie of the Israelites, so that no man durst aduenture vpon hym, God to the ende he mighte deliuer Israell, and shewe that mannes helpe, with all his armour, litle auaile to get victory, without his especiall grace: and again, to the ende he might set vp Dauid, and make hym honourable emong the Israelites, did then call out Dauid, the sonne of Ephrateus, of Bethleem Iuda, whose name was Isai, who beeyng but a childe in yeres, did kill out of hande, by Goddes mighte 71 and power, Goliah the moste terrible enemie of all other, that bare hate against the children of Israell. When this mightie felowe was slain, aboute the vale of Terebinthus, betwixte both tharmies, the Israelites reioysed, that before 72 quaked, and wondered at hym the, whom they would scant knowe before, & no doubt this dede was not onely wonderfull, but also right godly. For in battaill to kill an enemie, is thoughte righte worthy, or to aduenture vpon a rebell, (though the successe folowe not) is generally commended: yea, to put one to the worse, or to make hym flie the ground is called manly, but what shall we saie of Dauid, that not onely had the better hande, not onely bette his enemie, but killed streight his enemie, yea, and not an enemy, of the comon stature of men, but a mightie Gyaunt, not a man, but 73 a monster, yea, a deuill in hart, and a beast in body? Can any be compted more honest, then soche as seke to saue their countrey, by hasardyng their carcasses, and sheding of their bloude? Can loue shewe it self greater, then by yeldyng of 74 life, for the health of an armie? It had been moche, if halfe a dosen had dispatched, soche a terrible Gyaunte, but nowe, when Dauid without helpe, beyng not yet a manne, but a boye in yeres, slewe hym hande to hande, what iuste praise dooeth he deserue? If we praise other, that haue slain euil men, and compte them haulte, that haue killed their matches, 75 what shall wee saie of Dauid, that beyng wonderfully ouermatched, made his partie good, and gotte the gole of a monster? Lette other praise Hercules, that thinke best of hym: let Cesar, Alexander, and Hanniball, bee bruted for warriers: Dauid in my iudgement, bothe did more manly, then all the other wer able, and serued his countrey in greater daunger, then euer any one of theim did. And shall wee not call soche a noble capitain, a good man of warre? Deserueth not his manhode and stoute attempte, wonderfull praise? If vertue could speake, woulde she not sone confesse that Dauid had her in full possession? And therefore if well doynges, by right maie chalenge worthy brute, Dauid will be knowen, and neuer can want due praise, for soche an honest 76 deede. And what man will not saie, but that Dauid did mynde nothyng els herein, but the saufegarde of his countrey, thinkyng it better for himself to die, and his countrey to liue, then himself to liue, and his countrey to die. What gain got Dauid, by the death of Goliah, or what coulde he hope, by the death of soche a monster, but onely that the loue whiche he bare to the Israelites, forced hym to hasard his 77 awne life: Thinkyng that if the Phililstines should preuail, the Israelites wer like to perishe, euery mothers sonne of theim? Therefore he hassardyng this attempte, considered with himself, the saufegarde of the Israelites, the mainteinaunce of iustice, his duetie towardes God, his obedience to his prince, and his loue to his countrey. And no doubte, God made this enterprise appere full easie, before Dauid could haue the harte, to matche himself with soche a one. 78 For though his harte might quake, beeyng voyde of Godes helpe, yet assuredly he wanted no stomacke, when God did set hym on. Let tirauntes rage, let hell stand open, let Sathan shewe his mighte, if God bee with vs, who can bee against vs? Though this Goliah appeared so strong, that .x. Dauides were not able, to stande in his hande: yet.x. Goliaths were all ouer weake for Dauid alone. Manne cannot iudge, neither can reason comprehende, the mightie power of God. When Pharao with all his armie, thoughte fully to destroye the children of Israell, in the redde sea, did not God preserue Moses, and destroye Pharao? What is man and all his power that he can make, in the handes of God, vnto whom al creatures, bothe in heauen and in yearth, are subiecte at his commaundement? Therefore it was no mastery for Dauid, beyng assisted with God, as well to matche with the whole army, as to ouerthrowe this one man. But what did the Israelites, when they sawe Dauid take vppon 79 hym, soche a bolde enterprise? Some saied he was rashe, other mocked hym to scorne, & his brethren called hym foole. For thought they, what a madde felowe is he, beeyng but a lad in yeres, to matche with soche a monster in body? Howe can it be possible otherwise, but that he shalbe torne in peces euen at his firste commyng? For if the Philistine maie ones hit hym, he is goen though he had tenne mennes lifes. Now what should he meane, so vnegally to matche himself except he were, wery of his life, or els were not well in his wittes? Yea, and to geue his enemies, all the aduauntage that could bee, he came vnarmed, and whereas the Philistine, had very strong armour, bothe to defende himself, and a strong weapon to fight withall, Dauid came with a slyng 80 onely, as though he would kill crowes, whereat, not onely the Philistine laughed, & disdained his folie, but also bothe the armies thought he was but a deede man, before he gaue one stroke. And in deede, by all reason and deuise of manne there was none other waie, but deathe with hym, out of hande. Dauid notwithstanding, beeyng kyndeled in harte with Gods might, was strong enough for him, in his awne opinion, and forced nothyng, though all other were moche against him. And therefore made no more a dooe, but beyng redy to reuenge in Goddes name, soche greate blasphemie, as the Philistine then did vtter, marched towardes his enemie, and with castyng a stone out of a slyng, he ouerthrewe the Philistine at the first. The whiche when he had dooen, out with his sworde, and chopt of his hedde, cariyng it with his armoure, to the Campe of the Israelites: whereat the Philistines were greatly astonied, and the Israelites moche praised God, that had geuen soche grace, to soche a one, to compassed soche a deede. And the rather this manly acte, is highly to be praised, because he subdued this houge enemie, when Saul firste reigned kyng ouer Israell, and was sore assaied with the greate armie of the Philistines. Lette vs therefore that be nowe liuing, when this acte or soche like come into our myndes: remember what God is, of how infinite power he is, and let vs praise God in them, by whom he hath wrought soche wonders, to the strengthenyng of our faithe, and constaunt kepyng of our profession, made to him, by euery one of vs, in our Baptisme. Dauid beyng an Israelite, did this deede, beyng the sone of Isai, of the Tribe of Iuda, a boye in yeres, This circumstauce was vsed, not onely in the narracion, but also when I spake of the honestie and godlinesse, whiche Dauid vsed, when he slewe Goliah. He slewe Goliah, the strongest Giaunt emong the Philistines. This circumstaunces I vsed also, when I spake of the honestie, in killing Goliah. Aboute the vale of Terebinthus. He had no help of any man, but went himself alone. And whereas Saul offred him harnes, he cast it away, & trusting onely in God, toke him to his sling, with .iiij. or .v. small stones in his hand, the which wer thought nothyng in manes sight, able either to do litle good, or els nothing at al. This circunstaunce I vsed, when I spake of the easenesse & possibilite, that was in Dauid, to kill Goliah, by Goddes help. He aduentured his life, for the loue of his countrey, for the maintenaunce of iustice, for the aduauncement of Gods true glorye, and for the quietnesse of all Israell, neither seekyng fame, nor yet lokyng for any gain. I vsed this circumstaunce, when I shewed what profite he soughte, in aduenturyng this deede. Marie he put a stone in his slyng, and when he had caste it at the Philistine, Goliah fell doune straighte. I vsed this circumstaunce, when I spake of the impossibilitie of the thyng. This deede was doen, when Saul reigned, first kyng ouer the Israelites, at what tyme the Philistines, came against the Israelites. Thus by the circumstaunces of thynges, a right worthy cause, maie be pleintifully enlarged. matter commended. The kynde demonstratiue of thynges, is a meane wherby wee do praise, or dispraise thynges, as vertue, vice, tounes, citees, castles, woddes, waters, hilles, and mountaines. ------ iiij.   Hard to be doen. Many learned, will haue recourse to the places of Logique in steede of these .iiij. places, when they take in hand to commende any suche matter. The whiche places if they make them serue rather to commende the matter, then onely to teache men the truth of it, it were weil done & Oratourlike, for seyng a man wholly bestoweth his wit to plaie the Oratour, he shoulde chefely seke to copasse that whiche he entendeth, & not do that onely whiche he neuer mynded, for, by plaine teachyng, the Logician shewes himselfe, by large amplificacion and beautifiyng of his cause, the Rhetorician is alwaies knowne. --- 81 I do not se otherwise but that these places of Logique are confounded with the other .iiij. of confirmacion, or rather I thinke these of Logique must first be mynded ere the other can well be had. For what is he that can call a thyng honest & by reason proue it, except he first knowe what the thing is, the whiche he can not better doe, then by defining the nature of the thyng. Againe how shall I know whether myne attempte be easie, or hard, if I know not the efficient cause,or be assured howe it maie be doen. In affirming it to be possible, I shall not better knowe it, then by searching thende, and learning by Logique what is the final cause of euery thyng. So many as loke to liue in peaceable quietnesse, beyng mynded rather to folowe reason, than to be 82 led by wilfull affection: desire iustice in all thinges without the whiche no countrie is able long to cotinue. Then may I be bolde to commende that, which all men wishe & fewe can haue, whiche all men loue, & none can want: not doubting but as I am occupied in a good thyng, so all good men will heare me with a good wil. But woulde God I were so wel able to perswade all men to Iustice, as al men know the necessarie vse therof: and then vndoubtedly I woulde bee moche bolder, and force some by violence, whiche by faire wordes can not be entreated. And yet what nedes any perswasion for that thing, whiche by nature is so nedeful, & by experience so profitable, that looke what we want, without iustice we get not, loke what we haue, without iustice we kepe not. God graut his grace so to worke in the hartes of all men, that they maie aswel practise wel doyng in their owne life, as they woulde that other should folowe Iustice in their life: I for my parte will bestowe some labour, to set forthe the goodness of vpright dealing, that all other men the rather maie dooe thereafter. That if through my woordes, God shall woorke with any man, then maie I thinke my self in happie case, and reioyce moche in the trauaile of my witte. And how can it be otherwise, but that all men shall be forced, inwardly to allowe that, whiche in outward act, many doe not followe: seing God poured first this 83 Lawe of nature into mannes harte, and graunted it as a meane, wherby we might knowe his will, and (as I might saie) talke with him, grounding still his doynges vpon this poincte, that man should doe as he would bee doen vnto, the whiche is nothing els, but to liue vprightlie, without any will to hurt his neighbour. And therfore hauing this light of Gods will opened vnto vs, through his mere goodnesse, we ought euermore, to referre all our accios vnto this ende, bothe in giuing iudgemente, and deuising lawes necessarie for mannes life. And here vpon it is, that when men desire the lawe, for triall of a matter, thei meane nothing els, but 84 to haue iustice, the whiche Iustice is a vertue, that yeildeth to euery man, his owne: to the euer liuing God, loue aboue all thinges: To the king, obedience: To the inferiour, good counsell: to the poore man, mercie: to the hatefull and wicked, sufferaunce: to it self, truthe: and to all menne, perfite peace, and charitie. Now what can be more saied, in praise of this vertue, or what thing can be like praised? Are not all thinges in good case, when all men haue their owne? And what other thing dooeth Iustice, but seketh meanes to contente all parties? Then how greatly are thei to be praised, that meane trulie in all their doinges, and not onely, do no harme to any, but seke meanes to helpe all. The Sonne is not so wonderfull to the worlde (saieth Aristotle) as the iust 85 dealing of a gouernour, is marueilous to all men. No, the yearth yeldeth not more gaine to all creatures, then dooeth the iustice of a Magistrate, to his whole Realme. For, by a lawe, we liue, and take the fruictes of the yearth, but where no law is, nor iustice vsed: there, nothing can be had, though all thinges bee at hande: For, in hauing the thing, we shall lacke the vse, and liuing in greate plentie, we shall stand in great nede. The meane thereof, that maketh men to enioye their owne, is Iustice, the whiche beyng ones taken awaie, all other thinges are loste with it, neither can any one saue that he hath, nor yet get that he wanteth. Therefore if wrog 86 doing should bee borne withall, and not rather punished by death, what man could liue in rest? Who could be sure either of his life, or of his liuing one whole daie together? Nowe bicause euery man desireth, the preseruacion of himself, euery man should in like case desire, the sauegard of his neighbour. For if I shoulde whollie minde mine owne ease, and followe gaine without respecte, to the hinderaunce of mine euen Christian: why should not other vse the same libertie, and so euery man for himself,and the deuill for vs all, catch that catche maie? The whiche custome if all men followed, the yearth would sone be voide, for want of men, one would be so greadie to eate vp an other. For in seking to liue, wee should lose our liues, and in gaping after goodes, we should sone goe naked. Therefore to represse this rage, and with holsome deuises, to traine men in an order, God hath lightned manne with knowledge, that in all thinges, he maie se what is right, and what is wronge, and vpon good aduisement, deale iustlie with all men. God hath created all thinges for mannes vse, and ordeined man for mannes sake, that 87 one man might helpe an other. For though some one haue giftes more plentifullie, then the common sorte, yet no man can liue alone, without helpe of other. Therefore, we should striue, one to helpe an other by iust dealing, some this waie and some that waie, as euery one shall haue nede, and as we shall be alwaies best able, where in the lawe of nature is fulfilled, and Goddes commaundement followed. We loue the here in yearth, that giue vs faire wordes, and we can be cotent, to speake well of them, that speake well of vs:and shal 88 we not loue them, and take them also for honest men, which are contented from time to time, to yelde euery manne his owne, and rather would die, then consent to euill doing? If one bee ientle in outward behauiour, we like him well, and shall we not esteme him, that is vpright in his outwarde liuinge? And like as wee desire, that other should bee to vs, ought not we to be likewise, affected towardes them? Euen emong brute beastes, nature hath appoincted a Lawe, and 89 shall we men, liue without a Lawe? The Storke beyng not able to feede her self for age, is fedde of her yong ones, wherin is declared a naturall loue, and shall wee so liue, that one shall not loue an other: Man should be vnto man as a God, and shall man be vnto man as a Deuill? Hath God created vs, and made vs to his owne likenesse, enduing vs with all 90 the riches of the yearth, that we might be obediet to his wil, and shall wee neither loue him, nor like his? How can wee saie, that we loue God, if there be no charitie in vs? Dooe I loue him, whose minde I will not followe, although it bee right honest? If you loue me (saieth Christ) followe my commaundementes. Christes will is soche, that we should loue God aboue al thinges, and our neighbour as our self. Then 91 if we doe not iustice (wherein loue doeth consist) we doe neither loue man, nor yet loue God. The wiseman saieth: The 92 beginning of a good life, is to doe Iustice. Yea, the blessyng of the lorde, is vpon the hedde of the iuste. Heauen is theirs 93 then shall we doe, that haue any hope of the generall resurreccion, but doe the will of God, and liue iustlie all the daies of our life? Let euery man, but consider with himself, what 95 ease he shall finde thereby, and I doubte not, but euery one depely waiyng thesame, will in harte confesse, that Iustice maketh plentie, and that not one man could longe holde his own, if lawes wer not made, to restrain mans wil. We trauaile now, winter and Sommer, we watch, & take thought for maintenance of wife and children, assuredly purposing (that though God shall take vs immediatly) to leaue honestly for our familie. Now to what ende wer all our gathering 96 together, if iust dealing wer set a side, if lawes bare no rule, if what the wicked list, that thei maie, and what thei maie, that thei can, and what thei ca, that thei dare, and what thei 97 power is agreued therewith? What maketh wicked men (which els would not) acknowlege ye king as their souerein lorde, but the power of a lawe, and the practise of iustice for euill doers? Could a prince maintain his state roiall, if lawe and right had not prouided, that euery man should haue his owne? Would seruautes obeie their masters, the sonne his father, the tenaunt his landlorde, the Citezein his Maior or Sherief: if orders were not set, and iust dealing appoincted, for al states of men? Therefore, the true meaning folke in al ages giue them selues, some to this occupacion, and some to that, seking therein nothing els but to maintain a poor life, and to kepe them selues true men, bothe to God & the world What maketh men to performe their bargaines, to stand to their promises, and yelde their debtes, but an order of a law, 99 grounded vpon Iustice? Where right beareth rule, there craft is compted vice. The liar is moche hated, where truth is well estemed. The wicked theues are haged, where good men are regarded. None can holde vp their heddes, or dare shewe their faces, in a well ruled Common weale, that are not thought honest, or at the least haue some honest waie to 100 liue. The Egipcians therefore, hauing a worthie and a well gouerned publike weale, prouided that none should liue idlie, but that eueryone, monethly should giue an accompt, how he spente his time, and had his name regestered in a booke, for the same purpose. But lorde, if this lawe were vsed in England, how many would come behinde hand with their reckeninges at the audite daie. I feare me, their doinges would be soche, that it would be long, ere thei got their quietus est. Therefore the wourse is our state, the lesse that this euil is looked vnto. And surelie, if in other thinges wee should be as negligente, this realme could not long stande. But thankes be to God, we hang them a pace, that offende a lawe, and therefore we put it to their choise, whether thei will bee idle, and so fall to stealing, or no: thei knowe their reward, goe to it, when thei will. But if there withall some good order were taken, for educacion of youthe, and setting loiterers on worke (as thankes be to God, the citee is moste Godlie bent that waie) all would sone bee well without all doubt. The wise and discrete persones in all ages, sought al meanes possible, to haue an order in all thinges, and loued by iustice, to direct all their doinges, whereby appereth both an apt will in soche men, and a naturall stirring by Goddes 101 power, to make all men good. Therefore, if we doe not wel, we must blame our selues, that lacke a will, & doe not call to God for grace. For though it appere hard to do well, bicause no man can get perfeccion, without continuaunce: yet assuredly to an humble minde that calleth to God, & to a willing hart that fain would doe his best, nothing can be hard. God hath set all things to sale for labor, & kepeth open shop, come who will. Therefore in all ages, whereas we see the fewest good, we must well thinke, the moste did lacke good will to aske, or seke for the same. Lorde, what loue had that worthy Prince Seleucus, to maintain iustice, and to haue good lawes kept, of whom soche a woderfull thing is written. For whereas he established moste holsome lawes, for sauegarde of the Locrensians, and his owne sonne thereupon taken in adulterie, should lose bothe his iyes, according to the Lawe then made, & yet notwithstanding, the whole citee thought to remit the necessitie of his punishement, for the honour of his father, Seleucus would none of that in any wise. Yet at 102 laste, through importunitie being ouercome, he caused firste one of his owne iyes to bee pluckt out, and next after, one of his sonnes iyes, leauing only the vse of sight, to himself and his soonne. Thus through equitie of the Lawe, he vsed the due meane of chastisemente, shewing himself by a wonderfull temperature, bothe a mercifull father, and a iuste lawe maker. Now happie are thei that thus obserue a lawe, thinking losse of bodie, lesse hurt to the man, then sparing of punishement, mete for the soule. For God will not faile them, that haue soche a desire to followe his will, but for his promise sake, he will rewarde theim for euer. And now, seyng that iustice naturally is giuen to al men, without the which we could not liue, being warned also by God, alwaies to do vprightlie, perceiuing again the commodities, that redound vnto vs liuing vnder a lawe, and the sauegarde wherin we stande, hauing iustice to assiste vs: I trust that not onelie all men will commende iustice in woorde, but also will liue iustlie in deede, the whiche that we maie doe: God graunte vs of his grace. Amen. , perswade, or disswade, entreate, or rebuke, exorte, or dehorte, commende, or comforte any manne. In this kinde of Oracion, wee dooe not purpose whollie to praise any bodie, nor yet to determine any matter in controuersie, but the whole compasse of this cause is, either to aduise our neighbour to that thing, whiche wee thinke moste nedefull for him, or els to cal him backe fro that folie, which hindereth moche his estimacion. As for example, if I would counsell my frende to trauaile beyond the Seas, for knowlege of the tonges, & experience in forein countries: I might resorte to this kinde of Oracion, & finde matter to confirme my cause plentifully. And the reasons which are commonly vsed to enlarge soche matters, are these that folowe. ------ --- the vertues make a large walke. Againe loke what lawes, what customes, what worthie dedes, or saiynges haue bene vsed heretofore, all these mighte serue wel for the confirmacion of this matter, lastly where honestie is called in, to establish a cause: there is nature and God hym selfe present from whome commeth all goodnesse. In the seconde place where I spake of profite, this is to bee 105 learned, that vnder the same is compreheded the gettyng of gaine, & the eschewyng of harme. Againe, concernyng profite (whiche also beareth the name of goodnesse) it partely 106 perteineth to ye bodie, as beautie, strength, & healthe, partely to the mynde, as the encrease of witte, the gettyng of experience, & heaping together of moche learning: and partely to fortune (as Philosophers take it) wherby bothe wealth, honor and frendes are gotten. Thus he that diuideth profite, can not want matter. Thirdly, in declaring it is pleasaunt, 107 I might heape together the varietie of pleasures, whiche come by trauaile, first the swetenesse of the tongue, the holsomenesse of the aire in other countries, the goodlie wittes of the ientlemen, the straunge and auncient buildinges, the wonderfull monumentes, the great learned clerkes in al faculties, with diuers other like, & almoste infinite pleasures. 108 The easines of trauaile maie thus be perswaded, if wee  shewe that fre passage is by wholsome lawes appoincted, for all straungers, and waie fairers. And seing this life is none other thing but a trauaile, and we as pilgrimes wander fro place to place, moche fondnesse it were to thinke that hard, whiche nature hath made easie, yea, and pleasaunte also. None are more healthfull, none more lustie, none more merie, none more strong of bodie, then soche as haue trauailed 109 countries. Marie vnto theim that had rather slepe all daie, then wake one houre (chosing for any labour, slouthful idlenesse: thinking this life to be none other, but a continual resting place, vnto soche pardie, it shall seme painfull to abide any labour. To learne Logique, to learne the lawe, to some it semeth so harde, that nothing can enter into their heddes, and the reason is, that thei want a will,  & an earnest minde to dooe their endeuour. For vnto a willing harte, nothing can be harde, laie lode on soche a manes backe, and his good  110 harte maie soner make his backe to ake, then his good will, can graunt to yelde, and refuse the weight. And now where the sweete hath his sower ioyned with him, it shall be wisedome, to speake somewhat of it, to mitigate the sowernesse thereof, as moche as maie be possible. graunt, good men doe allowe, experience commendeth, and men in all ages haue moste vsed. either we must do some one thing, or els do worse. As if one should threaten a woman, to kille her, if she would not lye with him, wherein appereth a forcible necessitie. As touching trauaile we might saie, either a man must be ignorat of many good thinges, and want great experience, or els he must trauaile. Now to be ignorant, is a greate shame, therfore to trauaile is moste needefull, if we will auoide shame. The other kinde of necessitie is, when we perswade men to beare those crosses pacientlie, whiche God dooeth sende vs, considering will we, or nill we, nedes must we abide them. Againe, when we se our frende, enclined to any kinde of learnyng, wee muste counsaile hym to take that waie still, and by reason perswade him, that it were the metest waie for him, to dooe his countrey moste good. As if he giue his minde, to the Lawes of the realme, 113 and finde an aptnes thereunto, we maie aduise him, to continue in his good entent, and by reason perswade him, that it wer moste mete for so to do. And first we might shew him, that the studie is honest and godlie, considering it onely foloweth iustice, and is grounded wholie vpon naturall reason. Wherin we might take a large scope, if we would fully speake of al thinges, that are comprehended vnder honestie. For he that will knowe what honestie is, must haue an vnderstandyng, of all the vertues together. And bicause the knowledge of theim is moste necessarie, I will brieflie sette 114 them forthe. There are fower especiall and chief vertues, vnder whom all other are comprehended. --- 115 Prudence, or wisedome (for I will here take the both for one) is a vertue yt is occupied euermore, in searching out the truthe. Now we all loue knowledge, and haue a desire to passe other therein, and thinke it shame to bee ignoraunte: and by studiyng the Lawe, the truthe is gotten out, by knowing the truthe, wisedome is attained. Wherfore, in perswading one to studie the lawe, you maie shewe him, that he shall gette wisedome thereby. Under this vertue are comprehended. 116 --- The memorie calleth to accompt those thinges, that were dooen heretofore, and by a former remembraunce, getteth an after witte, and learneth to auoide deceipt. Understanding seeth thinges presently doen, and perceiueth what is in them, weighing and debating theim, vntill his minde be fully contented. Foresight, is a gathering by coniectures, what shall happen, and an euidente perceiuing of thinges to come, before thei doe come. Iustice. 117 Iustice is a vertue, gathered by long space, giuing euery one his owne, minding in all thinges, the common profite of our countrey, whereunto manne is moste bounde, and oweth his full obedience. Now, nature firste taught manne, to take this waie, and would euery one so to do vnto an other, as he would be don vnto would euery one so to do vnto another, as he would be doen vnto himselfe. For whereas Rain watereth all in like, the Sonne shineth indifferently ouer all, the fruicte of the yerth encreaseth egually, God warneth vs to bestowe our good will after the same sort, doyng as duetie byndeth vs, and as necessitie shall best require. Yea, God graunteth his giftes diuersly emong men, because he would man should knowe, and fele, that man is borne for man, and that one hath neds of an other. And therefore, though nature hath not stirred some, yet through the experiece that man hath, concernyng his commoditie: many haue turned the lawe of nature, into an ordinary custome, and folowed the same, as though they were bounde to it by a Lawe. Afterwarde, the wisedome of Princes, and the feare of Goddes threate, whiche was vttered by his woorde, forced men by a lawe, bothe to allowe thinges confirmed by nature, and to beare with old custome or els they should not onely suffer in the body, temporal punishement, but also lose their soules for euer. Nature is a 118 right, that phantasie hath not framed, but God hath graffed and giuen man power therunto, wherof these are deriued. --- him to be the creatour of creatures, and the onely geuer of all good thinges. beare to our parentes, wife, children, or any other that bee nighe of kynne vnto vs, stirred thereunto not onely by our fleshe, thinkyng that like as we would loue our selfes, so we shuld loue them, but also by a lykenesse of mynde: and therfore generally we loue al, because al be like vnto vs, but yet wee loue them moste, that bothe in body and mynd, be moste like vnto vs. And hereby it cometh that often wee are liberal, & bestowe our goodes vpon the nedy, remembryng that they are all one fleshe with vs, and should not wante, when we haue it, without our greate rebuke, and token of our moste vnkynde dealyng. 121 Thankefulnesse is a requiting of loue, for loue, and wil, for will, shewing to our frendes, the like goodnesse that we finde in them, yea, striuyng to passe theim in kyndnesse, losyng neither time nor tide, to do them good. 122 Stoutnes to withstand & reuenge euill, is then vsed whe either we are like to haue harme, and do withstand it, or els whe we haue suffred euill for the truthsake, & thereupon do reuenge it, or rather punishe the euil, whiche is in the man. 123 Reuerence is an humblenesse in outward behauor, whe wee do our dutie to them, that are our betters, or vnto soche as are called to serue the kyng, in some greate vocacion. 124 Assured and constant truthe is, when we doo beleue that those thynges, whiche are or haue been, or hereafter are aboute to be, cannot otherwise be, by any meanes possible. 125 That is right by custome, whiche long time hath confirmed, beyng partly grounded vpon nature, and partly vpon reason, as where we are taught by nature, to knowe the euer liuyng God, and to worship him in spirite, we turnyng natures light, into blynde custome, without Goddes will, 126 haue vsed at lengthe to beleue, that he was really with vs here in yearthe, and worshipped hym not in spirite, but in Copes, in Candlestickes, in Belles, in Tapers, and in Cesers, in Crosses, in Banners, in shauen Crounes and long gounes, and many good morowes els, deuised onely by the phantasie of manne, without the expresse will of God. The whiche childishe toyes, time hath so long confirmed, that the truthe is scant able to trie theim out, our hartes bee so harde, and our wittes be so farre to seke. Again wher we se by nature, that euery one should deale truely, custome encreaseth natures will, and maketh by auncient demeane, thynges to be iustly obserued, whiche nature hath appoyncted. ------ Bargainyng is, when two haue agreed, for the sale of some one thing, the one wil make his felowe to stande to the bargain, though it be to his neighbors vndoing, restyng vpon this pointe, that a bargain is a bargain, and must stand without al excepcion, although nature requireth to haue thinges doen by coscience, & would that bargaining should be builded vpo Iustice, whereby an vpright dealing, and a charitable loue is vttered emongest all men. haue a ground, or any soche thing emong theim, the which some of them will kepe still, for custome sake, and not suffer it to be fensed, and so turned to pasture, though they migthe gain ten tymes the value: but soche stubburnesse in kepyng of Commons for custome sake, is not standing with Iustice, because it is holden against all right. Parlamente, or a Lawe, determined by a Iudge, vnto the whiche many hed strong men, will stande to die for it, without sufferaunce of any alteracion, not remembring the circumstaunce of thinges, and that tyme altereth good actes. writing, and commaunded to bee kepte, euen as it is sette furthe vnto them. and a willyng harte to take paines in behalfe of the right. Nowe when can stoutnes be better vsed, then in iust maintenaunce of the lawe, and costaunt triyng of the truthe? Of this vertue there are foure braunches. --- with a lustie harte, and a liberall vsyng of his wealthe, to the encrease of honour. mindeth the compasse of moste weightie matters, and a couragious defendyng of his cause. and takyng of paines, for the maintenaunce of vertue, and the wealthe of his countrey. 134 Continuaunce is a stedfast and constat abidyng, in a purposed and well aduised matter, not yeldyng to any manne in querell of the right. 135 Temperaunce is a measuryng of affeccions, accordyng to the will of reason, and a subduyng of luste vnto the Square of honestie. Yea, and what one thyng doth soner mitigate the immoderate passios of our nature, then the perfect knowlege of right and wrog, and the iuste execucion appoincted by a lawe, for asswaging the wilfull? Of this vertue there are three partes. --- 136 Sobrietie is a bridelyng by discrecion, the wilfulnesse of desire. 137 Ientlenesse is a caulmyng of heate, when wee begin to rage, and a lowly behauior in all our body Modestie is an honest shamefastnesse, whereby we kepe a 138 constant loke, and appere sober in all our outward doynges. Now euen as wee should desire the vse of all these vertues, so should we eschewe not onely the contraries herunto, but also auoyde all soche euilles, as by any meanes dooe withdrawe vs from well doyng. After we haue perswaded our frend, that the lawe is honest, drawyng our argumentes from the heape of vertues, wee must go further with hym, and bryng him in good beleue, that it is very gainfull. For many one seke not the knowlege of learnyng for the goodnesse sake, but rather take paines for the gain, which they se doth 139 arise by it. Take awaie the hope of lucre, and you shall se fewe take any paines: No, not in the vineyard of the lorde. For although none should folowe any trade of life, for the gain sake, but euen as he seeth it is moste necessarye, for thaduauncement of Gods glory, and not passie in what estimacion thinges are had in this worlde: yet because wee are all so weake of wit, in our tender yeres, that wee cannot weigh with our selfes what is best, and our body so neshe, that it loketh euer to be cherished, wee take that, whiche is moste gainfull for vs, & forsake that altogether, whiche we oughte moste to folowe. So that for lacke of honest meanes, and for want of good order, the best waie is not vsed, neither is Goddes honor in our first yeres remembred. I had rather (saide one) make my child a cobler then a preacher, a tankerd bearer, tha a scholer. For what shall my sonne seke for learnyng, when he shall neuer gette therby any liuing? Set my sonne to that, whereby he maie get somewhat? Do ye not se how euery one catcheth and pulleth from the churche what they can? I feare me one day they will plucke doune churche and all. Call you this the Gospell, when men seke onely to prouide for their belies, and care not a grote though theyr soules go to helle? A patrone of a benefice will haue a poore yngrame soule, to beare the name of a persone for.xx. marke or. x. li: and the patrone himselfe, will take vp for his snapshare, as good as an .c. marke. Thus God is robbed, learnyng decaied, England dishonored, and honestie not regarded. Thold Romaines not yet knowyng Christ, and yet beyng 140 comendatu qui clepserit, rapseritue, parricida est. He that shal closely steale, or forcibly take awaie that thing, whiche is holy, or geuen to the holy place: is a murderer of his countrey. But what haue I said. I haue a greater matter in hand, then whereof I was a ware, my penne hath run ouer farre, when my leasure serueth not, nor yet my witte, is able to talke this case in soche wise, as it should bee, and as the largenesse thereof requireth. Therefore to my lawier again, whom I doubte not to perswade, but that he shall haue the deuill and all, if he learne a pase, and dooe as some haue dooen before hym. Therefore I will shewe howe largelie this profite extendeth, that I maie haue hym the soner, to take this matter in hand. The lawe therefore not onely bringeth moche gain with it, but also auaunceth men bothe to worshyppe, renoume, and honour. All men shall seke his fauour, for his learnyng sake: the best shall like his company, for his callyng: and his welth with hys skyll shalbe soche, that none shalbe able to woorke him any wrong. Some consider profite, by these circumstaunces, folowyng. --- vnto me. To whom therefore is the Lawe profitable? Marie to them that bee best learned, that haue redy wittes, and will take paines. When is the lawe profitable? Assuredly both now and euermore, but especially in this age, where all men go together by the eare for this matter, and that matter. Soche alteracion hath been heretofore, that hereafter nedes muste ensue moche alteracion. And where is all this a do? Euen in litle Englande, or in Westminster hall, where neuer yet wanted busines, nor yet euer shall. Wherefore is the lawe profitable? Undoubtedly because no manne could hold his awne, if there were not an order to staie vs, and a Lawe to restrain vs. And I praie you who getteth the money? The lawyers no doubt. And were not lande sometymes cheaper bought, then got by the triall of a lawe? Do not men commonly 141 for trifles fall out? Some for loppyng of a tree, spendes al that euer they haue, an other for a Gose, that graseth vpon his ground, tries the lawe so hard, that he proues him self a Gander. Now when men bee so mad, is it not easie to 142 gette money emong theim. Undoubtedly the lawyer neuer dieth a begger. And no maruaill. For an .C. begges for him, and make awaie all that they haue, to get that of hym, the whiche the oftener he bestoweth, the more still he getteth. So that he gaineth alwaies, aswell by encrease of lernyng as by storyng his purse with money, wheras the other get a warme sonne often tymes, and a slappe with a foxe taile, for al that euer they haue spent. And why woulde they. Tushe, if it were to do againe, they woulde do it: therefore the lawyer can neuer want a lyuyng, till the yearth want men, and all bee voyde. I Doubt not, but my lawyer is perswaded that the law is profitable, now must I beare him in hand that it is an easie matter to become a lawyer. The whiche if I shalbe able to proue. I doubt not, but he will proue a good lawyer, and that right shortly: the law is grounded vppon reason. And what hardenesse is it for a man by reason to finde out reason. That can not be straunge vnto hym, the grounde whereof, is graffed in his brest. What, though the lawe be a straunge tongue, the wordes may be gotte with out any paine, when the matter selfe is compast with ease. Tushe, a litle lawe will make a greate showe, and therfore though it be moche to becomme excellent, yet it is easie, to get a taist. And surely for getting of money, a litle wil do asmoche good oftentymes, as a greate deale. There is not a word in the lawe, but it is a grote in the lawyers purse. I haue knowne diuerse that by familiar talkyng, and moutyng together haue comme to right good learnyng without any greate booke skill, or moche beatyng of their braine by any close studie, or secrete musyng in their chamber. But where some say the lawe is very harde, & discourage young men from the studie therof, it is to bee vnderstande of soche as will take no paines at all, nor yet mynde the knowlege therof. For what is not hard to man, when he wanteth wil to dooe his best. As good slepe, and saie it is harde: as wake, and take no paines. ------ What nedeth me to proue the lawe to be godly, iust, or necessarie, seeyng it is grounded vpon Goddes wil, & all lawes are made for the maintenaunce of iustice. If we will not beleue that it is necessarie, let vs haue rebelles againe to disturbe the realme. Our nature is so fonde that we knowe not the necessitie of a thing, til we fynde some lacke of the same. Bowes are not estemed as they haue bene emong vs Englishmen, but if wee were ones wel beaten by our enemies, wee shoulde soone knowe the wante, & with feelyng the smarte, lament moche our folie. Take awaie the law, & take awaie our lifes, for nothing 143 mainteneth our wealthe, our health, & the sauegarde of our bodies, but the lawe of a Realme, wherby the wicked are condempned, and the godly are defended. in the behalfe of his frende. Albeit you are wyse enough of your self, through that singulare wisedome of yours (most louyng Cosyn) and litle needes the aduise of other, yet either for that olde frendshippe whiche hath bene betwixte vs, and continued with our age euen from our cradles, or for soche your greate good turnes showed at all tymes towardes me, or elles for that faste kynred and alliaunce whiche is betwixt vs: I thought my selfe thus moche to owe vnto you if I woulde be soche a one in deede, as you euer haue taken me, that is to saie a man bothe frendly and thankeful, to tell you freely (whatsoeuer I iudged to apperteine either to the sauegarde, or worshippe of you, or any of yours) and willingly to warne you of the same. Wee are better seen oftentymes in other mens matters, than wee are in our owne. I haue felte often your aduise in mine owne affaires, & I haue foude it to be as fortunate vnto me, as it was frendly. Now if you wil likewise in your awne matters folowe my counsail. I truste it shall so come to passe that neither I shal repet me for that I haue geuen you counsail, nor yet you shall forthynke your selfe, that you haue obeyed, and folowed myne aduise. There was at supper with me the twelfe daye of Aprill when I laie in the countrye, Antonius Baldus, a man (as you knowe) that most earnestly tendreth your welfare, and one that hath bene alwaies of great acquaintance and familiaritie with your sonne in Lawe: A heauie feast we had, and full of moche mourning. He tolde me greatly to bothe our heauinesse, that your mother that moste godly woman, was departed this life, and your sister beyng ouercome with sorow & heauinesse, had made her selfe a Nunne, so that in you onely remaineth the hope of issue and maintenaunce of your stocke. whereupon your fredes with one cosent haue offerde you in Mariage a ientle woman of a good house, & moche wealthe, faire of bodie, very wel brough vp, & soche a one as loueth you with al her harte. But you (either for your late sorowes which you haue in freshe remebraunce or elles for religio sake) haue so purposed to liue a syngle life yt neither can you for loue of your stock, neither for desier of issue, nor yet for any entreatie yt your fredes ca make, either by praiyng, or by weping: be brought to change your mind. And yet notwithstanding all this (if you will followe my counsaill) you shall be of an other minde, and leauing to liue single, whiche bothe is barren, and smally agreing with the state of mannes nature, you shall giue your self wholie, to moste holy wedlocke. And for this part I will neither wishe that the loue of your frendes (whiche els ought to ouercome your nature) nor yet mine aucthoritie, that I haue ouer you, should doe me any good at all, to compasse this my requeste, if I shall not proue vnto you, by moste plain reasons, that it will be bothe moche more honeste, more profitable, and also more pleasant for you, to marie, then to liue otherwise. Yea, what will you saie, if I proue it also, to be necessarie for you at this time to marie. And first of all, if honestie maie moue you in this matter (the whiche emong all good men, oughte to be of moche weight) what is more honest then Matrimonie, the whiche Christe himself did make honeste, when not onely he, vouchsaued to be at the Mariage with his mother, but also did consecrate the Mariage feaste, with the first miracle that euer he did vpon yearth? What is more holy then Matrimonie, which the creatour of all thinges did institute, did fasten, and make holie, and nature it self did establishe? What is more praise worthie then that thinge, the whiche 144 whosoeuer shall dispraise, is condempned straight for an heretique? Matrimonie is euen as honourable, as the name of an heretique, is thought shamefull. What is more right, or 145 mete, then to giue that vnto the posterie, the which we haue receiued of our auncesters? What is more incosiderate, then vnder the desire of holines, to eschue that as vnholy, whiche God himself, the fountaine and father of all holines, would haue to be counted as moste holie? What is more vnmanlie then that manne should go against the lawes of mankinde? What is more vnthankfull, then to denie that vnto younglinges, ye which (if thou haddest not receiued of thine elders) thou couldest not haue been the man liuing, able to have denied it vnto theim. That if you would knowe, who was the first founder of Mariage, you shall vnderstande, that it came vp not by Licurgus; nor yet by Moses, nor yet by Solon, but it was first ordeined, and instituted by the chief founder of al 146 holy by the same. For at the firste, when he made man of the yearth, he did perceiue that his life should be miserable and vnsauery, except he ioyned Eue as mate vnto him. Whereupon 147 he did not make the wife vpo the same claie, wherof he made man, but he made her of Adams ribbes, to thende we might plainly vnderstande, that nothing ought to bee more deare vnto vs, then our wife, nothing more nigh vnto vs, nothing surer ioyned, & (as a man would saie) faster glewed together. The self same God, after the generall flood, being 148 reconciled to mankinde is saied, to proclaime this lawe first of all, not that men should liue single, but that thei should increase, be multiplied, and fill the yearth. But how I praie you could this thing be, sauing by mariage, and lawfull coming together? And first, least we should allege here, either the libertie of Moises lawe, or els the necessitie of that time: 149 what other meaning els, hath that common & commendable report of Christ in the Gospell, for this cause (saieth he) shall man leaue father and mother, and cleaue to his wife. And what is more holy, then the reuerence and loue due vnto parentes? And yet the truth promised in Matrimonie, is preferred before it. and by whose meanes? Mary by god himself at what time? Forsoth not onely emong the Iewes, but also emong the Christians. Men forsake father and mother, and takes theim selues wholy to their wiues. The sonne being paste. xx. yeres, is free and at libertie. Yea, the sonne being abdicated, becommeth no sonne. But it is death onelie that parteth maried folke, if yet death dooe parte theim. Now if the other Sacramentes (whereunto the Churche of Christe chiefly leaneth) be reuerently vsed, who dooeth not see that this Sacrament, should haue the moste reuerence of all, the whiche was instituted of God, and that firste and before all other. As for the other, thei wer instituted vpon yearth, this was ordeined in Paradise: the other were giuen for a remedie, this was appoincted for the felowship of felicitie: the other were applied to mannes nature aftcer the fall, this onely was giuen, when man was in moste perfite state. If wee compt those lawes good, that mortall menne haue enacted, shall not the lawe of Matrimonie be moste holie, whiche we haue received of him, by whom wee haue receiued life, the whiche lawe was then together enacted, when manne was firste created? And lastlie, to strengthen this Lawe with an example and deede doen, Christ beyng a young man (as the storie reporteth) was called to a Mariage, and came thither 150 willingly with his mother, and not onely was he there present, but also he did honest the feast, with a wonderfull maruaile, beginning first in none other place, to worke his wonders & to doe his miracles. Why then I praie you (will one saie) how happeneth it yt Christ forbare mariage? As though good sir, there are not many thinges in Christ, at the which we ought rather to maruaile, then seke to followe. He was borne, & had no father, he came into this worlde, without his mothers painfull trauaile, he came out of the graue, when it was closed vp, what is not in him aboue nature? Let these thinges bee proper vnto him. Lette vs that liue within the boundes of nature, reuerence those thinges that are aboue nature, and followe soche thinges as are within our reach, soch as we are able to compasse. But yet (you saie) he would be borne of a virgin: of a virgin (I graut) but yet of a maried virgine. A virgine beyng a mother, did moste become God, and being maried, she shewed what was best for vs to dooe. Uirginitie did become her, who beyng vndefiled, broughte hym foorthe by heauenlie inspiracion, that was vndefiled. And yet Ioseph beeyng her housebande, dooeth commende vnto vs the lawe of chaiste wedlocke. Yea, how could he better set out the societie in wedlocke, then that willyng to declare the secrete societie of his diuine nature, with the bodie and soule of manne, whiche is wonderfull euen to the heauenlie Aungelles, and to shewe his vnspeakable and euer abidyng loue towarde his Churche: he doeth call hymself the Bridegrome, and her the Bride. Greate is the Sacramente of Matrimonie (saieth Paule) betwixt Christ and his Churche. If there had been vnder heauen any holier yoke, if there had been any more religious couenaunte then is Matrimonie, without doubte the example thereof had been vsed. But what like thing dooe you reade in all Scripture, of 151 the single life? The Apostle saint Paule, in the.xiii.Cha. of his Epistle to the Hebrues, calleth Matrimonie honourable emong all men, and a bedde vndefiled, and yet the single life is not so moche as ones named in the same place. Naie thei are not borne withal that liue single, except thei make some recompence, with dooyng some greater thing. For els, if a man following the lawe of nature, do labour to get childre, he is euer to be preferred before him, that liueth still vnmaried, for none other eande, but bicause he would bee out of trouble, and liue moare free. We dooe reade, that soche as are in verse deede chaiste of their bodie, and liue a virgines life, haue been praised, but the single life, was neuer praised of it self. Now againe, the lawe of Moses accurseth the barrenesse of maried folke, and wee dooe reade that some were excommunicated for the same purpose, and banished from the altare. And wherefore I praie you? Marie sir, bicause that thei like vnprofitable persones, and liuing onely to theim selues, did not encrease the worlde with any issue. 152 In Deuteronomie, it was the chiefest token of Gods blessynges vnto the Israelites, that none should bee barren 153 emonge theim, neither manne, nor yet woman. And Lia is thought to be out of Goddes fauour, bicause she could not bring forthe children. Yea, and in the Psalme of Dauid. 128. it is compted one of the chiefest partes of blesse, to be a fruitfull woman. Thy wife (saieth the Psalme) shall be plentiful like a vine, and thy children like the braunches of Oliues, rounde about thy table. Then if the lawe doe condempne, and vtterlie dissalowe barren Matrimonie, it hath alwaies moche more condempned, the single liue of Batchelaures. If the faulte of Nature hath not escaped blame, the wille of man can neuer want rebuke. If thei ar accursed that would haue children, and can get none, what deserue thei, whiche neuer trauaile to escape barreinesse? 154 The Hebrues had soche a reuerence to maried folke, that he whiche had maried a wife, the same yere should not bee forced to go on warfare. A citee is like to fall in ruin, except there be watchmen to defende it with armour. But assured destruccion must here nedes followe, except menne through the benefite of Mariage supplie issue, the whiche through mortalitie, doe from time to time decaie. Ouer and besides this, the Romaines did laie a penaltie vpon their backe, that liued a single life, yea, thei would not suffer theim to beare any office in the common weale. But 155 thei that had encreased the worlde with issue, had a reward by common assent, as menne that had deserued well of their Countrie. The olde foren lawes did appoincte penalties, for soche as liued single, the which although thei wer qualified by Constancius the Emperor, in the fauour of Christes religion: yet these lawes doe declare, how little it is for the comon weales aduauncement, that either a citee should be lesned, for loue of sole life, or els that the countrie should be filled full of bastardes. And besides this, themperor Augustus, 156 being a sore punisher of euill behauior, examined a soldiour bicause he did not marie his wife, according to the Lawes the whiche souldiour had hardelie escaped iudgement, if he had not got three children by her. And in this poinct doe the lawes of the Emperours, seme fauourable to maried folke, that thei abrogate soche vowes, as were Proclaimed to bee kepte, and brought in by Miscella, and would that after the 157 penaltie were remitted, soche couenauntes, being made against all right and conscience, should also be taken of none effect, and as voide in the lawe. Ouer and besides this, Ulpianus doeth declare, that the matter of Dowries was euer 158 more, and in all places the chiefest aboue al other, the which should neuer haue been so, except there came to the common weale, some especial profite by mariage. Mariage hath euer been reuerenced, but fruictfulnesse of bodie hath bee moche more, for so sone as one gotte the name of a father, there discended not onely vnto him inheritaunce of lande, but all bequestes, and gooddes of soche his frendes, as died intestate. The whiche thing appereth plain, by the Satyre Poete. 159 Through me thou art made, an heire to haue lande, Thou hast all bequestes one with an other, All goodes and cattell are come to thy hande Yea gooddes intestate, thou shalt haue sure. Now he that had three children, was more fauoured, for he was exempted from all outward ambassages. Againe, he that had fiue childred, was discharged and free from all personalle office, as to haue the gouernaunce, or patronage of young ientlemenne, the whiche in those daies was a greate charge, and full of paines, without any profit at all. He that had. xiij. children, was free by the Emperour Iulianus law, not onely from beyng a man of armes, or a Capitaine ouer horsmen: but also fro all other offices in the common weale. And the wise founders of all Lawes, giue good reason why soche fauour was shewed to maried folk. For what is more blessefull, then to liue euer? Now where as nature hath denied this, Matrimonie dooeth giue it by a certaine sleight, so moche as maie be. Who doeth not desire to be bruted, and liue through fame emong men hereafter? Now there is no building of pillers, no erecting of arches, no blasing of Armes, that doeth more set forthe a mannes name, then doeth the encrease of children. Albinus obteined his purpose of the Emperour Adrian, for none other desert of his, but that he had begot an housefull of children. And therefore the Emperour (to the hinderaunce of his treasure) suffred the children to enter whollie vppon their fathers possession, forasmoche as he knewe well, that his Realme was more strengthened with encrease of children, then with store of money. Againe, all other lawes are neither agreyng for all Countries, nor 160 yet vsed at al times. Licurgus made a lawe, that thei which maried not, should be kept in Somer, from the sight of stage Plaies, and other wonderfull shewes, and in Winter, thei should go naked about the Market place, and accursing the selues, thei should confesse openlie, that thei had iustlie deserued soche punishemente, bicause thei did not liue, accordyng 161 to the Lawes. And without any more a dooe, will ye knowe how moche our olde Auncesters, heretofore estemed Matrimonie? Weigh well, and consider the punishemente, 162 for breakyng of wedlocke. The Grekes heretofore thought it mete to punishe the breache of Matrimonie with battaile, that continued ten yeres. Yea, moreouer not onelie by the Romaine Lawe, but also by the Hebrues and straungers, aduouterous persones were punished with death. If a thefe paied fower times the value of that, whiche he toke awaie,  163 he was deliuered, but an aduouterers offece, was punished, with the sworde. Emong the Hebrues, the people stoned the aduouterers to death, with their owne handes, bicause thei had broke that, without whiche the world could not cotinue. 164 And yet thei thought not this sore Lawe sufficient inough, but graunted further, to run him through without Lawe, that was taken in aduoutrie, as who should saie, thei grauted that to the grief of maried folke, the whiche thei would hardlie graunte to him, that stoode in his owne defence, for saufegarde of his life, as though he offended more hainouslie, that tooke a mannes wife, then he did that tooke awaie a mannes life. Assuredlie Wedlocke must neades seme to be a moste holie thing, consideryng that beyng ones broken, it muste neades bee purged with mannes blood, the reuenger whereof is not forced to abide, either Lawe or Iudge, the whiche libertie is not graunted any, to vse vppon hym that hath killed, either his father or his mother. But what dooe we with these Lawes written? This is the lawe of nature, not written in the Tables of Brasse, but firmelie printed in our mindes, the whiche Lawe, whosoeuer dooeth not obeie, he is not worthie to bee called a manne, moche lesse shall he bee computed a Citezein. For if to liue well (as the Stoikes wittelie doe dispute) is to followe the course of nature, what thinge is so agreyng with Nature as Matrimonie? 165 For there is nothing so naturall, not onelie vnto mankinde, but also vnto all other liuyng creatures, as it is for euery one of theim to keepe their owne kinde from decaie, and through increase of issue, to make their whole kind immortall. The whiche thing (all menne knowe) can neuer be dooen, without Wedlocke and carnall copulacion. It were a foule thinge, that brute beastes should obeye the Lawe of Nature, and menne like Giauntes, should fighte againste Nature. Whose woorke, if wee would narowlie looke vpon, we shall perceiue that in all thinges, here vpon yearth, she would there should be a certaine spice of Mariage. I wil not speake nowe of Trees, wherein (as Plinie moste certainlie writeth) there is founde Mariage, with some manifeste difference of bothe kindes, that excepte the housebande Tree, dooe leane with his boughes, euen as though 166 he should desire copulacion vppon the women Trees, growynge rounde aboute hym: Thei would elles altogether wae barraine. The same Plinie also dooeth reporte, that certaine aucthours dooe thinke, there is bothe Male and Female, in all thynges that the yearthe yeldeth. I will not speake of precious Stones, wherein the same aucthoure 167 affirmeth, and yet not he onelie neither, that there is bothe Male and Female emong them. And I praie you, hath not GOD so knitte all thinges together, with certaine Linckes, that one euer seameth to haue neade of an other? What 168 saie you of the skie or firmament, that is euer stirring, with continuall mouing? Doeth it not plaie the parte of a houseband, while it puffeth vp the yearth, the mother of all thinges, and maketh it fruictfull, with casting seede (as a manne would saie) vpon it. But I thinke it ouer tedious, to run ouer all thinges. And to what ende are these thinges spoken? Marie sir, bicause we might vnderstande, that through Mariage, al thinges are, and doe still continue, and without the same, all thinges doe decaie, and come to nought. The olde 169 aunciente and moste wise Poetes doe feine (who had euer a desire, vnder the colour of fables, to set foorthe preceptes of Philosophie) that the Giauntes, whiche had Snakes feete, and were borne of the yearth, builded great hilles, that mouted vp to heauen, minding thereby to bee at vtter defiaunce with God and al his angels. And what meaneth this fable? Marie it sheweth vnto vs, that certain fierce and sauage me soche as were vnknowen, could not abide wedlocke, for any worldes good, and therefore thei wer stricken doune hedlog with lightning, that is to saie: thei were vtterly destroied, when thei sought to eschue that, whereby the weale & saufgard of all mankinde, onely doeth consiste. Now again, the 170 same Poetes dooe declare, that Orpheus the Musician and Minstrell, did stirre and make soft with his pleasaunt melodie, the moste harde Rockes and stones. And what is their meaning herein? Assuredly nothing els, but that a wise and well spoken man, did call backe harde harted men, soche as liued abrode like beastes, from open whoredome, & brought the to liue after the moste holy lawes of Matrimonie. Thus we se plainly, that soche a one as hath no minde of Mariage semeth to be no man, but rather a stone, an enemie to nature a rebell to God himself, seking through his owne folie, his laste ende and destruccion. Welle, let vs go on still (seing we are fallen into fables, that are not fables altogether) when thesame Orpheus, in the middes of hell, forced Pluto himself, and all the deuilles there, to graunt him leaue to cary awaie his wife Euridice, what other thing doe we thinke, that the Poetes meant, but 171 onely to set forthe vnto vs the loue in wedlocke, the whiche euen emong the deuilles, was coumpted good and Godlie. they made Iupiter Gamelius, the God of mariage, & Iuno Lucina ladye midwife, to helpe soche women as laboured in child bedde, beynge fondlye deceiued, and supersticiouslie, erryng in namyng of Gods, and yet not missinge the trueth, in declaring that Matrimonie is an holy thinge, & mete for the worthines therof, that the Goddes in heauen should haue care ouer it. Emonge diuers countries, and diuers menne, there haue bene diuers lawes and customes vsed. yet was there neuer any countrey so sauage, none so farre from all humanitie, where the name of wedlocke was not counted holye, and hadde in great reuerence. This the Thracian, this the Sarmate, this the Indian, this the Grecian, 172 this the Latine, yea, this the Britain that dwelleth in the furtheste parte of all the worlde, or if there be anye that dwell beyonde them haue euer counted to be moste holye. And why so? Marye because that thinge must neades be comune to all, whiche the comune mother vnto all, hath graffed in vs all, and hath so thorowlye graffed the same in vs, that not onely stockedoues and Pigions, but also the most wilde beastes haue a natural felinge of this thinge. For the Lyons are gentle against the Lionesse. The Tygers fight for safegarde of their yong whelpes. The Asse runnes through the hote fyre (whiche is made to kepe her awaie) for safegarde of her issue. And this they cal the lawe of Nature, the which as it is of most strengthe and force, so it spreadeth abroade most largely. Therefore as he is counted no good gardener, that beyng content with thinges present, doth diligently proyne his old trees, and hath no regard either to ympe or graffe yong settes: because the selfe same Orcharde (thoughe it be neuer so well trimmed) moste nedes decaye in time, and al the trees dye within fewe yeres: So he is not to be counted halfe a diligent citezen, that beynge contente with the preset multitude hathe no regarde to encrease the number. Therfore there is no one man that euer hath bene counted a worthy Citeze, who hath not laboured to get children, and sought to bring them vp in Godlines. that had most wiues, as thoughe the countrey were moste beholdyng to hym, that encreased the same with the greatest number of childre. Do you seke to be compted more 174 holie then Abraham him selfe? Well, he should neuer haue bene compted the father of many nacions, and that through Gods furtheraunce, if he had for borne the companie of his wife. Do you loke to be rekened more deuoute then Iacob? 175 He doubteth nothing to raunsome Rachel from her greate bondage. Will you be taken for wiser then Salomon? And 176 yet I praye you what a number of wiues kept he in one house? Will you bee compted more chaste then Socrates, 177 who is reported to beare at home with Zantippe that verie shrewe, and yet not so muche therfore (as he is wont to ieste accordinge to his olde maner) because he might learne pacience at home, but also because he might not seme to come behinde with his dutye in doynge the wil of nature. For he beynge a manne, suche a one (as Appollo iudged him by his Oracle to bee wise) did well perceyue that he was gotte for this cause, borne for this cause, and therfore bounde to yeld so muche vnto nature. For if the olde aunciet Philosophers haue saied well, if our Diuines haue proued the thinge not without reason, if it be vsed euery where for a common prouerbe, and almoste in euerye mans mouthe, that neyther God nor yet Nature, did euer make any thinge in vaine: Why did he geue vs suche membres, howe happenethe we haue suche luste, and suche power to gette issue, if the single life and none other bee altogether prayse worthie? If one shoulde bestowe vpon you a verie good thinge, as a bowe, a coate, or a sworde, al men would thinke you were not worthie to haue the thing, if either you could not, or you would not vse it, and occupie it. And where as al other thinges are ordeined vpon suche greate consideratios, it is not like that Nature slepte or forgate her selfe when she made this one thinge. And nowe here will some saye tht this fowle and filthle desire, and stirringe vnto luste, came neuer in by Nature, but through Sinne: for whose wordes I passe not a strawe, seinge their saynges are as false, as God is true. For I praye you was not Matrimonie Instituted) whose worke can not be done withoute these mebers) before there was anye Synne. And againe, whence haue all other brute beastes their prouocations? of Nature, or of Sinne? A man woulde thinke they hadde theim of nature. But shall I tell you at a worde, wee make that filthye by oure owne Imagination, whiche of the owne nature is good and Godlye. Or ells if we will examine matters, (not accordinge to the opinion of menne, but weye them as thei are of their owne Nature) howe chaunceth it that we thinke it lesse filthye, to eate, to chewe, to digeste, to emptye the bodye, and to slepe, then it is to vse carnall copulation, such, as is lawfull, and permitted. Naye sir (you will saye) we muste followe vertue, rather then Nature. A gentle dishe. As thoughe anye thinge can be called vertue that it contrary vnto Nature. Assuredly there is nothing that can be perfectly gote, either throughe laboure, or throughe learninge, if man grounde not his doynges altogether vpon Nature. But you will liue an Apostles life, suche as some of them did that liued single, and exhorted other to the same kinde of life. Tushe, let them folowe the Apostls that are Apostls in deede, whose office seyng it is bothe to teache & bringe vp the people in Goddes doctrine, thei are not able to discharge their dutyes bothe to their flocke, and to their wife & familie Althoughe it is well knowen that some of the Apostles had wiues. But beit that Bishopps liue single, or graut we the to haue no wiues. What do you folowe the profession of the Apostles, beynge one that is farthest in life fro their Uocation, beinge bothe a temporal manne, and one that liueth of youre owne. They hadde this Pardon granted them to be cleane woyde from Mariage, to the ende they mighte bee at leasure to get vnto Christe a more plentifull number of his children. Let this be the order of Priestes and monkes, who belike haue entred into the Religion and rule of the Essens suche as amonge the Iewes lothed Mariage) but youre callinge is an other waye. Naye, but (you will saye) Christe him selfe hathe compted theim blessed, whiche haue gelded theim selues for the Kingdome of GOD. Sir, I am contente to admitte the authoritie, but thus I expounde the meaning. Firste, I thinke that this doctrine of Christe did chieflye belonge vnto that time, when it behoued theim chieflie to be voide of all cares and busines of this Worlde. They were feine to trauayle into all places, for the persecutoures were euer readye to laye handes on theim. But now the worlde is so, that a manne can finde in no place the vprightnes of behauiour lesse stained, then emonge maried folke. Lette the Swarmes of Monkes and Nunnes sette forthe their order neuer so moche, let them boast and bragge their bealies full, of their ceremonies and churche seruice, wherein they chieflie passe all other: yet is wedlocke (beinge well and trulie kepte) a mooste holie kinde of life. Againe, would to God they were gelded in very deede, what soeuer they be, that coloure their noughtie liuing with soch a iolie name of geldinge, liuing in moche more filthye luste vnder the clocke and pretence of chastitie. Neither can I reporte for verye shame, into howe filthye offences they do often fal, that will not vse that remedye whiche Nature hath graunted vnto manne. And last of all, where do you reade that euer Christe commaunded any manne to liue single, and yet he dothe openlye forbidde diuorcement. Then he dothe not worste of all (in my Iudgemente) for the commune weale of Mankinde, that graunteth libertie vnto Priestes: yea, and 178 Monkes also (if neade be) to mary, and to take them to their wiues, nameli seing there is soche an vnreasonable number euery where, emonge who I praye you how many be there that liue chaste. How moche better were it to turne their concubines into wiues, that where as they haue them now to their greate shame with an vnquiet consciece, they might haue the other openlye with good report, and get children, and also bringe them vp godlie, of whom they them selues not onelye mighte not be ashamed, but also might be counted honest men for them. And I thinke the bishoppes officers woulde haue procured this matter longe agoe, if they had not founde greater gaines by pristes lemmans, then 179 they were like to haue by priestes wiues. But virginitie forsothe is an heauenlie thing, it is an Aungels life. I aunswer, wedlocke is a manly thinge, soche as is mete for man. And I talke now as ma vnto man. I graunte you, that virginitie, is a thinge prayse worthy, but so farre I am content to speake in praise of it, if it be not so praised, as though the iust shuld altogether folow it, for if men commonly should begin to like it, what thing could be inuented more perilous to a commune weale then virginitie. Nowe be it that other deserue greate praise for their maydenheade, you notwithstandinge can not wante greate rebuke, seynge it lieth in your handes to kepe that house from decaie, whereof you lineallye descended, & to continue still the name of your auncesters, who deserue moste worthely to be knowen foreuer. And laste of all, he deserueth as moche praise, as they which kepe their maydehode: that kepes him selfe true to his wife, and marieth rather for encrease of children, then to satisfy his luste. For if a brother be commaunded to stirre vp sede to his brother that dieth without issue, will you suffer the hope of all youre stocke to decaye, namely seynge there is none other of your name and stocke, but your selfe alone, to continue the posteritie. I knowe well inough, that the auncient fathers haue set forthe in greate volumes, the praise of virginitie, emonge whom, Hierome dothe so take on, and 180 praiseth it so moche aboue the starres, that he fell in maner to depraue Matrimonie, & therefore was required of Godly Bishoppes to cal backe his wordes that he had spoken. But let vs beare with soche heate for that time sake, I woulde wishe now, that thei, whiche exhort yong folke euery where, and without respecte (soche as yet knowe not themselfes) to liue a single life, and to professe virginitie: that thei would bestowe the same labour, in setting furth the descripcion of chast and pure wedlocke. And yet those bodies that are in soche great loue with virginitie, are well contented that menne shoulde fight against the Turkes, which in nomber are infinitely greater then we are. And now if these menne thinke right in this behalfe, it must nedes be thought right good and godly, to labour earnestly for children getting, & to substitute youthe from time to time, for the maintenance of warre. Excepte parauenture thei thinke that Gunnes, Billes, Pikes, and nauies, should be prouided for battaill, and that men stand in no stede at all with them. They also allowe it well, that we should kill miscreaunt and Heathen parentes, that the rather their children not knowing of it, might bee Baptized and made Christians. Nowe if this bee righte and lawfull, howe moche more ientlenesse were it to haue children Baptized, beyng borne in lawfull mariage. There is no nacio so sauage, nor yet so hard harted, within the whole worlde, but the same abhoreth murdering of infauntes, and newe borne babes. Kynges also and hedde rulers, dooe likewise punishe moste streightly, all soche as seke meanes to be deliuered before their time, or vse Phisicke to wae barren, and neuer to beare children. What is the reason? Marie thei coumpte small difference betwixt hym, that killeth the childe, so sone as it beginneth to quicken: and the other, that seketh al meanes possible, neuer to haue any child at all. The self same thing, that either withereth and drieth awaie in thy body, or els putrifieth within thee, and so hurteth greatly thy healthe, yea, that self same, whiche falleth from thee in thy slepe, would haue been a man, if thou thy 181 self haddest been a man. The Hebrues abhorre that manne, and wishe him Goddes cursse, that (beeyng commaunded to Marie, with the wife of his dedde brother) did caste his seede vpon the grounde, least any issue should be had, and he was euer thought vnworthie to liue here vpo yearth, that would not suffer that childe to liue, whiche was quicke in the mothers wombe. But I praie you, how little doe thei swarue from this offence, whiche binde themselues to liue barren, all the daies of their life? Doe thei not seeme to kill as many men, as were like to haue been borne, if thei had bestowed their endeuours, to haue got children? Now I praie you, if a man had lande that were very fat and fertile, and suffred the same for lacke of manering, for euer to wae barren, should he not, or were he not worthie to be punished by the lawes, considering it is for the common weales behoue, that euery man should wel and truely husbande his owne. If that man bee punished, who little hedeth the maintenaunce of his tillage, the whiche although it bee neuer so well manered, yet it yeldeth nothing els but wheat, barley, beanes, and peaso: what punishemente is he worthy to suffre, that refuseth to plough that lande, whiche being tilled, yeldeth childre. And for ploughing lande, it is nothing els, but painfull toilyng from time to time,but in getting children, there is pleasure, whiche being ordeined, as a redie reward for paines taking, asketh a short trauail for al the tillage. Therfore if the working of nature, if honestie, if vertue, if inward zeale, if godlinesse, if duetie maie moue you, why can you not abide that, whiche God hath ordeined, nature hath established, reason doeth counsaill, Gods worde and mannes woorde doe commende, all lawes doe commaunde, the consent of all nacions doeth allowe, whereunto also the example of all good men, doeth exhort you. That if euery honest manne should desire many thinges, that are moste painfull for none other cause, but onely for that thei are honest, no doubt but matrimonie ought aboue al other, moste of all to be desired, as the which we maie doubt, whether it haue more honestie in it, or bring more delite and pleasure with it. For what can be more pleasaunt, then to liue with her, with whom not onely you shall be ioined, in felowship of faithfulnes, and moste hartie good will, but also you shall be coupled together moste assuredly, with the companie of bothe your bodies? If we coumpt that greate pleasure, whiche wee receiue of the good will of our frendes & acquaintaunce, how pleasaunt a thing is it aboue all other, to haue one, with who you maie breake the botom of your harte, with whom ye maie talke as freely, as with your self, into whose trust, you maie safly commit your self, soch a one as thinketh al your goodes to be her charge. Now what an heauenly blisse (trowe you) is the companie of man and wife together, seing that in all the world, there can nothing be found, either of greater weight & worthines, or els of more strength and assurance. For with frendes, we ioine onely with them in good will, & faithfulnes of minde, but wt a wife, we are matched together, both in hart and minde, in body and soule, sealed together with the bond & league of an holy sacrament, and parting all the goodes we haue, indifferently betwixt vs. Again when other are matched together in frendship, doe we not se what dissembling thei vse, what falshode thei practise and what deceiptful partes thei plaie ? Yea, euen those who we thinke to be our most assured frendes, as swallowes flie awaie when somer is past, so thei hide their heddes, whe fortune ginnes to faile. And oft times whe we get a newe frend, we streight forsake our old. We hear tel of very fewe, that haue continued frendes, euen till their last end. Wheras the faithfulnes of a wife, is not stained wt deceipt, nor dusked with any dissebling, nor yet parted with any chauge of the worlde, but disseuered at last by death only, no not by death neither. She forsakes & settes light by father & mother, sister & brother for your sake, & for your loue only. She only passeth vpo you, she puttes her trust in you, & leaneth wholi vpo you, yea, she desires to die wt you. Haue you any worldly substance? You haue one that wil maintein it, you haue one yt will increase it. Haue you none: You have a wife that will get it. If you liue in prosperitee, your ioye is doubled: if the worlde go not with you, you haue a wife to put you in good comfort, to be at your commaundement, & redy to serue your desire, & to wishe that soche euill as hath happened vnto you, might chauce vnto her self. And do you thinke yt any pleasure in al the world, is able to be copared with soche a goodly felowiship & familier liuing together? If you kepe home, your wife is at hand to kepe your company, the rather yt you might fele no werines of liuing al alone, if you ride furth, you haue a wife to bid you fare well with a kisse longing moche for you, being from home, and glad to bid you well come home at your next returne. A swete mate in your youth, a thankfull comfort in your age. Euery societie or companyng together, is delitefull and wisshed for, by nature of all men, for as moche as Nature hath ordeined vs to be, sociable, frendly, and louing together. Now how ca this fellowship of man and wife, be other wise then moste pleasaunt, where all thinges are common together betwixt them bothe. Now I thinke he is moste worthy, to be despised aboue all other, that is borne, as a manne would saie for hymself, that liueth to hymself, that seketh for hymself, that spareth for himself, maketh cost onely vpon himself, that loueth no man, and no man loueth him. Would not a manne thinke that soche a monster, were mete to be caste out of all 182 mennes companie (with Tymon that careth for no man) in to the middest of the sea. Neither doe I here vtter vnto you, those pleasures of the body, the whiche, wheras nature hath made to be moste pleasaunt vnto man, yet these greate witted men, rather hide them, and dissemble them (I can not tel how) then vtterly contempne them. And yet what is he that is so sower of witte, and so dropping of braine (I will not saie) blockhedded, or insensate, that is not moued with soche pleasure, namely if he maie haue his desire, without offence either of God or man, and without hinderaunce of his estimacion. Truely I would take soche a one, not to be a man, but rather to be a very stone. Although this pleasure of the bodie, is the least parte of all those good thinges, that are in Wedlocke. But be it that you passe not vpon this pleasure, and thinke it vnworthy for man to vse it, although in deede we deserue not the name of man without it, but coumpt it emong the least and vttermost profites, that wedlocke hath: now I praie you, what can bee more hartely desired, then chast loue, what can be more holie, what can be more honest? And emong all these pleasures, you get vnto you a ioly sort of kinsfolk, in whom you maie take moche delite. You haue other parentes, other brethren, sisterne, and nephewes. Nature in deede can giue you but one father, and one mother: by mariage you get vnto you an other father, and an other mother, who ca not chuse, but loue you with al their hartes, as the whiche haue put into your handes, their owne fleshe and blood. Now againe, what a ioie shall this be vnto you, whe your moste faire wife, shall make you a father, in bringing foorthe a faire childe vnto you, where you shall haue a pretie little boie, running vp and doune your house, soche a one as shall expresse your loke, and your wiues loke, soche a one as shall call you dad, with his sweete lisping wordes. Now laste of all, when you are thus linked in loue, the same shall be so fastened and bounde together, as though it were with the Adamant stone, that death it self can neuer be able to vndo it. Thrise happie are thei ([quoth] Horace) yea, more then thrise happie are thei, whom these sure bandes doe hold, neither though thei are by euill reporters, full ofte set a sonder, shall loue be vnlosed betwixt them twoo, till death the bothe departe. You haue them that shall comfort you, in your latter daies, that shall close vp your iyes, when God shall calle you, that shall burie you, and fulfill al thinges belonging to your funerall, by whom you shall seme, to bee newe borne. For so long as thei shall liue, you shall neuer be thought ded you self. The goodes and landes that you haue got, go not to other heires, then to your own. So that vnto soch as haue fulfilled all thinges, that belong vnto mannes life, death it self can not seme bitter. Olde age cometh vpon vs all, will we, or nil we, and this waie nature prouided for vs, that we should wae yong again in our children, and nephues. For, what man can be greued, that he is olde, when he seeth his owne countenaunce, whiche he had beyng a child, to appere liuely in his sonne? Death is ordeined for all mankinde, and yet by this meanes onely, nature by her prouidece, mindeth vnto vs a certaine immortalitie, while she encreaseth one thing vpon an other, euen as a young graffe buddeth out, when the old tree is cut doune. Neither can he seme to dye, that, when God calleth him, leaueth a yong childe behinde him. But I knowe well enough, what you saie to your self, all this while of my long talke. Mariage is an happie thing if all thinges hap well, what and if one haue a curste wife? What if she be light? What if his children bee vngracious? Thus I se you will remember all soche men, as by mariage haue been vndooen. Well, go to it, tell as many as you can, and spare not: you shall finde all these wer the faultes of the persones, and not the faultes of Mariage. For beleue me, 183 none haue euill wiues, but soche as are euill men. And as for you sir, you maie chuse a good wife, if ye liste. But what if she be croked, and marde altogether, for lacke of good ordering. A good honest wife, maie be made an euill woman, by a naughtie husebande, and an euill wife, hath been made a good woman, by an honest manne. We crie out of wiues vntruly, and accuse them without cause. There is no man (if you will beleue me) that euer had an euill wife, but thorowe his owne default. Now again, an honest father, bringeth forthe honest children, like vnto himself. Although eue these children, how so euer thei ar borne, commonly become 184 soche men, as their educacion and bringing vp is. And as for ielousie, you shall not nede to feare that fault at al. For none be troubled with soche a disease, but those onely that are folishe louers. Chaste, godly, and lawfull loue, neuer knewe what ielousie ment. What meane you to call to your minde and remember soche sore tragedies, and dolefull dealinges, as haue been betwixt man and wife. Soche a woman being naught of her body, hath caused her husband to lose his hed, an other hath poisoned her good manne, the third with her churlish dealing (whiche her husband could not beare) hath been his outer vndoing, and brought him to his ende. But I praie you sir, why doe you not rather thinke vpon Cornelia, 185 wife vnto Tiberius Gracchus? Why doe ye not minde that moste worthie wife, or that moste vnworthie manne 186 Alcestes? Why remember ye not Iulia Pompeies wife, or Porcia Brutus wife? And why not Artemisia, a womanne moste worthy, euer to be remembred? Why not Hipsicratea wife vnto Mithridates king of Potus? Why doe ye not call to remebraunce, the ientle nature of Tertia Acmilia? Why not Lucrecia and Lentula to your remembrance? And why not Arria? Why not thousandes other, whose chastite of life, and faithfulnesse towardes their housebandes, could not be chaunged, no, not by death. A good woman (you will saie) is a rare birde, and harde to be founde in all the worlde. Well then sir, imagine your self worthy to haue a rare wife, soche as fewe men haue. A good woman (saieth the wiseman) is a good porcio. Be you bolde to hope for soche a one, as is worthy 188 your maners. The chiefest poinct standeth in this, what maner of woman you chuse, how you vse her, and how you order your self towardes her. But libertie (you will saie) is moche more pleasaunt: for, who soeuer is maried, weareth fetters vpo his legges, or rather carieth a clogge, the whiche he can neuer shake of, till death parte their yoke. To this I answere, I can not se what pleasure a man shal haue, to liue alone. For if libertie be delitfull, I would thinke you should get a mate vnto you, with who you should parte stakes, and make her priuie of all your ioies. Neither can I se any thing more free, then is the seruitude of these twoo, where the one is so moche beholding, and bound to the other, that neither of theim bothe would be louse, though thei might. You are bounde vnto hym, whom you receiue into your frendship: but in mariage neither partie findeth fault, that their libertie is taken awaie from them. Yet ones againe you are sore afraied, least when your children are taken awaie by death, you fall to mourning for want of issue. Well sir, if you fear lack of issue, you must marie a wife for the self same purpose, the whiche onely shall be a meane, that you shall not wante issue. But what dooe you searche so diligently, naie so carefully, all the incommodities of Matrimonie, as though single life, had neuer any incommoditie ioigned with it at all. As though there were any kinde of life, in all the worlde, that is not subiecte to all euilles that maie happen. He must nedes go out of this worlde, that lookes to liue without feeling of any grief. And in comparison of that life, whiche the Sainctes of God shall haue in heauen, this life of man is to be compted a death, and not a life. But if you consider thinges, within the compasse of mankinde, there is nothing either more saufe, more quiet, more pleasaunt, more to be desired, or more happie, then is the maried mannes life. How many do you se, that hauing ones felt the swetnesse of wedlocke, dooeth not desire eftsones to enter into the same? My frende Mauricius, whom you know to be a very wise man, did not he, the next moneth after his wife died (whom he loued derely) get him straight a newe wife? Not that he was impacient of his lust, and could not forbeare any longer, but he saied plainly, it was no life for him, to be without a wife, whiche should be with him, as his yoke fellowe, and companion in all thinges. And is not this the fowerth wife, that our fred Iouius hath maried? And yet he so loued the other, when thei were on liue, that none was able to comfort him in his heauinesse: and now he hastened so moche (when one was dedde) to fill vp and supplie the voide roume of his chaber, as though he had loued the othe very little. But what dooe we talke so moche of the honestie and pleasure herein, seing that not onely profite doeth aduise vs, but also neede 189 doeth earnestlie force vs, to seke Mariage. Let it be forbidde that manne and woman, shall not come together, and with in fewe yeres, all mankinde muste needes decaie for euer. 190 When Zerxes king of the Persians, behelde from an high place, that greate armie of his, soche as almoste was incredible, some saied he could not forbeare weping, considering of so many thousandes, there was not one like to be a liue, within seuetie yeres after. Now why should not we cosider the same of all mankinde, whiche he meante onely of his armie. Take a waie Mariage, and how many shall remain after a hundred yeres, of so many realmes, countries, kingdomes, citees, and al other assemblies that be of men, through out the whole worlde? On now, praise we a Gods name, the single life aboue the nockethe, whiche is like for euer to vndoe all mankinde. What plague, what infeccion can either heauen or hell, sende more harmefull vnto makinde? What greater euill is to be feared by any flood? What could be loked for, more sorowfull, althoughe the flame of Phaeton should sette the world on fire againe? And yet by soche sore tempestes, many thinges haue been saued harmelesse, but by the single life of man, there can be nothing left at al. We se what a sort of diseases, what diuersitee of missehappes do night & daie lie in waite to lessen the small nomber of mankinde. How many doeth the plague destroie, how many doe the seas swallowe, how many doeth battaile snatch vp? For I will not speake of the dailey diynge that is in all places. Death taketh her flight euery where round about, she runneth ouer them, she catcheth them vp, she hasteneth asmoche as she can possible, to destroie al mankinde, and now doe we so highly commende single life, and eschue mariage? Except happely we like the profession of the Essens (of whom Iosephus) 191 speaketh, that thei will neither haue wife, nor seruautes) or the Dulopolitans, called otherwise the rascalles and 192 slaues of citees, the whiche companie of theim is alwaie encreased, and continued by a sort of vagabounde peasauntes, that continue, and be from time to time still together. Dooe we loke that some Iupiter, should giue vs that same gift, the whiche he is reported to haue giuen vnto Bees, yt we should haue issue without procreacion, and gather with our mouthes out of the flowers, the seede of our posteritie? Or els do we desire, that like as the Poetes fein Minerua, to be borne out of Iupiters hedde: in like sort there should children leape out of our heddes? Or last of all dooe we looke, according as the old fables haue been, that men should be borne out of the yearth, out of rockes, out of stockes, stones, and olde Trees. Many thinges breede out of the yearth, without mannes labour at all. Yong shrubbes growe and shoute vp, vnder the shadowe of their graundsire trees. But nature would haue man, to vse this one waie of increasing issue, that through labour of bothe the housebande and wife, mankinde mighte still be kept from destruccion. But I promise you, if all men tooke after you, and still forbare to marie: I can not see but that these thinges, whiche you wonder at, & esteme so moch could not haue been at all. Do you yet esteme this single life so greatly? Or dooe we praise so moche virginitie, aboue all other? Why man, there will be neither single men, nor virgines a liue, if men leaue to marie, and minde not procreacion. Why doe you then preferre virginitie so moche, why set if you so hie, if it be the vndoing of all the whole worlde? It hath been moche commended, but it was for that tyme, and in fewe. God would haue men to se, as though it were a paterne, or rather a picture of yt heauenly habitacion, where neither any shall be maried, nor yet any shall giue theirs to Mariage. But when thinges be giuen for an exaple, a fewe maie suffise, a nomber were to no purpose. For euen as all groundes, though thei be very fruictfull, are not therefore tourned into Tillage, for mannes vse and commoditie, but part lieth fallowe, and is neuer mannered, part is kept and cherised to like the tye, and for mannes pleasure: and yet in all this plentie of thinges, where so greate store of lande is, nature suffereth very little to wae barren: but now if none should be tilled, and Plowe menne went to plaie, who seeth not, but that we should all sterue, and be fain shortly to eate acornes: euen so, it is praise worthy, if a few liue single, but if all should seke to liue single, so many as be in this world, it were to greate an inconuenience. Now againe, be it that other deserue worthy praise, that seke to liue a virgines life, yet it must nedes bee a greate faulte in you. Other shall bee thought to seke purenesse of life, you shall bee coumpted a parricide, or a murtherer of your stocke: that whereas you maie by honest mariage, encrease your posteritie: you suffer it to decaie for euer, through your wilfull single life. A man maie, hauing an house full of children, comende one to God to liue a virgine all his life. The plowe man offreth to God the tenthes of his owne, and not his whole croppe all together: but you sir, must remember that ther is none left aliue of all your stocke, but your self alone. And now it mattereth nothing, whether you kille, or refuse to saue that creature, whiche you onely might saue, and that with ease. But you will folowe the example of your sister, and liue single as she doeth. And yet me thinketh you should chiefly, euen for this self same cause, be afraied to liue single. For whereas there was hope of issue heretofore in you bothe, now ye se there is no hope left, but in you onely. Be if that your sister maie be borne withall, bicause she is a woman, and bicause of her yeres, for she being but a girle, and ouercome with sorowe, for losse of her mother, toke the wrong waie, she cast her self doune hedlong, and became a Nunne, at the earnest sute either of foolishe women, or els of doultishe Monkes: but you being moche elder, must euermore remember that you are a man. She would neades die together with her auncesters, you must labor, that your auncesters shal not die at al. Your sister would not dooe her duetie, but shranke awaie: thinke you now with your self, that you haue twoo offices to discharge. The doughters of Loth neuer stucke at the matter, 193 to haue a dooe with their dronken father, thinking it better with wicked whoredome and inceste, to prouide for their posteritie, then to suffer their stocke to die for euer. And will not you with honest, godly, and chaste mariage (whiche shal be without trouble, and turne to your greate pleasure) haue a regard to yur posteritie, moste like els for euer to decaie? Therefore, let them on Gods name, followe the purpose of chaste Hippolitus, let them liue a single life, that either can be maried men, & yet can get no children, or els soche, whose stocke maie be continued, by meanes of other their kinsfolk, or at the least whose kindred is soche, that it were better for the comon weale, thei were all dedde, then that any of that name should bee a liue, or els soche men, as the euerliuyng God, of his moste especiall goodness, hath chosen out of the whole worlde, to execute some heauely office, whereof there is a marueilous small nomber. But wheras you, according  194 to the reporte of a Phisicion, that neither is vnlearned, nor  yet is any liar, are like to haue many childre hereafter, seing also you are a man of greate landes, and reuenues by your auncesters, the house whereof you came, beyng bothe right honourable, and right auncient, so that you could not suffer it to perishe, without your greate offence, and great harme to the common weale: againe, seing you are of lustie yeres, and very comely for your personage, and maie haue a maide to your wife, soche a one as none of your countrie hath knowen, any to bee more absolute for all thinges, commyng of as noble a house, as any of theim, a chaste one, a sober one, a godly one, an excellent faire one, hauyng with her a wonderfull dowrie: Seeyng also your frendes desire you, your kinsfolke weepe to winne you, your cousins and aliaunce, are earnest in hand with you, your countrie calles and cries vpon you: the ashes of your auncesters from their graues, make hartie sute vnto you, dooe you yet holde backe, dooe you still minde to liue a single life? If a thing wer asked you that were not halfe honest, or the whiche you could not well compasse, yet at thinstaunce of your frendes, or for the loue of your kinsfolke, you would be ouercome, & yelde to their requestes: then how moch more reasonable wer it, that the wepinge teares of your frendes, the hartie good will of your Countrie, the deare loue of your elders, might winne that thing at your handes, vnto the whiche bothe the Lawe of God and man doeth exhorte you, nature pricketh you foreward, reason leadeth you, honestie allureth you, so many comodities call you, and last of all, necessitie it self dooeth constraine you. But here an ende of all reasoning. For I truste you haue now, and a good while ago, chaunged your minde through mine aduise, and taken your self to better counsell. 195 The places of exhorting and dehorting, are the same whiche we vse in perswading and disswading, sauing that he whiche vseth perswasion, seeketh by argumentes, to compasse his deuise: he that labors to exhorte, doeth stirre affeccions. Erasmus sheweth these to be moste especiall places, that doe partein vnto exhortacion. --- Rehearsall of examples, in all ages, and especially of thinges lately doen. 196 Praising is either of the man, or of some deede doen. We shall exhort men to doe the thing, if we shewe them that is a worthy attempt, a Godly enterprise, and soche as fewe men hetherto haue aduentured. 197 In praising a man, we shall exhorte him to go forwarde, considering it agreeth with his wonted manhode, and that hetherto he hath not slacked, to hasard boldely vpon the best and worthiest deedes, requiring him to make this ende answerable, to his moste worthy beginninges, yt he maie ende with honor, which hath so long cotinued in soche renoume. For it wer a foule shame, to lose honour through folie, whiche hath been got through vertue, and to appere more slack in keping it, then he semed carefull at the first to attaine it. to time, will be thought more wonderfull, and greater promises will men make vnto them selues, of soche mennes aduentures, in any comon affaires, then of others, whose vertues are not yet knowen. A notable master of fence is marueilous to behold, and men loke earnestly to se him do some wonder, how moche more will thei looke, when thei heare tell that a noble capitain, and an aduenturous prince, shall take vpon him the defence, and sauegard of his countrie, against the raging attemptes of his enemies? Therfore a noble 198 man can not but go forward, with moste earnest wil, seing all me haue soche hope in him, and count him to be their 199 onely comfort, their fortresse, and defence. And the rather to encourage soche right worthy, wee maie put theim in good hope, to compasse their attempt, if we shewe them that God is an assured guide vnto all those, that in an honest quarell, aduenture them selues, and shew their manly stomake. Sathan himself, the greatest aduersarie that man hath, yeldeth like a capitain, when God doeth take our part, moche soner shall al other bee subiecte vnto him, and crie Peccaui, for if God be with him, what mattereth who be against him? Now when victorie is gotte, what honour dooeth ensue? Here openeth a large field, to speake of renoume, fame, and endles honour. In all ages the worthiest men, haue alwaies 200 aduetured their carcases, for the sauegard of their countrie, thinking it better to die with honor, then to liue with shame Again, the ruin of our realme, should put vs to more shame, 201 then the losse of our bodies, should tourne vs to smarte. For our honestie being stained, the paine is endlesse, but our bodies being gored, either the woud maie sone be healed, or els our paine being sone ended, the glory endureth for euer. neighbours, and in the fauour of his coutrie, bestoweth his life: will not God besides all these, place him where he shall liue for euer, especially seing he hath doen all these enterprises in faithe, and for Christes sake? Now in all ages, to recken soche as haue been right Souerain, and victorious, what name got the worthie Scipio, that withstode the rage of Anniball? What brute hath Cesar, for his moste worthie conquestes? What triuphe of glorie doeth sounde in all mennes eares, vpo the onely naming of mightie Alexander, and his father king Philip?: And now to come home, What hedde can expresse, the renoumed Henrie the fifte king of Englande of that name, after the Conquest? what wit can sette out, the wonderfull wisedome of Henrie the seuenth, and his greate foresight, to espie mischief like to ensue, and his politique deuises to escape daungers, to subdue rebelles, and maintain peace? 203 Likewise, we maie exhort men to take pitie of the fatherlesse, the widdowe, and the oppressed innocent, if we set before their iyes, the lamentable affliccios, the tyrannous wronges, and the miserable calamities, whiche these poore wretches doe susteine. For if fleshe and blood, moue vs to loue our children, our wiues, and our kinsfolke: moche more should the spirite of God, and Christes goodnes towardes man, stirre vs to loue our neighbors moste entirely. These exhortacions the preachers of GOD maie more aptly vse, whe thei open his Gospell to the people, and haue iust cause to speake of soche matters. 204 In commendyng a manne, we vse this report of his witte, honestie, faithfull seruice, painefull laboure, and carefull nature to doe his Maisters will, or any soche like, as in the Epistles of Tullie, there are examples infinite. 205 New after all these, the weake would be comforted, and the sorowful would be cherised, that their grief might be aswaged, and the passios of man brought vnder the obedience of reason. The use hereof is greate, aswell in priuate troubles, as in common miseries. As in losse of gooddes, in lacke of frendes, in sickenesse, in darthe, and in death, In all whiche losses, the wise vse so to comfort the weake, that this giue them not iuste cause euen 206 at the first to refuse all comfort. And therefore thei vse twoo waies, of cherishyng the troubled mindes. The one is when we shewe that in some cases, and for some causes, either thei should not lament at all, or els be sorie verie little: the other is when we graunte, that thei haue iuste cause to be sadde, and therefore we are sadde also in their behalfe, and would remedie the matter, if it could be, and thus entering into felowshippe of sorowe, we seke by little and little, to mitigate their grief. For all extreme heauinesse, and vehemente sorowes, can not abide coumfort, but rather seke a mourner, that would take parte with them. Therefore moche warinesse ought to bee vsed, when we happen vpon soche excedyng sorowfull, least we rather purchace hatred, then asswage grief. Those harmes should be moderately borne, whiche must nedes happen to euery one, that haue chaunced to any one. As death, whiche spareth none, neither kyng, nor Caisar, neither poore, nor riche. Therefore to be impaciente for the losse of our frendes, is to fall out with God, bicause he made vs men, and not Angelles. But the Godlie (I trust) will alwaies remitte the order of thinges, to the will of God, and force their passions to obeie necessitie. When God lately visited this realme, with the Sweatyng disease, and receiued the twoo worthie gentlemen, Henrie Duke of Suffolk and 207 his brother Lorde Charles: I seyng my Ladies grace their mother, takyng their death moste greuouslie, could not otherwise for the duetie, which I then did, & euer shal owe vnto to her, but comforte her in that her heauinesse, the whiche vndoubtedly at that tyme, moche weakened her body. And bicause it maie serue for an example of comfort, I haue been bolde to set it forthe as it foloweth hereafter. Though myne enterprise maie be thought foolishe, and my doynges verie slender, in busiyng my brain to teache the expert, to giue counsaill to other, whe I lack it my self, and whereas more neede were for me to bee taught of other, to take vpon me to teache my betters, yet duetie bindyng me to dooe my beste, and emong a nomber, though I can dooe leaste, yet good will settyng me foorthe with the foremest: I can not chuse but write, what I am able, and speake what I can possible, for the better coumfortyng of your grace, in this your greate heauinesse, and sore visitacion sente from God, as a warnyng to vs all. The Phisician then deserueth moste thanke, when he practiseth his knowledge in tyme of necessitie, and then trauaileth moste painefullie, when he feeleth his paciente to bee in moste daunger. The souldiour at that time, and at no time so moche is thought moste trustie, when he sheweth at a nede his faithfull harte, and in time of extreme daunger doeth vse, & bestowe his moste earnest labour. In the welthe of this worlde, what valiaunt manne can wante assistence? What mightie prince can misse any helpe, to compasse his desire? Who lacketh me, that lacketh no monie? But when God striketh the mightie with his strong hande, and displaceth those that wer highly placed, what one man doeth ones loke backe, for the better easement of his deare brother, and Godlie comforting his euen Christian, in the chief of all his sorowe. All men commonlie more reioice in the Sunne rising, then thei doe in the Sunne setting. The hope of lucre, and expectacion of priuate gain, maketh many one to beare out a countenaunce of fauour, whose harte is inwardly fretted with dedly rancour. But soche frendes, euen as prosperitie doeth gette theim, so aduersitie doeth trie them. God is the searcher of euery mannes thought, vnto whose iudgement, I referre the assuraunce of my good will. And though I can doe little, also therefore deserue as little thanke, as I loke for praise (which is none at all) yet will I endeuour earnestlie at all times, as well for mine own discharge, to declare my duetie, as at this present to saie somewhat, for the better easement of your grace, in this your heuinesse. 208 The passions of the minde haue diuers effectes, and therefore worke straungelie, according to their properties. For like as ioie comforteth the harte, nourisheth blood, and quickeneth the whole bodie: So heauinesse and care hinder digestion, engender euill humours, waste the principall partes, and with time consume the whole bodie. For the better knowlege thereof, and for a liuely sight of the same, we nede not to seke farre for any example, but euen to come straight vnto your grace, whose bodie as I vnderstade crediblie, and partlie see my self, is sore appaired within shorte time, your minde so troubled, and your harte so heauie, that you hate in a maner all light, you like not the sight of any thing that might be your coumfort, but altogether striken in a dumpe, you seke to be solitarie, detesting all ioye, and deliting in sorowe, wisshing with harte (if it were Goddes will) to make your laste ende. In whiche your heauinesse, as I desire to be a coumfortour of your grace, so I can not blame your naturall sorowe, if that nowe after declaracion of the same, you would moderate all your grief hereafter, and call back your pensifenes, to the prescripte order of reason. And firste, for the better remeadie of euery disease, and troubled passion, it is beste to knowe the principall cause, and chief occasion of the same. Your grace had twoo sonnes how noble, how wittie, how learned, and how Godlie, many thousandes better knowe it, then any one is able well to tell it. GOD at his pleasure hath taken theim bothe to his mercie, and placed them with him, whiche were surely ouer good to tarie here with us. Thei bothe died, as your grace knoweth verie young, whiche by course of Nature, and by mannes estimacion, might haue liued moche longer. Thei bothe were together in one house, lodged in twoo seueralle chambers, and almoste at one time bothe sickened, and both departed. Thei died bothe Dukes, bothe well learned, both wise, and bothe right Godlie. Thei bothe gaue straunge tokens of death to come. The elder sitting at supper, and verie merie, saied sodainlie, to that right honest Matrone, and Godlie aged gentilwoman, that moste faithfull, and longe assured seruaunte of yours, whose life GOD graunte long to continue: Oh Lorde, where shall we suppe to morowe at night, whereupons the beyng troubled, and yet saiyng comfortablie, I trust my lorde, either here, or els where at some of your frendes houses: Naie ([quoth] he) wee shall neuer Suppe together againe in this worlde, bee you well assured, and with that, seyng the gentilwoman discomforted, tourned it vnto mirthe, and passed the reste of his Supper with moche ioye, and the same night after twelue of the Clocke, beyng the fowertene of Iulie sickened, and so was taken the nexte mornyng, aboute seuen of the clocke, to the mercie of God, in the yere of our lorde, a thousande, fiue hundred, fiftie and one. When the eldeste was gone, the younger would not tarie, but tolde before (hauyng no knowledge thereof by any bodie liuyng) of his brothers death, to the greate wonderyng of all that were there, declaryng what it was to lose so deare a frende, but coumfortyng himself in that passion, saied: well, my brother is gone, but it maketh no matter, for I will go straight after him, and so did, within the space of halfe an houre, as your grace can beste telle, whiche was there presente. Now I renue these woordes to your graces knowlege, that you might the more stedfastly consider their tyme, to bee then appoincted of GOD, to forsake this euill worlde, and to liue with Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, in the kyngdome of heauen. But wherefore did GOD take two 209 soche awaie, and at that tyme? Surely to tell the principall cause, we maie by all likenesse affirme, that thei were taken awaie from vs, for our wretched sinnes, & moste vile naughtinesse of life, that thereby we beyng warned, might bee as redie for God, as thei now presentlie were, and amende our liues in tyme, whom God will call, what tyme wee knowe not. Then as I can see, we haue small cause to lamente the lacke of them, whiche are in soche blessed state, but rather to amende our owne liuyng, to forthinke vs of our offences, and to wishe of God to purge our hartes, from all filthines and vngodly dealyng, that we maie be(as thei now be) blessed with God for euer. Notwithstanding the workes of god are vnsearcheable, without the compasse of mannes brain, precisely to comprehende the verie cause, sauyng that this persuasion ought surely to bee grounded in vs, euermore to thinke that God is offended with sinne, and that he punisheth offences, to the third and fowerth generacion of al the that breake his commaundemetes, being iust in all his workes, and doyng all thinges for the beste. And therfore when God plagueth in soche sorte, I would wishe that our faiths might alwaies bee staied vpon the admiracion of Gods glorie, throughout all his doinges, in whom is none euill, neither yet was there euer any guile founde. And I doubte not but your grace is thus affected, and vnfainedlie confessyng your owne offences, taketh this scourge to come from God, as a iuste punishment of sinne, for the amendement not onely of your owne self, but also for the amendement of al other in generalle. The lamentable voice of the poore (whiche is the mouthe of God)throughout the whole realme, declares full well the wickednes of this life, and shewes plainly that this euill is more generally felt, then any manne is able by worde, or by writyng at full to set forthe. When God therefore that is lorde, not onely of the riche but also of the poore, seeth his grounde spoiled, from the wholsome profite of many, to the vaine pleasure of a fewe, and the yearth made priuate, to suffice the lust of vnsaciable coueteousnesse, and that those, whiche be his true membres can not liue for the intollerable oppression, the sore enhaunsyng, and the moste wicked grasing of those throughout the whole realme, whiche otherwise might well liue, with the onely value and summe of their lades, and yerely reuenues: he striketh in his anger the innocentes, and tender younglinges, to plague vs with the lacke of theim, whose innocencie and godlines of life, might haue been a iuste example for vs to amende our moste euill dooynges. In whiche wonderfull woorke of God, when he receiued these twoo moste noble impes, and his children elected to the euerlasting kyngdom, I can not but magnifie his moste glorious name, from time to tyme, that hath so graciouslie preserued these twoo worthie gentilmen, from the daunger of further euill, and most vile wretchednesse, moste like right shortlie to ensue, except we all repente, and forthinke vs of our former euill liuyng. And yet I speake not this, as though I knewe any crime to be more in you, then in any other: But I tell it to the shame of all those vniuersallie, within this Realme, that are giltie of soche offences, whose inwarde consciences, condemne their owne doynges, and their open deedes beare witnesse againste their euill nature. For it is not one house that shal feele the fall of these twoo Princes, neither hath GOD taken theim for one private persones offence: but for the wickednesse of the whole Realme, whiche is like to feele the smarte, except God be mercifull vnto vs. But now that thei be gone, though the fleshe be fraile, weake, and tender, and must nedes smarte, beyng wounded or cut: yet I doubte not but your grace, lackyng twoo soche porcions of your owne fleshe, and hauyng them (as a manne would saie) cut awaie from your owne bodie, will suffer the smarte with a good 210 stomacke, and remember that sorowe is but an euill remedie to heale a sore. For if your hande were detrenched, or your bodie maimed with some sodaine stroke, what profite were it for you, to weepe vpon your wounde, and when the harme is dooen, to lamente still the sore? Seeing that with weping, it will not be lesse, & maie yet through weping full sone be made more. For the sore is encreased, when sorowe is added, and the paine is made double, whiche before was but single. A constaunte Christian, should beare all miserie, and with pacience abide the force of necessittie, shewyng with sufferaunce the strengthe of his faithe, and especiallie, when the chaunge is from euil to good, from woe to weale, what folie is it to sorowe that, for the whiche thei ioye, that are departed? Thei haue taken nowe their reste, that liued here in trauaile: Thei haue forsaken their bodies, wherein thei were bounde, to receiue the Spirite, whereby thei are free. Thei haue chosen for sickenesse, healthe: for yearth, heaue: for life transitorie, life immortall: and for man, God: then the whiche, what can thei haue more? How is it possible thei can be better? Undoubtedlie if euer thei were happie, thei are nowe moste happie: if euer thei were welle, thei are nowe in beste case, beeyng deliuered from this presente euill worlde, and exempted from Sathan, to liue for euer with Christ our Sauiour. Then what meane we, that not onely lament the wante of other, but also desire to tarie here our selues, hoping for a short, vain, and therewith a painfull pleasure, and refusing to enioye that continuall, perfect, & heauenlie enheritaunce, the whiche so sone shall happen vnto vs, as Nature dissolueth this yearthly body. Truthe it is, we are more fleshlie then Spirituall, soner felyng the ache of our bodie, then the grief of our soule: more studious with care, to bee healthfull in carkasse, then sekyng with praier, to bee pure in Spirite. And therefore if our frendes be stained with sinne, we dooe not, or we will not espie their sore, we coumpte theim faultlesse, whe thei are moste wicked: neither sekyng the redresse of their euill doeyng, nor yet ones amendyng the faultes of our owne liuyng. 211 But when our frende departeth this worlde, and then forsaketh vs, when sinne forsaketh hym: we begin to shewe our fleshlie natures, we wepe, and we waile, and with long sorowe without discrecion, declare our wante of Goddes grace, & all goodnesse. For whereas we see that as some be borne, some dooe die also, menne, women, and children, and not one houre certaine to vs of all our life, yet wee neuer mourne, we neuer wepe, neither marking the death of soch as we know, nor regarding ye euil life of those who we loue. But when suche departe as were either nighest of our kinred, or els moste our frends, we then lament without all cofort, not the sinnes of their soules, but the chaunge of their bodyes, leauing to dooe that whiche we should, and doyng that onelye whyche we shoulde not doo at all. Wherein not onely we declare muche wante of Faythe, but also we shew greate lacke of wytte. For as the other are gone before, either to heauen or els to hell: so shall oure frendes and kinsfolke folowe after. We are all made of one metall, and ordeyned to dye, so manie as liue. Therfore what folye is it 212 in vs, or rather what fleshelye madnesse immoderatelye to wayle their death, whom God hath ordeined to make their ende, excepte we lamente the lack of our owne liuing? For euen as well we myght at theyr first byrthe betwaile their natiuitie, considering they muste nedes dye, because they are borne to lyue. And whath soeuer hath a beginning, the same hath also an endinge, and the ende is not at oure wil, whiche desire cotinuance of life, but at his will whiche gaue the beginnige of life. Now then seing God hath ordeined all to dye, according to his appointed wil, what meane thei that woulde haue theirs to liue? Shall God alter his fyrst purpose for the onely satisfiyng of oure folysh pleasure? And where God hathe minded that the whole worlde shal decay, shall any man desire that any one house may stand? In my mynde, there can be no greater comforte to any one liuinge for the lacke of his frende, tha to thincke that this happened to him, whyche all other eyther haue felte, or elles shal feele here after: And that God the rather made Deathe comune to all, that the vniuersall plague and egalnes to all, myght abate the fiercenes of death, and comfore vs in the crueltie of the same, consideringe no one man hath an ende, but that all shall haue the lyke, and dye we muste euerye mothers sonne of vs, at one time or other. But you wil saye: my children might haue liued longer, then dyed younge. Sure it is by mannes estimation they myght haue liued longer, but 213 had it bene best for them thinke you to haue cotinued styl in this wretched worlde, where Uyce beareth rule, and Uertu is subdued, where GOD is neglected, his lawes not obserued, his word abused, & his Prophets that preache the iudgemente of God almost euery wher contemned. If your children were aliue, & by thaduice of some wicked persone were brought to a brothell house, where entising harlottes liued and so were in daunger to commit that fowle sinne of whoredome, and so, ledde from one wickedness to another: I am assured your grace would call them backe with labour, and would with exhortations induce theim to the feare of God and vtter detestatio of all sinne, as you haue full often heretofore done, rather fearing euill to come, then knowing any open faulte to be in either of them. Nowe then, seynge God hath done the same for you him selfe, that you woulde haue done for them if they hadde liued, that is, in deliuerynge the bothe from this present euil worlde, whiche I coumpt none other then a brothel house, and a life of all noughtines: you ought to thanke God highly, that he hath taken away your twoo soonnes, euen in their youth, being innocentes bothe for their liuing, & of suche expectation for their towardnes, that almoste it were not possible for them hereafter to satisfie the hope in their age, which al men presently had conceiued of their youth. It is thought, and in deede it is no lesse 214 then a great poynct of happines to dye happely. Now when could your two noble gentilmen haue died better, then whe they were at the beste, mooste Godlye in many thinges, offendinge in fewe, beloued of the honeste, and hated of none, (if euer they were hated) but of suche as hate the best. As in deede, noble vertue neuer wanted cankarde enuy to folowe her. And consideryng that this life is so wretched, that the beste are euer most hated, and the vilest alwayes, moste estemed, and your. ij. sonnes of the other side being in that state of honestie, and trained in that pathe of Godlines (as I am able to be a liuely witnes, none hathe bene like these many yeres, or at the lest, none better brought vp) what think you of God, did he enuy the, or els did he prouidently forse unto them bothe, when he toke them bothe from vs. Assuredly 215 whom God loueth best, those he taketh sonest, according to ye saiyng of Salomon: The righteous ma (meaning Enoch and other the chosen of God) is sodainely taken away, to the entent that wickednes should not alter his vnderstandyng, and that hypocrisie should not begile his soule. For the craftie bewitching of lies, make good thinges darke, the vnstedfastenes also and wickednes of voluptuose desire, turn aside the vnderstanding of the simple. And though the rigtheous was sone gone, yet fulfilled he much time, for his soule pleased God, and therefore hasted he to take him a waie from among the wicked. Yea the good men of god in al ages, haue 216 euer had an earnest desire to be dissolued. My soule ([quoth] Dauid) hath an earneste desire to enter into the Courtes of the 217 Lorde. Yea, like as the Hearte desireth the water brokes, so longeth my soule after the O God. My soule is a thyrste for God: yea, euen for the liuing God, when shal I come to appeare before the presence of God? Paule and al the Apostles wished and longed for the daye of the Lord, and thought euery daye a thousand yere, till their soules were parted from their bodies. Then what should we waile the whiche are in that place where we al shoulde wish to be, & seke so to liue, that we might be ready whe it shall please God of his goodnes to cal vs to his mercy Let vs be sicke for our own sinnes that liue here on earth, & reioice in their most happy passage yt are gone to heaue. They haue not left vs, but gone before vs to enherit with Christ, their kingdo prepared. And what shuld this greue your grace that thei are gone before, cosidering our whole life is nothing els but ye right way to death. Should it trouble any one that his fred is come to his iournies 218 ende? Our life is nothing els, but a continuall trauail, & death obtaineth rest after all our labour. Emong me that trauaill by the high waie, he is beste at ease (in my minde) yt sonest cometh to his iourneis ende. Therfore, if your grace loued your children (as I am well assured you did) you must reioice in their rest, and giue God hartie thankes, yt thei are come so sone to their iourneis ende. Marie, it it wer so yt ma might escape ye daunger of death, & liue euer it were another matter: but bicause we must al die, either first or last, & of nothing so sure in this life, as we are all sure to die at length, and nothing more vncertain vnto man, then ye certain tyme of euery mannes latter time: what forceth when wee die, either this daie, or to morowe, either this yere, or the next, sauing yt I thinke them moste happie that die sonest, & death 219 frendly to none so muche, as to theim whom she taketh sonest. At the time of an execucion doen for greuous offences, what mattereth who dye first, when a dosen are codempned together, by a lawe, considering they muste al dye one and other. 220 I saie still, happie are thei, that are sonest ridde out of this world, and the soner gone, the soner blessed. The Thracias lamet greatly at the birthe of their children,  & reioice much at the burial of their bodies, beinge well assured that this  221 worlde is nothing els but miserie, and the worlde to come, ioye foreuer. Now again, the child new borne, partly declareth the state of this life, who beginnethe his time with wailinge, and firste sheweth teares, before he can iudge the cause of his wo. If we beleue ye promises of God, if we hope 222 for the generall resurreccion, and constantly affirme, that God is iust in all his woorkes: we cannot but ioyfully saye, with the iust man Iob: The lorde gaue them, the lorde hath taken them again, as it pleaseth God, so may it be, and blessed be the name of the lorde, for now and euer. God dealeth wrongfullye with no man, but extendeth his mercie moste plentifuly, ouer all mankinde. God gaue you two children, as the like I haue not knowen, happie are you moste gracious lady, that euer you bare them. God lent you them twoo for a tyme, & toke them twoo again at his time, you haue no wrong doen you, that he hath taken them: but you haue receiued a wnderfull benefite, that euer you had them. He is 223 very vniust that boroweth, and will not pay again, but at his pleasure. He forgetteth moch his duetie, that boroweth a iewell of the kynges maiestie, and will not restore it with good will, when it shall please his grace, to call for it. He is vnworthy here after to borowe, that will rather grudge, because he hath it no loger, then ones geue thanks, bicause he hath had the vse of it so long. He is ouer coueteous, that copteth not gainful, the time of his borowing: but iudgeth it his losse, to restore thinges again. He is vnthankful, that thinkes he hath wrong doen, whe his pleasure is shortened and takes the ende of is delite, to be extreme euill. He loseth the greatest parte of his ioye in this worlde, that thinkethe ther is no pleasure, but of thinges present: that cannot comfort hymself with pleasure past, and iudge them to be moste assured, considering the memorie of them ones had, can neuer decay. His ioyes be ouer straighte, that be comprehended within the compasse of his sighte, and thinketh no thing comfortable, but that whiche is euer before his iyes. All pleasure whiche ma hath in this worlde, is very shorte, and sone goeth it awaie, the remembraunce lasteth euer, and is muche more assured, then is the presence or lyuely sight of any thing. And thus your grace maie euer reioyce, that you had twoo such, which liued so verteously, and died so Godly and thoughe their bodies bee absent from your sigh, yet the remembraunce of their vertues shal neuer decay from your mynde. God lendeth life to all, an lendeth at his pleasure for a time. To this man he graunteth a longe life, to this a shorte space, to som one, a day, to some a yere, to some a moneth. Now whe God taketh, what man should be offended, cosidering he yt gaue frely maie boldy take his awne when he wil, & doe no man wrong. The kings Maiestie geueth one x. pound an other fourtie pounde, another lx. skore pounde, shall he bee greued, that receiued but tenne pound, and not rather geue thankes, that he receiued so much? Is that man happier, that dieth in ye latter ende of the moneth, then he is that died in the beginnyng of the same Monethe? Doeth distance of time, and long tariyng from God make men more happie, when thei come to God? By space of passage we differ muche, and one liueth longer then another, but by death at the last, we all are matched, and none the happier, that liueth the longer, but rather moste happie is he, that died the sonest, & departed best in the faith of Christ. Thinke therfore your selfe most happie, that you had two suche, & geue God hartie thakes, that it pleased him so sone, to take two suche. Necessitie is lawles, and that whiche is by God appoincted no man can alter, Reioyce we, or wepe we, die we shal, how sone, no man can tell. Yea, we are all our life time warned before, that death is at hande, and that when we go to bedde we are not assured to rise the nexte daie in the mornyng, no not to liue one hour longer. And yet to se our foly, we would assigne God his tyme, accordyng to our sacietie, & not content our selfes with his doynges, accordying to his appoinctment. And euer we saie, when any dye yong, he might haue liued longer, it was pitie he died so sone. As though forsoth he were not better with God, then he can bee with manne. Therfore, whereas for a time your grace, muche bewailed their lake, not onely absenting your selfe from all company but also refusing all kinde of comforte, almoste dedde with heauinesse, your body beyng so worne with sorow, that the long continuance of the same, is much lyke to shorten your daies: I shall desire your grace for Goddes loue, to referre your wil to Goddes wil, and wheras hetherto nature hath taught you, to wepe the lacke of your naturall children let reason teache you herafter, to wipe awaie the teares, & lette not phantasie encrease that, which nature hath comaunded moderately to vse. To bee sory for the lacke of oure dearest, wee are taughte by nature, to be ouercome with sorowe, it commeth of oure awne fonde opininion, and greate folie it is, with naturall sorowe, to encrease all sorowe, and with 224 a litle sickesse, to purchase readie death. The sorowes of brute beastes are sharpe, and yet thei are but shorte. The Cowe lackyng her Caulfe, leaueth Loweyng within three or foure daies at the farthest. Birdes of the ayre perceiuyng their youngones taken from their neast, chitter for a while in tres there aboute, and streighte after thei flie abrod, and make no more a do. The Doo lacking her Faune, the Hind her Caulfe, braie no long tyme after their losse, but seyng their lacke to be without remedy, they ceasse their sorowe within short space. Man onely emong al other, ceaseth not to fauour his sorowe, and lamenteth not onelie so muche as nature willeth him, but also so much as his awne affeccion moueth hym. And yet all folke do not so but suche as are subiect to passions, and furthest from fortitude of mynde, as women commonlye, rather then men, rude people, rather then godly folke: the vnlearned, soner then the learned: foolishe 225 folke, soner then wise men: children, rather then yong men. Wher upon we may wel gather, that immoderate sorowe is not natural, (for that which is natural, is euer like in al) but through folte maintened, encreased by weakenesse and for lacke of reason, made altogether intolerable. Tha I doubte not but your grace, wil rather ende your sorowe, by reason: then that sorowe shoud ende you, through foly: And wheras by nature, you are a weake woman in body, you will shewe your self by reason, a strong man in harte: rather endyng your grief by godly aduertisemetes, and by the iust consideratio of Gods wonderful doynges: tha that tyme and space, shoulde weare awaie your sorowes, whiche in deede suffer none continually to abide in any one, but rather rid them of life, or els ease them of grief. The foole, the vngodly be more heauenly, if you doe (as you professe) referre all to Goddes pleasure, and saye in your prayer. Thy will bee doe in yearth, as it is in heauen. Those who God loueth, those he chasteneth, and happie is that body, who God scourgeth, for his amendement. The man that dieth in the faithe of Christ is blessed, and the chastened seruaunt, if he doo repent and amende his life, shalbe blessed. We know not what we dooe, when we bewaile the death of our dearest, for in death 227 is altogether all happines, and before deathe not one is happie. The miseries in this worlde declare, small felicitee to be in the same. Therefore, many men beyng ouer whelmed with muche woe, & wretched wickednes, haue wished and praied to God, for an ende of this life, & thought his worlde to be a let, to the heauenly perfeccion, the whiche blisse all thei shal attain hereafter that hope well here, & with a liuely faith declare their assuraunce. Your graces two sonnes, in their life wer so godly, that their death was their aduautage: for, by death thei liued, because in life thei wer dedde. Thei died in faith, not wearie of this world, nor wishing for death, as ouerlode with synne: but paciently takyng ye crosse departed with ioye. At whose diyng, your grace maie learn an exaple of paciece,& al thanks geuing, yt God of his goodnesse, hath so graciously taken these your two childre to his fauourable mercy. God punished, partly to trie your constacie, wherin I wishe that your grace maie nowe be as well willing to forsake theim, as euer you were willing to haue the. But such is the infirmity of our flesh, that we hate good cofort in wordes, when ye cause of our coforte in deed (as we take it) is gone. And me thinkes I heare you cry notwithstading 228 all my wordes a lacke my childre are gone. But what though thei are gone? God hath called, & nature hath obeied Yea, you crie stil my childre are dedde: Marie therefore thei liued and blessed is their ende, whose life was so godly. Wo worthe, thei are dede, thei are dede. It is no new thing, thei are neither the first that died, nor yet the last that shall die. Many went before, & al shall folowe after. Thei liued together, thei loued together, & now thei made their ende bothe together. Alas thei died, yt were ye fruict of mine awn body, leuyng me cofortles, vnhappie woma ytce I am. You do well, to call the the fruicte of your body, & yet you nothyng the more vnhappy neither. For is the tre vnhappy, fro whiche the arpelles 229 fall? Or in the yearth accursed, that bringeth furthe grene grasse, which hereafter notwithstading doth wither. Death taketh no order of yeres, but whe the time is appoincted, be it earelye or late, daye or nighte, a waye we must. But I praie you, what losse hath your grace? thei died, that shoulde haue died, yea, thei that could liue no longer. But you wished theim longer life. Yea, but God made you no such promise, and mete it wer not that he shuld be led by you, but you rather should be led by him. Your childre died and that right godly, what would you haue more? All good mothers desire, that their children maye die Goddes seruauntes, the whiche youre grace hath most assuredly obteined. Now again manns nature altereth, and hardly tarieth vertue long in one place, without much circumspeccion, and youth may sone be corrupted. But you will saye. These were good and godlye broughte vp, and therefore moste like to proue godly hereafter, if they had liued stil. Wel, though suche thinges perhappes had not chaunced, yet such thinges mighte haue chaunced, and although thei happen not to al, do thei happe to many, and though thei had not chauced to your children, yet we knewe not that before, and more wisedome it had been, to feare the worst with good aduisement, then euer to hope, & loke still for the beste, without all mistrusting. For such is the nature of man, and his corrupt race, that euermore the one foloweth soner, then the other. 230 Commodus was a verteous childe, and had good bringyng vp, and yet he died a moste wicked man. Nero wanted no 231 good counsaill, and such a master he had, as neuer any had the better, and yet what one aliue, was worse then he? But now death hath assured your grace, that you may warrant your selfe, of their godly ende, whereas if God had spared them life, thinges might haue chaunced other wise. In wishyng longer life, we wishe often times longer woe, longer trouble, longer foly in this world, and wey all thinges wel, you shall perceiue wee haue small ioye to wishe longer life. This imaginacion of longer life, when the life standeth not by nomber of yeres, but by the appoincted will of God, maketh our foly so muche to appere, and our teares so continually to fall from oure chekes. For if we thought (as we shoulde dooe in deede) that euery daye risynge, maye be the ende of euery man liuynge, and that there is no difference with God, betwixte one daie, & an hudreth yeres: we might beare al sorowes, a greate deale the better. Therfore it wer moste wisedome for vs all, and a greate poinct of perfeccion to make euery daie an euen rekening of our lyfe, & talke so with God euery houre, that we maye be of euen borde with hym, through fulnes of faithe, and redy to go the next houre folowyng, at his commaundement, and to take alwaies his sending in good part. The lord is at hande. We knowe not when he wil come (at mid night, at cocke crowe, or at noone dayes) to take either vs, or any of ours. Therefore, the rather that we maye be armed, let vs folow the examples of other godly me, and lay their doinges before your iyes. And emog al other, I knowe none so mete for your graces comfort, as 232 the wise and Godly behauiour of good Kyng Dauid. Who whe he was enfourmed, that his sonne was sicke, praied to God hartely, for his amendme, wept, fasted, & with much lamentation declared greate heauinesse. But when woorde came of his sonnes departure, he left his mourning, he called for water, and willed meate to be set before hym, that he might eate. Wherupo, whe his men maruailed, why he did so, considering he toke it so greuously before, when his child was but sicke, and now being dedde, toke no thought at all, he made this answere vnto theim, so long as my child liued, I fasted, and watered my plantes for my young boye, and I saied to my self, who can tell, but that God perchappes will geue me him, and that my child shall liue, but now seing he is dedde, to what ende should I faste? can I call him again any more? Naye, I shall rather go vnto hym, he shall neuer come againe vnto me. And with that Dauid comforted his wife Bethsabe, the whiche example, as I truste your grace hath redde, for your comfort, so I hope you will also folowe it for your healthe, and bee as stronge in pacience, as euer Dauid was. The historie it self shall muche delighte youre grace, beeing redde as it lieth in the Booke, better then my bare thouching of it can dooe, a greate deale. The whiche I doubte not but your grace will often reade, and comforte other 233 in his extreme pouertie. Tobias lackyng his iye sighte, in spirite prased GOD, and with open mouthe, confessed his holy name to bee magnified throughout the whole yearthe. Paule the Apostle of God, reproueth the as worthy blame, whiche mourne & lament, the losse of their derest. I would 235 not brethren ([quoth] he) that you should be ignorant, concerning them whiche be fallen on slepe, that you sorow not as other doe, whiche haue no hope. If we beleue that Iesus died, and rose again, euen so thei also, whiche slepe by Iesus, wil God bring again with hym. Then your grace, either with leauyng sorowe, must shewe your self faithful, or els with yeldyng to your wo, declare your self to be without hope. But I trust your grace, being planted in Christ, will shew with sufferaunce, the fruict of your faithe, and comforte your self 236 with the wordes of Christ, I am the resurrecio and the life he that beleueth on me, yea, though he were ded, yet should he liue, and whosoever liueth, & beleueth in me, shall neuer die. We read of those that had no knowlege of God, and yet thei bare in good worth, the discease of their childre. Anaxagoras 237 hearinge tell, that his sonne was dedde, no maruaill [quoth] he, I knowe well I begot a mortall body. Pericles chief 238 ruler of Athens, hearing tell that his twoo sonnes, being of wonderfull towardnesse, within foure daies wer bothe ded, neuer greatly chaunged countenaunce for the matter, that any one could perceiue, nor yet forbare to go abrode, but according to his woted custome, did his duetie in the counsaill house in debating matters of weighte, concerning the state of the common peoples weale. But because your grace is a 239 woman, I will shewe you an example of a noble waman, in whom appered wonderfull pacience. Cornelia, a worthy ladie in Rome, being comforted for the losse of her twoo children, Tiberius, and Caius Gracchus, both valiaunt ientle men, although bothe not the moste honest men, whiche died not in their beddes, but violently were slain in Ciuill battaill, their bodies liyng naked & vnburied, when one emongest other saied, Oh vnhappie woma, that euer thou shouldest se this daye. Naye [quoth] she, I will neuer thinke my self other wise then moste happy, that euer I brought furth these twoo Gracchions. If this noble ladye, could thinke her self happie, beyng mother to these twoo valiaunt ientlemen, and yet both rebelles, & therefore iustly slain: Howe muche more maye youre grace, thinke youre self moste happie, that euer you brought furthe twoo suche Brandons, not onely by naturall birth, but also by most godly education, in suche sorte that the lyke .ij. haue not been for their towardnes vniuersallie, Whose deathe the generall voice of all men declares howe muche it was lamented. So that whereas you might euer haue feared some daungerouse ende, you are nowe assured that thei both made a most godly ende, ye whiche thing 240 is the ful perfectio of a Christia life. I reade of one Bibulus that hearing of his two children to die bothe in one daie, lamented the lacke of them bothe for that one daie, and mourned no more. And what coulde a man doe lesse than for two children to lament but one daie, and yet in my mynde he lamented enough and eue so muche as was reason for him to do, whose doynges if all Christians woulde folowe, in my iudgement thei shoulde not onely fulfill natures rule, but 241 also please God highly. Horatius Puluillus beeyng highe Prieste at Rome when he was occupied about the dedicatyng of a Temple to their greate God Iuppiter in the Capitoly, holdyng a post in his hande, and hard as he was vtteryng the solempne wordes, that his sonne was dead, euen at the same present: he did neither plucke his hande from the post lest he shoulde trouble suche a solempnitie, neither yet turned his countenaunce from that publique religo to his priuate sorowe, least he should seeme rather to doe the office 242 of a father, then the dutie of an highe minister. Paulus Emilius after his moste noble victorie had of Kynge Perse, desired of God, that if after suche a triumphe there were any harme lyke to happen to the Romaines, the same night fal vpon his owne house. Wher vpon when God had taken his two children from hym immediatly after, he thancked God for grautyng him his bound. For in so doing he was a meane that the people rather lamented Paulus Emilius lack, then that Paulus or any bewailed any misfortune that the Romains had. Examples be innumerable of those 243 whiche vsed lyke moderation in subduyng their affections, as Zenophon, Quintus Martius, Iulius Cesar, Tiberius Cesar, Emperours bothe of Rome. But what seeke I for misfortunate men, (if any suche be misfortunate) seing it is an harder matter and a greater peece of worke, to finde out happie men. Let vs loke round about euen at home, and we shall finde enowe subiect to this misfortune for who liueth that hath not lost? Therfore I woulde wishe your grace euen nowe to come in againe with God, and although he be angry, yet show you your self most obedient to his wil, consideryng he is Lorde ouer Kynges, Emperours, and ouer al that be bothe in heauen and in yearth, and spareth noone whom he listeth to take, and no doubt he will take all at the last. His dart goeth daily, neither is any darte cast in vaine, whiche is sent amongest a whole, armie standing thicke together. Neither can you iustly lamente that they lyued no longer, for they lyued longe enough, that haue liued well enought. You must measure your children by their vertues, 244 not by their yeres. For (as the wise man saith) a mans wisedome is the grey heeres, and an vndefiled life, is the old age. Happie is that mother that hath had Godlye children, and 245 not she that hath had long liuinge children. For if felicitie should stande by length of time, some tree were more happy then is any man, for it liueth longer, and so like wyse brute 246 beastes, as the Stagge, who liuethe (as Plinius dothe saye) twoo, hundreth yeares, and more. If we would but consider what man is, we shuolde haue small hope to liue, and little cause to put any great assuraunce in this lyfe. Let vs se him what he is: Is his body any thinge els but a lumpe of earth 247 made together in suche forme as we do see? A fraill vessell, a weake carton subiect to miserie, cast doune with euery light disease, a man to daie, to morowe none. A flower that this daie is freshe, to morowe withereth. Good Lorde do we not see that euen those thinges which nourishe vs, do rotte and dye, as herbes, birdes, beastes, water, and all other without the which we cannot lyue. And how can we lyue euer, that are susteined by dead thinges? Therfore when any one doth dye, why do we not thinke, that this may chaunse to euery one, whiche now hath chaunsed to any one. We be now as those that stand in battail raye. Not one man is suer of him selfe before an other, but all are in daunger in like maner to deathe That your chidren died before other that were of riper yeares, we may iudge that their ripenes for vertue and all other giftes of nature were brought euen to perfection, wherby death the sonner aproched, for nothing long lasteth that is sone excellent, God gaue your grace two most excellent childre, God neuer geueth for any long time those that 248 be right excellent. Their natures were heauenly, and therfore more mete for God then man. Emong frute we se some appels are sone ripe, and fall from the tree in the middest of summer: other be stil grene, & tary til winter, & hereupo are comonly called winter frute? Euen so it is with men, some dye young, some die old, & some die in their midle age. Your sonnes wer euen.ij. such al ready as some hereafter may be with long cotinuance of time. Thei had that in their youth for the giftes of nature, whiche al men would require of the bothe scarcelie in their age. Therfore beeing both now ripe they were now moste readie for God. There was a childe in Rome of a mans quantitie, for face, legges & other partes of his body, wherupon wise men iudged he would not be long liuyng. How could your grace thinke, that when you sawe anciet wisedom in the one, & most pregnant wit in the other meruailouse sobriete in the elder, & most laudable gentlines in the younger, them bothe most studious in learning, most forward in al feates as wel of the body, as of the mind, being two suche, & so excellent, that thei were lyke longe to continue with you? God neuer suffreth such excellet and rare iewels long to enherite therth. Whatsoeuer is nie perfectio the same is most nigh falling. Uertue being one absolute canot long be seen with these our fleshly iyes, neither can that tary the latter end with other, that was ripe it self first of al & before other. Fier goth out the soner, the clearer that it burneth: & that light lasteth longest, that is made of most course matter. In greene wood we may see that where as the fuel is not most apt for burning, yet the fier lasteth loger, than if it were nourished with like quantitie of drie wood. Euen so in the nature of man the minde beeing ripe, the body decaiyeth streight, and life goeth awaye beyng ones brought to perfection. Neither can there be any greater token of short lyfe, than full ripenes of naturall witte: The whiche is to the bodie, as the heate of the Sunne is to thinges yearthly. Therefore iudge right honourable ladie, that eue now they bothe died, when thei both wer most redie for God, neither thinke that thei died ouer sone, because thei liued no loger. They died both Gods seruauntes, & therfore they died well and in good time. God hath set their tyme, and taken them at his tyme, blessed children as they be, to reigne with hym in the kingdom of his father, prepared for them from the beginnyng. Unto whose will, I wishe and I trust your grace doth wholy referre your will, thanking hym as hartely for that he hath taken them, as you euer thanked hym, for that he euer lent you them. I knowe the wicked wordes of some vngodly folke haue muche disquieted your grace, notwithstandyng God beyng iudge of your naturall loue towardes your children, and al your faithful frendes, and seruauntes bearyng earnest witnes with your grace of the same: their vngodly talke the more lightely is to bee estemed, the more vngodly that it is. Nay your grace may reioyce rather, that wheras you haue doen well, you heare euill, accordyng to 249 the wordes of Christe: blessed are you, when men speake all euil thynges against you. And again consider GOD is not ledde by the reporte of men to iudge his creatures, but perswaded by ye true knowlege of euery mas conscience, to take them for his seruauntes, & furthermore the harme is theirs whiche speake so lewdlye, and the blesse theirs whiche beare it so pacietly. For loke what measure thei vse to other, with the same they shalbe measured againe. And as they iudge so shall they be iudged. Be your grace therfore strog in aduersitie, and pray for them that speake amisse of you, rendryng good for euill, and with charitable dealyng showe your self 250 long suffring, so shal you heape cooles on their heades. The boisterouse Sea trieth the good mariner, and sharpe vexatio declareth the true Christian. Where bataill hath not been before, there neuer was any victorie obteined. You then beyng thus assailed, show your self rather stowte to withstad, than weake, to geue ouer: rather cleauyng to good, tha yeldyng to euil. For if God be with you, what forceth who bee against you. For when all frendes faile, God neuer faileth them that put their trust in him, and with an vnfained hart cal to hym for grace. Thus doyng I assure your grace, God wilbe pleased, and the Godly wil much praise your wisdom, though the worlde ful wickedly saye their pleasure. I praie God your grace may please the Godlie, and with your vertuouse behauiour in this your wydohod, winne their commendation to the glory of God, the reioysyng of your frendes, and the comforte of your soule. Amen. Thus, the rather to make preceptes plaine, I haue added examples at large both for counsel geuing, & for comforting. And most nedeful it were in such kynd of Oracions to be most occupied, considering the vse hereof appereth full ofte in al partes of our life, and confusedly is vsed emong al other matters. For in praisyng a worthie ma, we shal haue iust cause to speake of all his vertues, of thinges profitable in this life, and of pleasures in generall. Lykewyse in trauersyng a cause before a iudge, we cannot wante the aide of persuasio, and good counsel, concerning wealth, health, life and estimacion, the helpe wherof is partely borowed of this place. But wheras I haue sette forthe at large the places of confirmacion, concernyng counsel in diuerse causes: it is not thought that either they should al be vsed in numbre as they are, or in ordre as thei stande: but that any one may vse theim and ordre theim as he shall thynke best, accordyng as the tyme, place, and person, shall most of all require. cotrouersies, rest onely vpon iudgement. Therfore when matters concernyng lade, goodes, or life, or any such thynge of lyke weight are called in Question, we must euer haue recourse to this kynde of Oratio, and after iust examinyng of our causes by the places therof: loke for iudgement accordyng to the law. Oration Iudiciall is, an earnest debatyng in open assemblie of some weightie matter before a iudge, where the complainaunt commenseth his action, and the defendaunt thereupon aunswereth at his peril to all suche thynges as are laied to his charge. called of the Rhetoricians the State, or constitucion of the Cause. wherunto we must leauel our reasons,  & directe our inuencion: but also we ought in euery cause to haue a respecte vnto some one especial poincte, and chief article: that the rather the whole drift of our doinges maye seeme to agree with our firste deuised purpose. For, by this meanes our iudgement shalbe framed to speake with discretion, and the ignoraunt shall learne to perceiue with profite, what soeuer is saied for his enstructio. But thei that take vpon them to talke in open audiece, and make not their accompte before, what thei wil speake after: shal neither be well liked for their inuencio, nor allowed for their witte, nor estemed for their learning. For, what other thinge do they, that boult out their wordes in suche sorte, & without all aduisement vtter out matter: but showe themselues to plaie as young boyes, or scarre crowes do, whiche showte in the open and plaine feldes at all auentures hittie 251 missie. The learned therfore and suche as loue to be coumpted Clerkes of vnderstanding, and men of good circumspection and iudgement, doe warely scanne what they chefely mynd to speake, and by definition seke what that is whereunto they purpose to directe their whole doynges. For, by suche aduised warenesse, and good iye castyng: they shall alwayes be able both to knowe what to say & to speake what they ought. As for example if I shal haue occasion to speake in open audience of the obedience due to our souereigne king I ought first to learne what is obedience, and after knowelege attained, to direct my reasons to the onely profe of this purpose, and wholy to seke confirmacion of the same, & not turne my tale to talke of Robbyn Hoode, & to showe what a goodly archer was he, or to speake wounders of the man 252 in the Mone, suche as are most nedelesse & farthest from the purpose. For then, the hearer lookyng to be taught his obedience, & hearing in the meane season mad tales of archerie and great meruailes of the man in the Mone: being half astoined at his so great straing wil perhappes say to him self: Now, whether the deuill wilt thou, come in man again for very shame, & tel me no bytailes, suche as are to no purpose but show me that, whiche thou diddeste promise both to teache & perswade at thy first entrie. Assuredlye suche fonde felowes there haue been, yea euen emong Prachers, that talking of faith, thei haue fetcht their full race from the.xij signes in the Zodiake. An other talking of the general resurrectio hath made a large matter of our blessed lady, praising her to be so gentle, so curteous, and so kind, that it wer better a thousade fold, to make sute to her alone, then to Christ her sonne. And what neded (I praie you) any soche rehersall beyng bothe vngodlie, and nothing at all to the purpose? For, what maketh the praise of our Ladie, to the confirmacion of the generalle doume? Would not a man thinke hym madde, that hauyng an earneste errande from London to Douer, would take it the next waie, to ride first into Northfolke, nexte into Essex, and last into Kent? And yet assuredly, many an vnlearned and witlesse man, hath straied in his talke moche farther a greate deale, yea truely as farre, as hens to Rome gates. Therefore wise are thei, that followe Plinies aduise, who would that all men, bothe in writyng and speakyng at large vpon any matter, should euer have an 253 iye to the chief title, and principall grounde of their whole entet, neuer swaruyng from their purpose, but rather bringyng all thynges together, to confirme their cause so moche as thei can possible. Yea, the wise and expert men will aske of theim selues, how hangeth this to the purpose? To what ende doe I spkeake it? What maketh this for confirmacion of my cause? And so by ofte questionyng, either chide their owne folie, if thei speake amisse: or els be assured, thei speak to good purpose. A State therefore generally, is the chief ground of a matter, and the principall poinct, whereunto bothe he that speaketh, 254 should referre his whole witte, and thei that heare should chiefly marke, A Preacher taketh in hande, to shewe what praier is, and how nedefull for man, to call vpo God: Now, he should euer remember this his matter, appliyng his reasons wholly and fully to this eande, that the hearers maie bothe knowe the nature of praier, and the nedefulnes of praier. The which when he hath doen, his promise is fulfilled, his time well bestowed, & the hearers well instructed. seuerally handled vpo good aduisemente, as he shall thinke beste, that professeth to speake. But in matters criminall, where iudgemet is required: there are twoo persones at the least, which must through contrarietie, stande and reste vpon some issue. As for example: A seruing man is apprehended by a lawier, for Felonie vpon suspicion. The Lawier saieth to the seruyng man: Thou haste doen this roberie. Naie (saieth he) I haue not doen it. Upon this conflicte and matchyng together, ariseth this State, whether this seruyng man hath doen this robberie, or no? Upon whiche poinct the Lawier must stand, and seke to proue it, to the vttermoste of his power. 255 A State therefore in matters of iudgement is that thing, whiche doeth arise vpon the first demande, and denial made betwixte men, whereof the one parte is the accuser, and the 256 other parte the persone, or persones accused. It is called a State, bicause we doe stande and reste vpon some one poinct, the whiche must wholly and onely be proued of the one side, and denied of the other. I cannot better terme it in Englishe, then by the name of an issue, the whiche not onely ariseth vpon moche debatyng, and long trauers vsed, whereupon all matters are saied, to come to an issue: but also els where an issue is saied to be then, and so often as bothe partes stande vpon one poinct, the whiche doeth as well happen at the first beginnyng, before any probacions are vsed, as it doth at the latter ending, after the matter hath at large been discussed. Now that we know what an issue is, it is next most nedefull, to shewe how many thei are in nomber. The wisest and best learned, haue agreed vpo three onely, and no lesse, the whiche are these folowyng. ------ questions folowyng, expounde their meanyng altogether. j. Whether the thing be, or no. ------ ij. What it is. iij. What maner of thing it is. soche thyng bee, or no. As if one should be accused of murder, good it wer to knowe, whether any murder were committed at all, or no, if it be not perfectly knowen before: and after to go further, and examine whether soche a manne that is accused, haue doen the deede or no. In the second place, we doubt not vpon the thing doon, but we stande in doubte what to call it. Sometymes a man is accused of Felonie, and yet he proueth his offence, to bee but a trespace, wherupon he escapeth the daunger of death. An other beyng accused for killyng a manne, confesseth his fault to bee manslaughter, and denieth it vtterly to bee any murder, whereupon he maketh frendes to purchase his pardon. Now the Lawiers by their learnyng, must iudge the doubte of this debate, and tell what name he deserueth to haue, that hath thus offended. In the thirde place, not onely the deede is confessed, but the maner of doyng is defended. As if one were accused for killyng a man, to confesse the deede, and also to stande in it, that he might iustly so doe, bicause he did it in his owne defence: whereupon ariseth this question, whether his doyng be right or wrong. And to make these matters more plain, I will adde an example for euery state seuerally. The Assercion. The Aunswere. The State or Issue. Whether he hath killed this man or no. Thus we see vpon the auouchyng and deniall, the matter standeth vppon an issue. Assercion. Aunswere State or Issue. Whether his offence doen, maie bee called treason or no. Here is denied that any soche thing is in the deede dooen, as is by worde reported, and saied to be. Assercion. Thou hast killed this man. Aunswere. I graunt it, but, I haue doen it lawfully, bicause I killed hym in myne owne defence. State or issue. Whether a man maie kill one in his owne defence, or no and whether this man did so, or no. The Oracion coniecturall is, when matters be examined, and tried out by suspicions gathered, and some likelihode of thing appering. A soldiour is accused for killing a fermar. The soldiour denieth it vtterly, & saith he did not kill him. Hereupon riseth the questio, whether the soldiour killed the fermar or no, who is wel knowen to be slaine. Now to proue this question, we muste haue soche places of confirmacion, as hereafter doe folowe. j. Will, to doe euill. ------ ij. Power, to doe euill. 257 like to doe soche a deede or no, and what should moue him to attept soche an enterprise; whether he did the murther vpo any displeasure before conceiued, or of a sodaine anger, or els for that he loked by his death, to receiue some commoditie, either land, or office, money, or money worth, or any other gainfull thing. 258 Some are knowen, to want no will to kill a man, bicause thei haue been flesht heretofore, passyng as little vppon the death of a man, as a Bocher doeth passe for killing of an oxe. beyng heretofore either accused before a Iudge, of manne-slaughter, or els quit by some generall pardon. Now, when the names of soche menne are knowen, thei make wisemen euer after, to haue them in suspeccion. 259 The countrie where the man was borne, declares sometime his naturall inclinacio, as if he were borne or brought vp emong the Tindale, and Riddesdale menne, he maie the soner be suspected. 260 Of what trade he is, by what occupacion he liueth. 261 emong Ruffians. Of what wealth he is and how he came by that, whiche 262 he hath, if he haue any. What apparell he weareth, and whether he loueth to go 263 gaie, or no. Of what nature he is, whether he bee hastie, heddie, or 264 readie to pike quarels. deede, or no. The grounde where the man was slain, whether it was 267 in the high waie, in a wodde, or betwixt twoo hilles, or elswhere, nigh to an hedge, or secrete place. The time, whether it was earely in the Morning, or late 268 at Night. Whether he ran awaie, after the deede doen, or had any 270 blood aboute him, or trembled, or stakerde, or was contrary in tellyng of his tale, and how he kept his countenaunce. Hope to kepe his deede secrete, by reason of the place, 271 tyme, and secrete maner of doyng. other mannes weakenesse, armour with nakednesse, and stoutnesse with simplicitie. 274 His confession. knowlege of a notable and moste hainous offence, committed by a soldiour. hath plagued bloodsheading, so I trust your wisdomes(moste worthy Iudges) will spedely seke the executio of this moste hatefull sinne. And where as God reuealeth to the sight of men, the knowledge of soche offences, by diuers likelihodes, and probable coiectures: I doubt not, but you being called of God, to hear soche causes, will doe herein as reason shall require, and as this detectable offence shal moue you, vpon rehearsall of the matter. The manne that is well knowen to be slain, was a worthy farmer, a good house keper, a welthy husbandman. one that traueiled moche in this worlde, meaning vprightly in all his doynges, and therefore beloued emong all men, and lamented of many, when his death was knowen. This Soldiour beeyng desperate in his dooynges; and liuyng by spoile all his life time, came newlie from the warres, whose handes hath been lately bathed in blood, and now he kepeth this countrey (where this Farmer was slain) and hath been here for the space of one whole moneth together, and by all likelihodes he hath slain this honest farmer. For soche men-flesht vilaines, make small accompt for killing any one, and doe it thei will without any mercie, when thei maie se their time. Yea, this wretche is bruted for his beastly demeanour, and knowen of long time to be a strog thief. Neither had he escaped the daunger of the Lawe, if the kynges free pardon had not preuented thexecucio. His name declares his noughtie nature, & his wicked liuing hath made him famous. For, who is he that hearyng of N. (the notable offenders name, might here be rehearsed) doeth not thinke by and by, that he were like to doe soche a deede? Neither is he onely knowen vniuersally to bee nought, but his soile also (where he was borne) giueth him to be an euil man: cosidering he was bred and brought vp emong a denne of theues, emong the men of Tindale and Riddesdale, where pillage is good purchase, and murderyng is coumpted manhode. Occupacion hath he none, nor yet any other honeste meanes, whereby to maintain himself: and yet he liueth most sumpteously. No greater gamester in a whole Countrey, no soche riotour, a notable whoremonger, a leude roister emong Ruffians, an vnreasonable waister, to daie full of money, within a seuennight after not worthe a grote. There is no man that seeth him, but will take him for his apparell to be a getleman. He hath his chaunge of sutes, yea, he spareth not to go in his silkes and Uelvet. A greate quareller, and fraie maker, glad when he maie bee at defiaunce with one or other, he hath made soche shiftes for money ere now, that I maruaile how he hath liued till this daie. And now being at a lowe ebbe, and loth to seme base in his estate, thought to aduenture vpon this farmer, and either to win the saddle, or els to lose the hors. And thus being so farre forward, wanting no will to attept this wicked deede, he sought by all meanes possible, conuenient oportunitie to copasse his desire. And waiting vnder a wood side, nigh vnto the high waie, about sixe of the clock at night, he sette vpon this Farmer, at what time he was commyng homeward, For, it appereth not onely, by his owne confession, that he was there about the self same time, where this man was slain: but also there be men that sawe him ride in greate haste, aboute the self same time. And bicause GOD would haue this murder to bee knowen, looke I praie you, what blood he carieth about him, to beare witnesse againste him, of his moste wicked deede. Again, his owne confession doeth plainly go against him, for he is in so many tales, that he can not tell what to saie. And often his colour chaungeth his bodie shaketh, and his tongue foultereth within his mouthe. And soche men as he bringeth in to beare witnesse with him, that he was at soche a place, at the self same hour, when the Farmer was slain: thei will not be sworne for the verie houre, but thei saie, he was at soche a place, within twoo houres after. Now Lorde, doeth not this matter seme moste plain unto all menne, especially seyng this deede was doen soche a tyme, and in soche a place, that if the deuill had not been his good lord, this matter had neuer come to light. And who will not saie, that this Caitife had little cause to feare, but rather power inough, to doe his wicked feacte, seing he is so sturdie and so strong, and the other so weake and vnweldie: yea, seyng this vilaine was armed, and the other manne naked. Doubt you not (worthie Iudges) seyng soche notes of his former life, to declare his inwarde nature, and perceiuing soche coniectures, lawfully gathered vpon iuste suspicion: but that this wretched Soldiour, hath slaine this worthie Farmer. And therefore I appeale for Iustice vnto your wisdomes for the death of this innocent man, whose blood before God, asketh iust auengement. I doubt not, but you remember the wordes of Salomon, who saieth. It is as great a sinne to forgiue the wicked, as it is euill to condepn, the innocente: and as I call vnfainedly for rightfull iudgement so I hope assuredly for iuste execucion. The Persone accused beyng innocente of the crime, that is laied to charge, maie vse the selfe same places, for his owne defence, the whiche his accuser vsed, to proue him giltie. the nature of the same, by defining sone one woorde, or comparing one lawe with an other, iudging vpon good triall, what is right, and what is wrong. The partes. j. Definicion. ------ ij. Contrary lawes. iij. Lawes made, & thende of the lawe maker iiij. Ambiguitie, or doubtfulnes. v. Probacion by thynges like. vi. Chalengyng or refusing. Then we vse to define a matter, when we can not agree vpon the nature of some worde, the which we learne to knowe, by asking the question, what it is. As for example. Where one is apprehended for killing a manne, we laie murder to his charge: whereupon the accused persone, when he graunteth the killyng, and yet denieth it to be murther: we must straight after haue recourse to the definicion, and aske, what is murder, by definyng whereof, and comparyng the nature of the worde, with his deede dooen: wee shall sone knowe, whether he committed murder, or manslaughter. whereof emong many riseth moche contencion, where as if bothe the lawes wer well weighed and considered, according to their circumstances, thei would appere nothing contrary in matter, though in wordes thei seme to dissent. Christ giueth warnyng, and chargeth his disciples, in the tenth of Matthewe, that thei preache not the glad tidinges, of his commyng into the worlde to the Gentiles, but to the Iewes onelie, vnto whom he was sent by his father. And yet after his resurreccion, we doe read in the last of Matthew, that he commaunded his disciples, to go into all the whole world, and preach the glad tidinges of his passion, and raunsome, paied for all creatures liuyng. Now though these twoo Lawes seme cotrary, yet it is nothing so. For if the Iewes would haue receiued Christ, and acknowleged him their sauiour, vndoubtedly thei had been the onely children of God, vnto who the promise and couenaut was made from the beginning. But bicause thei refused their sauiour, and crucified the Lorde of glory: Christe made the lawe generall, and called all men to life that would repente, promisyng saluacion to all soche as beleued and wer baptised. So that the particuler Lawe, being now abrogated, must nedes giue place to the superiour. question. j. Thinferior law must giue place to ye superior. ------ ij. The lawe generall must yelde to the special. iij. Mannes Lawe, to Gods Lawe. iiij. An old Lawe, to a newe Lawe. There bee Lawes vtterde by Christes owne mouthe, the whiche if thei bee taken, accordyng as thei ar spoken, seme to containe greate absurditie in theim. And therefore the minde of the Lawe maker, muste rather bee obserued, then the bare wordes taken onely, as thei are spoken. Christ saith in the fiueth of Matthewe. If thy right iye be an offence vnto 275 thee, pluck him out, and cast him awaie from thee. If one giue thee a blowe of thy right cheke, tourne to him againe thy lefte cheke. There be some Eunuches, that haue gelded 276 theim selues for the kingdome of heauen. Goe, and sell all that thou haste, and giue it to the poore. He that dooeth not 277 take vp his crosse and followe me, is not worthie of me. In al whiche sentences, there is no soche meanyng, as the bare wordes vttered seme to yelde. Pluckyng out of the iye, declares an auoidyng of all euill occasions: receiuyng a blowe vpon the left cheke, commendes vnto vs, modestie, and pacience in aduersitie. Geldyng, signifieth a subduyng of affeccions, and tamyng the foule luste of pleasure, vnto the will of reason. Goe and sell all: declares we should bee liberall, and glad to part with our gooddes to the poore and neadie. Bearyng the crosse, betokeneth sufferaunce of all sorowes, and miseries in this worlde. Now to proue that the will of the lawe maker, is none other then I haue saied: I maie vse the testimonies of other places in the Scripture, and copare them with these sentences, and so, iudge by iuste examinacio and diligent searche, the true meaning of the Lawe maker. Sometymes a doubte is made, vpon some woorde or Sentence, when it signifieth diuerse thynges, or maie diuersly be taken, whereupon full oft ariseth 278 moche contencion. The Lawiers lacke no cases, to fill this parte full of examples. For, rather then faile, thei will make doubtes often tymes, where no doubte should bee at all. Is his Lease long inough ([quoth] one): yea sir, it is verie long, saied a poore housbandman. Then ([quoth] he) let me alone with it, I will finde a hole in it, I warrant thee. In all this talke, I except alwaies the good Lawiers, and I maie well spare them, for thei are but a fewe. When there is no certain lawe, by expresse woordes vttered for some hainous offender, we maie iudge the offence worthie death, by rehearsall of some other law, that soundeth moche that waie. As thus. The Ciuill lawe appoincteth, that he shall be put in a sacke, and caste in the sea, that killeth his father: well, then he that killeth his mother, should by all reason, in like sort be ordered. It is lawfull to haue a Magistrate, therefore it is lawfull to plead matters before an Officer. And thus, though the laste can not be proued by expresse woordes, yet thesame is founde lawfull, by rehearsall of the first. other, as if a man should appele from the Common place, to the Chauncerie. Or if one should be called by a wrong name, not to aunswere vnto it. Or if one should refuse to aunswere in the Spirituall Court, and appele to the Lorde Chauncellour. Iuridiciall. After a deede is well knowen to bee dooen, by some one persone, wee goe to the nexte, and searche whether it bee right, or wrong. And that is, when the maner of dooyng is examined, and the matter tried through reasonyng, and moche debatyng, whether it bee wrongfullie doen, or otherwise. This state of right or wrong, is twoo waies diuided, wherof the one is, when the matter by the awn nature, is defended to bee right, without any further seking, called of the Rhetoricias, the state absolute. The other (vsing little force or strength, to mainteine the matter) is, when outward help is sought, and by waies vsed to purchase fauour, called otherwise the state assumptiue. ------ Tullie in his moste worthy Oracion, made in behalf of Milo, declareth that Milo slue Clodins most lawfully, who Clodius sought to haue slain moste wickedly. For ([quoth] Tullie) if nature haue graffed this in man, if lawe haue confirmed it, if necessitie haue taught it, if custome haue kept it, if aequitie haue mainteined it, if true dealing hath allowed it, if all common weales haue vsed it, if deedes aunciente haue sealed this vp, that euery creature liuing should sense it self, against outward violence: no man can thinke that Milo hath doen wrong, in killing of Clodius, except you thinke, that when men mete with theues either thei must be slain of them, or els condempned of you. Graunting of the faulte committed. ------ Blaming euill companie for it. Comparing the fault, & declaring that either thei must haue doen that, or els haue doen worse. Shifting it from vs, and shewing that wee did it vpon commaundement. graunteth his crime, and craueth pardon thereupon, leauing to aske iustice, & leaning wholly vnto mercie. 280 The first is, when one excuseth himself, that he did it not willingly, but vnwares, and by chaunce. The second is, when he asketh pardon, for the fault doen, consideryng his seruice to the common weale, and his worthie deedes heretofore doen, promisyng amendement of his former euil deede: the whiche wordes, would not be vsed before a Iudge, but before a king, or generall of an armie. For the Iudges must giue sentence, accordyng to the Lawe: the kyng maie forgiue, as beyng aucthour of the Lawe, and hauyng power in his hande, maie doe as he shall thinke best. 281 Blamyng other for the faulte doen, is when we saie that the accused persone, would neuer haue doen soche a deede, if other againste whom also, this accusacion is intended, had not been euill men, and giuen iuste cause, of soche a wicked deede. 282 Comparyng the faulte, is when we saie, that by slayng an euill manne, we haue doen a good deede, cuttyng awaie the corrupte and rotten member, for preseruacion of the whole bodie. Or thus: some sette a whole toune on fire, bicause their enemies should haue none aduautage by it. The 283 Saguntines beyng tributarie to the Romaines, slue their owne children, burnte their gooddes, and fired their bodies, bicause thei would not be subiecte to that cruell Haniball, and lose their allegiaunce, due to the Romaines. 284 Shiftyng it from vs, is when we saie, that if other had not sette vs on, we would neuer haue attempted soche an enterprise. As often times the souldiour saieth, his Capitaines biddyng, was his enforcement: the seruaut thinketh his Maisters commaundement, to be a sufficient defence for his discharge. Now that I haue hetherto set forthe, what Rhetorique is, whereunto euery Oratour is moste bounde, what the causes bee, bothe in their nature, and also by nomber, that comprehende euery matter, and what places serue to confirme euery cause: I thinke it is moste mete, after the knowledge of all these, to frame an Oracion accordinglie, and to shewe at large, by partes of euery Oracion (but specially soche as are vsed in Iudgemente) that vnto euery cause, apte partes maie euermore bee added. For euery matter hath a diuers beginning, neither all controuersies, or matters of weight, should alwaies after one sorte be rehearsed, nor like reasons vsed, nor one kinde of mouing affeccions, occupied before al men, and in euery matter. And therefore, whereas I haue briefly spoken of them before, I will now largely declare the and shewe the vse of theim in euery matter, that cometh in debate, and is nedefull, through reason to be discussed. is made apte, to giue good eare out of hande, to that whiche shall followe. in, to win fauor with moche circustaunce, called insinuacio. For in all matters that man taketh in hande, this consideracion ought first to be had, that we first diligetly expende the cause, before we goe through with it, that wee maie bee assured, whether it be lawfull, or otherwise. And not onely this, but also we muste aduisedly marke the menne, before whom we speake, the men against whom we speake, and al the circumstaunces, whiche belong vnto the matter. If the matter bee honest, godlie, and soche as of right ought to bee well liked, we maie vse an ope beginning, and will the hearers to reioice, and so go through with our part. If the cause be lothsome, or soche as will not be well borne withall, but nedeth moche helpe, and fauour of the herers: it shall be the speakers parte, priuely to get fauour, and by humble talke, to winne their good willes. Firste, requiring theim to giue hym the hearyng, and nexte, not streightlie to giue iudgement, but with mercie to mitigate, all rigour of the Lawe. Or in a coplaint made, whiche the counsaill shall greuously stomach to exaggerate it the more, if we se just cause to set it forwarde, And whereas many often times, are suspecte to speake thinges of malice, or for hope of gain, or els for a set purpose, as who should saie, this I can do: the wisest will euermore clere the selues, from all soche offences and neuer giue any token so moche as in the lieth, of any light suspicio In accusing any persone, it is best to heape all his faultes together, and wheras any thing semeth to make for him, to extenuate the same to the outermoste. In defending any persone, it is wisedome to reherse all his vertues first and foremest, and with asmoche art as maie be, to wipe awaie soche faultes, as were laied to his charge. And before all thinges this would be well marked, that, whensoeuer we shall largely talke of any matter, we alwaies so inuent, and find out our first enteraunce in the cause, that the same be for euer taken, euen from the nature and bowelles therof, that al thinges, which shall first be spoken, maie seme to agree with the matter, and not made as a shippe mannes hose, to serue for euery legge. Now whereas any long talke is vsed, the beginning therof is either taken of the matter self, or els of the persones, that are there present, or els of them, against who the accion is entended. And bicause the winning of victorie, 287 resteth in three pointes: First, in apt teaching the hearers, what the matter is, next in getting them to giue good eare,  288 and thirdly, in winning their fauour: We shall make them vnderstande the matter easely, if firste of all we begin to expounde it plainly, and in brief wordes, settyng out the meaning, make them harke to our saiynges. And by no meanes better, shall the standers by, knowe what we saie, and carie awaie that, which thei heare, then if at the first, we couche together the whole course of our tale, in as small roume as we can, either by defining the nature and substaunce of our matter, or els by diuiding it in an apte order, so that neither the hearers bee troubled with confoundyng of matter, and heaping one thing in an others neck, nor yet their memorie dulled with ouerthwart rehersall, and disorderly tellyng of  289 our tale. We shall make the people attentiue, and gladde to hear vs, if we will promise them, to speake of weightie matters, of wholsome doctrine, soche as thei haue heretofore wated yea, if we promise to tell the thinges, concerning either their owne profite, or thaduauncement of their countrie, no doubte we shall haue them diligente hearers. Or els if thei like not to heare weightie affaires, we maie promise theim strange newes, & perswade them, we will make them laugh and thinke you not, that thei wil rather heare a foolishe tale then a wise and wholsome counsaill? Demosthenes therfore 290 seing at a time, the fondnes of the people to be soche, that he could not obtein of theim, to heare him speake his minde, in an earnest cause, concerning the wealth of his countrie, required them to tary, and he would tell them a tale of Robin Hode. Wherat thei all staied, & longed to knowe what that should be. He began streight to tel them, of one that had sold his Asse to an other man, whereupon thei both went forthe to the next Market toune, hauyng with them the saied Asse. And the weather being somwhat hot, the first owner, which had now sold his Asse, went of that side the Asse, which kept him beste from the heate. The other being now the owner, and in fulle possession, would not suffre that, but required him to giue place, and suffer him to take the best commoditie of his owne Asse, that he could haue, whereat the other answered and saied, naie by sainct Marie sir, you serue me not so, I sold you the Asse, but I sold you not the shadowe of the Asse, and therefore picke you hence.When the people heard this, thei laughed apace, and likte it very well. Whereupon Demosthenes hauing wonne theim together, by this merie toie, rebuked their folie, that were so slacke to heare good thinges, and so redy to heare a tale of a Tubbe, thus hauing them attentiue, perswaded with them to heare him, in matters of great importance, the whiche otherwise he could neuer haue doen, if he had not taken this waie with hym. of waies, either beginning to speake of our selues, or els of our aduersaries, or els of the people, and companie present, or last of all, if we begin of the matter it self, and so goe thorowe with it. We shal get fauour for our owne sakes, if we shall modestlie set forthe our bounden dueties, and declare our seruice dooen, without all suspicion of vauntyng, either to the common weale, as in seruyng either in the warres abrode, or els in hearyng some office at home, concerning the tranquilitie of our countrie: or in helping our frendes, kinsfolkes, and poore neighbours, to declare our goodnes, doen heretofore towardes theim: and lastlie, if we shewe without all ostentacion, aswell our good willes towardes the iudges there, as also pleasures doen for theim in tymes paste, to the outermoste of our power. And if any thyng seme to let our cause, by any misreport, or euil behauior of our partes heretofore: best it were in moste humble wise to seke fauour, and sleightlie to aduoide all soche offences, laied to our charge. Wee shall get fauour, by speakyng of our aduersaries, if wee shall make soche reporte of them, that the hearers shall either hate to heare of them, or outerly enuie them, or els altogether despise them. We shall sone make our aduersaries to be lothed, if we shewe and set forthe, some naughtie deede of theirs, and declare how cruelly, how vilie, and how maliciouslie thei have vsed other men heretofore. We shall make them to be enuied, if we reporte vnto the Iudges, that thei beare them selues haulte, and stoute vpon their wealthie frendes, and oppresse poore men by might, not regardyng their honestie, but sekyng alwaies by hooke and croke, to robbe poore men of their Farmes, Leases, and money. And by the waie, declare some one thing, that thei haue doen, whiche honest eares would scant abide to heare. We shall make theim to bee set naught by, if we declare what luskes thei are, how vnthriftelie thei liue, how thei do nothing from daie to daie, but eate, drinke, and slepe rather sekyng to liue like beastes, then mindyng to liue like men, either in profiting their countrie, or in tendering their own commoditie, as by right thei ought to doe. Wee shall get good will, by speakyng of the Iudges and hearers: if we shall commende their worthie dooynges, and praise their iuste dealing, and faithfull execucion of the law, and tell theim in what estimacion the whole countrey hath the for their vpright iudgyng and determinyng of matters, and therefore in this cause nedes must it bee, that thei must answere their former doinges, and iudge so of this matter, as all good men haue opinion thei will doe. We shall finde fauor by speaking of the matter, if in handeling our owne cause, we commende it accordinglie, & dispraise the attempt of our adversary, extenuating al his chief purposes, so muche as shalbe necessarie. 292  Now resteth for me to speake of the other parte of Enteraunce into an Oration, whiche is called a close, or priuie gettyng of fauour when the cause is daungerouse, and cannot easely be heard without displeasure. A priuy begynnyng, or crepyng in otherwyse called Insinuation must then, and not els be vsed, when the iudge is greaued with vs, and our cause hated of the heares. The cause selfe oftentymes is not lyked for thre diuerse causes, if either the matter selfe be vnhonest, and not meete to be vttered before an audience, or els if the iudge him selfe by a former tale be perswaded to take part against vs, or last if at that tyme we are forced to speake, when the iudge is weried with hearing of other. For the iudge him self beyng weried by hearyng, will be muche more greued if any thyng be spoken either ouermuche, or els agaynst his likyng. Yea who seeth not that a weried man will soone mislike a right good matter? Yf the matter be so hainouse that it connot be hearde without offence, (as if I shoulde take a mans parte, who were generally hated) wisedome were to lette hym go and take some other whom al me liked: or if the cause were thought not honest, to take sum other in stede therof which were better liked, till thei were better prepared to heare the other: so that euermore nothynge should bee spoken at the firste, but that which might please the iudge, and not to be acknowen ones to thinke of that, which yet we minde most of al to perswade. Therfore, when the hearers are somwhat calmed, we may entre by litle and litle into the matter, and saie that those thinges, whiche our aduersarie doeth mislike in the person accused, we also do mislyke the same. And when the heares are thus wonne, we may saie, that all, whiche was saied, nothyng toucheth vs, and that wee minde to speake nothing at al against our aduersaries, neither this waie, nor that waie. Neither were it wisedome openly to speake against theim, whiche are generally well estemed and taken for honest menne. And yet it were not a misse for the furtheraunce of our owne causes closelye to speeke our fantasie, and so, streighte to aulter their hartes. Yea and to tel the iudges the lyke in a like matter, that such and suche iudgement hath bene geuen: And therfore at this time consideryng the same case, and the same necessitie, like iudgement is looked for. But if the aduersarie haue so tolde his tale, that the iudge is wholy bent to geue sentence with hym, and that it is well knowne vnto what reasons the iudge moste leaned and was perswaded: we maye firste promise to weaken that, whiche thaduersarie hath made moste strong for hym selfe, and confute that parte whiche the hearers did moste esteme, and best of all lyke. Or elles we may take aduauntage of some part of our aduersaries tale, and talke of that firste, whiche he spake laste: or elles begynne so, as though wee doubted what were beste firste to speake, or to what parte it were moste reason firste of all to aunswere, wonderyng, and takyng GOD to wittenesse at the straungenesse of his reporte, and confirmacion of his cause. For when the standers by perceiue that the aunswere (whome the aduersaries thought in their mind was wholly abashed) feareth so litle the obiections of his aduersarie, and is ready to aunswere Adomnia quare, with a bolde countenaunce: thei will thinke that thei themselues rather gaue rashe credite, and were ouerlighte in beleuyng the firste tale: than that he whiche nowe aunswereth in his owne cause, speaketh without grounde, or presumeth vpon a stomacke to speake for hym selfe without iust consideration. But if the tyme bee so spente, and the tale so long in tellyng, that all menne be almoste weried to heare any more: than we must make promise at the first to be verie short, and to lappe vp our matter in fewe wordes. 293 And if tyme maye so serue, it were good when men bee weried to make theim some what merie, and to begin with some pleasaunt tale, or take an occasion to iest wittely vpon some thyng then presently doen. 294 Or if the tyme wille not serue for pleasaunte tales, it were good to tell some straunge thyng, some terrible wonder, that they all maye quake at the onely hearyng of the same. For lyke as when a mannes stomacke is full and can brooke no more meate, he may stirre his appetite either by some Tarte sawce, or elles quicken it somewhat by some sweate dishe: euen so when the audience is weried with weightie affaires, some straunge wounders maye call vp their spirites, or ells some merie tale maie cheare their heauie lookes. And assuredly it is no small connyng, to moue the hartes of menne either to mirthe, or saddenesse: for he that hath suche skill, shal not lightely faile of his purpose, whatsoeuer matter he taketh in hande. Thus haue I taught what an Enteraunce is, and howe it shoulde be vsed. Notwithstandyng I thynke it not amisse often to reherse this one poincte, that euermore the begynning bee not ouermuche laboured, nor curiously made, but rather apte to the purpose, semyng vpon presente occasion, euermore to take place and so to be deuised, as though wee speake all together without any great studie, framyng rather our tale to good reason, than our toungue to vaine paintyng of the matter. 295 In all whiche discourse, whereas I haue framed all the Lessons and euery Enteraunce, properly to serue for pleadyng at the Barre: yet assuredly many of theim maye well helpe those that preache Goddes truthe, and exhorte men in open assemblies to vpright dealyng. And no doubte many of theim haue muche neede to knowe this Arte, that the rather their tale maye hange together, where as oftentymes they begynne as muche from the matter, as it is betwixte Douer and Barwyke, whereat some take pitie, and many for werinesse can skante abide their begynnyng, it is so long or they speake any thyng to the purpose. Therefore the learned Clerkes of this our 296 tyme, haue thought it good that all Preachers shoulde take their begynnyng vppon the occasion of suche matter as is there written, declaring why and wherfore, and vpon what consideration suche wordes were is those daies so spoken, that the reason geuen of suche talke then vtterde, myght serue well to beginne their Sermon. Or els to gather some seueral sentence at the firste, whiche brifely comprehendeth the whole matter folowyng, or elles to begynne with some apte similitude, example, or wittie saiyng. Or lastely to declare what wente before, and so to showe that, whiche foloweth after. Yea sometimes to begynne lamentablie with an vnfained bewailyng of sinne, and a terrible declaryng of Goddes threates: Sometymes to take occasion of a matter newly done, or of the company there present, so that alwais the begynnyng be aunswerable to the matter folowyng. After the preface & first Enteraunce, the matter must be openened, and euery thyng lyuely tolde, that the heares may fully perceaue what we go about, now in reportyng an acte done, or vtteryng the state of a controuersie, we must vse these lessons, wherof the firste is 297 to be shorte, the next to be plaine, and the thirde is, to speake likely, and with reason, that the hearers may remember, vnderstande, & beleue the rather, suche thynges as shalbe saied. And first whereas we should be shorte in telling the matter as it lyeth, the best is to speake no more than needes we 298 muste, not rauyng it from the botome, or tellynge bytales suche as rude people full ofte doe, nor yet touchynge euery poinct, but tellyng the whole in a grosse summe. And where as many matters shal neither harme vs, nor yet do vs good being brought in, and reported by vs: it were well done not to medle with them at al, nor yet twyse to tel one thyng, or reporte that, whiche is odiouse to be tolde againe. Notwithstandyng this one thing woulde bee wel considered, that in sekyng to be short, we be not obscure. And therfore to make our matter plain, that all may vnderstande it, the best were 299 first and formest to tell euery thyng in order, so muche as is nedeful, obseruyng bothe the tyme, the place, the maner of doing, and the circumstances thereunto belonging. Wherin good heede woulde bee had that nothyng bee doubtfullie spoken, whiche maie haue a double meanyng, nor yet any thyng vttered that maye make asmuche against vs, as with vs, but that all our woordes runne to confirme wholly our matter. And suerly if the matter be not so plainely told that al may wnderstande it, we shall doe litle good in the reste of our reporte. For in other partes of the Oration if we bee sowhat darke, it is the lesse harme, we may be more plaine in an other place. But if the Narration, or substaunce of the tale bee not well perceyued, the whole Oration besydes is darkened altogether. For to what ende should we go about to proue that, whiche the hearers know not what it is? Neither can we haue any libertie to tel our tale again, after we haue ones tolde it, but must streight go furth and comfirme that which we haue saied howsoeuer it is. Therfore the reportyng of our tale may soone appere plaine, if we first expresse our mynde in plaine wordes, and not seke these rope-rype termes, whiche betraie rather a foole, than commende a wise man: & again if we orderly obserue circumstaunces, and tell one thing after an other from tyme to tyme, not tublyng one tale in an anothers neke, telling halfe a tale, and so leauyng it rawe, hackyng and hemmyng as though our wittes & our senses were a wolle gathering. Neither should we suffer our tongue to runne before our witte, but with muche warenesse sette forthe our matter, and speake our mynde euermore with iudgement. Yf we speake directely as the cause requireth, if wee showe the very purpose of all the deuise, and frame our inuencion, accordyng as we shall thynke them most willyng to allowe it that haue the hearyng of it. The Narration reported in matters of iudgement, shall 301 seeme to stande with reason, if we make our talke to agree with the place, tyme, thyng, and persone, if we shall showe that what soeuer we say, the same by al likelyhodes is true, if our coiectures, tokens, reasons, and argumentes be suche that neiter in them there appere any fablyng, nor yet that any thyng was spoken, whiche might of right otherwise be taken, and that wee not onely speake this; but that diuers other of good creditie will stande with vs in defense of the same, all whiche reportyng may sone bee lyked, and the tale so told, may be thought very reasonable. Yea, we shall make our doynges seme reasonable, if we frame our worke to natures will, and seke none other meanes, but suche onely, as the honest and wise haue euer vsed and allowed, bryngyng in and blamyng the euil alwaies for suche faultes chiefely, wherunto thei most of all are like to be subiect, ss to accuse a spend al, of thefte: a whoremonger, of adulterie: a rash quareller, of manslaughter:  & so of other. Sometimes it is good and profitable to be merie and pleasaut in reporting a matter, against some maner of man and in some cause. For neither, against all men that offend, nor yet against al matters shoulde the wittie alwayes vse iestyng. And nowe, for those that shall tel their mynde in the other kyndes of Oratorie, 302 as in the kynde Demonstratiue, Deliberatiue, in exhortyng or perswadyng: the learned haue thought meete, that they must also call the whole summe of their matter to one especial poincte, that the rather the hearers may better perceiue wherat they leauel al their reasons. As if a Clarke do take in hande to declare Goddes heste, he will after his Enteraunce, 303 tell what thinge is chiefelie purposed in that place,  and nexte after, showe other thinges annexed thereunto, whereby not onely the hearers may get great learning, and take muche profite of his doctrine, but he hym selfe maye knowe the better what to saie, what order to vse, and when to make an ende. Some doe vse after the literall sense, to gather a misticall vnderstandynge, and to expounde the saiynges spiritually, makyng their Narration altogether of thynges heauenly. Some rehersyng a texte particularly spoke, applie the same generally vnto all states, enlargyng the Narration moste Godly by comparyng wordes long agoe spoken, with thinges and matters that are presently done. Notwitstandyng the auncient fathers, because they dyd onely expounde the Scriptures for the moste parte, made no artificiall Narration, but vsed to folowe suche order as the plain texte gaue theim. So that if euery sentence were plainely opened to the hearers, they went not muche farther, sauynge that when any worde gaue them occasion to speake of some vice, they woulde largely saye their mynde in that behaulfs: As Chrisostome and Basile haue done, with other. The ware marking and hedie obseruacion of time, place, and person, may teache all men (that be not paste teachyng) howe to frame their Narration in al contruersies that are called in Question, and therfore when presente occasio shall geue good instruction, what neede more lessons? And especially seeyng nature teacheth what is comely, and what is not comely, for all tymes. Ye what tel I nowe of suche lessons, seeyng GOD hath raised suche worthie Preachers in this our tyme, that their Godly and learned doynges, may be a moste iuste example for all other to folowe: as well for their lyuyng, as for their learnyng. I feare me the precepts are more in nomber, than wil be wel kepte or folowed this yeare. After our tale is told, and the hearers haue wel learned what we meane, the nexte is to reporte wherein the aduersarie and wee, cannot agree, and what it is wherin we do agree. And then to part out such principall poinctes, wherof we purpose fully to debate, and late theim out to be knowen: that the hearers may plainely see what we wil say, and perceiue at a worde, the substaunce of our meanyng. Now Tullie would not haue a diuision to be made, of, or aboue thre partes at the most, nor yet lesse than iij. neither, if nede so require. For if we haue thre chief groudes wherupon to rest, appliyng al our argumetes therunto 304 we shal both haue matter enought to speake of, the hearers shal with ease vnderstad our meanyng,  & the whole Oratio shall sone be at an ende. Notwithstandyng this lesson must not so curiouslie be kept, as thought it were synne to make the diuision of fower, or fiue partes, but it was spoken for this ende, that the diuision should be made of as fewe as may be possible, that men may the better carie it away, and the reporter with more ease maie remember what he hath to saie. Nowe in praisyng, or dispraisyng, in perswadyng, or disswadyng, diuisions must also be vsed. As if one would enueighe agaynste those women, that will not geue their owne children sucke, he might vse this diuision. Where as women commonly put their children furthe to nursyng, I  305 will first proue, that it is bothe agaynst the lawe of nature, and also against Goddes holie wil: Again, I wil shewe that it is harmefull bothe for the childes bodie, and also for his witte, lastly, I will proue that the mother selfe falleth into muche sickenesse thereby. First, nature geueth milke to the woman for none other ende, but that she shoulde bestowe it vpon her childe. And we see beastes feede their youngones, and why shoulde not women? GOD also commaundeth all women to bryng vp their children. Againe, the childrens bodies shalbe so affected, as the milke is whiche they receyue. Nowe, if the nurse be of an euil complexion, or haue some hidde disease, the childe suckyng of her brest muste needes take parte with her. And if that be true whiche the learned doe saie, that the temperature of the mynde folowes the constitucion of the bodie, needes must it be that if the Nurse be of a naughtie nature, the childe muste take thereafter. But be it, the Nurse be of a good complexion, of an honest behauiour (whereas contrary wyse Maydens that haue made a scape are commonly called to be Nurses) yet can it not bee put that the mothers mylke should be muche more naturall for the childe, then the mylke of a straunger. As by experience, let a manne bee long vsed to one kynde of dryke, if the same man chaunge his ayre, and his drinke, he is like to mislyke it. Lastely for the mothers, howe are they troubled with sore brestes, besydes other diseases that happen throughe plentie of mylke, the whiche Phisicians can tell, and women full ofte haue felte. Lykewyse in speakyng of fastyng, I might vse this diuision. Firste, it is godly to fast, because the spirite is more free and apter for any good worke. Again it is wholesome, because thereby euil humours are waisted, and many diseases either clerely put awaie, or much abated of their tirannie. Lastly it is profitable, because menne spende lesse money, the lesse banqueting that thei vse. Therfore, if men loue either to be wise, godly, healthful, or wealthy, let the vse fastyng, & forbeare excesse. Now vpon a diuision, there might also be made a subdiuision, as where I saie, it is godly to fast, I might diuide godlinesse, into the hearing of Goddes worde, into praiyng deuoutly, and charitable dealyng with all the worlde. Again, speaking of healthe, I mighte saie that the whole body, is not onely more lustie with moderate fasting, but also more apte for al assaies. The learned man studieth better when he fasteth, then when he is ful. The cousailor heareth causes with lesse pain being emptie, then he shalbe able after a full gorge. Again, whereas the fiue senses, bring vs to the knowlege of many thynges: the more apte that euery one is, the more pleasure thei bryng euer with the. The iyes se more clerely, the eares heare more quickely, the tongue rouleth more roundly, and tasteth thinges better, and the nose smelleth euill sauours the soner. 306 Philosophie is diuided into the knowleges of thinges naturall, thinges morall, and into that arte, whiche by reason findeth out the truthe, commonly called Logique. Nowe of these three partes of Philosophie, I might make other thre subdiuisions, and largely set them out. But these maye suffice for this tyme. Quintilia willeth, that streight and immediatly after the Narracion, there shoulde also be vsed suche sentences, as might bee full of pithe, and contein in the the substaunce of muche matter, the rather that the hearers may be stirred vpo the onely report, of some sentecious saiyng, or weightie text in the lawe. As in speakyng largely against extorcio, one might after his reasos applied to the purpose, bryng in a pithie and sentencious proposicio as thus. Those handes are euill that scratche out the iyes: and what other doe thei, that by force robbe their Christian brethre? Wo be to that realme, wher might out goeth right Or thus, whe rage doth rule, and reason doeth waite, what good man can hope to liue log in rest. Also an act of a realme maie wel serue to make a proposicio. As thus. The lawe is plain: that man shal die as an offendour, what soeuer he bee that breaketh vp another manes house, and seketh by spoile to vndo his neighbour. Now here is no man that doubteth, but that thou hast doen this deede, therfore, what nedes any more, but that thou muste suffer, accordyng to the lawe? In diuidyng a matter, proposicios are vsed, and orderly applied for the better setting furth of the cause. As if I should speke of thankfulnesse, I might first shewe, what is thanfulnesse, 307 next how nedeful it is, and last, how commendable and profitable it is vniuersally? Thankfulnesse is a kynde of remebryng good wil shewed, and an earnest desire to requite the same. Without thakfulnesse, no man would do for another The brute beastes haue these properties, and therefore man cannot want the, without his greate rebuke. Some proposicions are plain spoken, without any cause, or reason added therunto. As thus. I haue charged this man with felony, as you haue hard, but he denieth it, therfore iudge you it, I pray you. Somtimes a cause is added, after the aledging af a proposicio. As thus, I haue accused this man of felonie, because he tooke my pursse by the high waie side, and therfore I call 308 immediately after the rehersall of any cause, and beautife much the matter, beyng either alleged with the cause annexed, or els being plainly spoken, without geuyng any reaso to it at all. When we haue declared the chief poynctes, wherevnto wee purpose to referre all our reasons, we muste heape matter and finde out argumentes, to confirme the same to the outermoste of our power, makyng firste the strongest reasons that wee can, and nexte after, gatheryng all probable causes together, that being in one heape, thei maie seme strong, & of greate weighte. And whatsoeuer the aduersarie hath saied against vs, to answer therunto, as tyme and place beste maie serue. That if his reasons be light, and more good maie bee doen in confuting his, then in confirming our awne: it were best of all to sette vpon him, and putte awaie by arte, all that he hath fondly saied without witte. For prouing the matter, and searching 309 out the substaunce, or nature of the cause, the places of Logique muste helpe to sette it forward. But when the person shalbe touched, and not the matter, we must seke els where, and gather these places together. ------ In wel examining of al these matters, muche maie be saied, & greate likelihods maie be gathered, either to or fro, the whiche places I vsed heretofore, when I spake of matters in iudgemet, against the accused souldiour. Now in triyng the treuth, by reasons gathered of the matter: we must first marke what was doe at that time by the suspected persone, when suche and such offences wer committed. Yea, what he did, before this acte was doen. Again, the tyme muste be marked, the place, the maner of doyng, and what hart he bare him. As thoportunitie of doyng and the power he had to do this deede. The whiche all sette together, shal either acquite him, or finde him gilite. These argumentes serue to confirme a matter in iudgement, for any hainous offece. But in the other causes which are occupied, either in praisyng, or disprasyng, in perswading, or disswadyng, the places of confirmacion, be suche as are before rehersed, as when we commende a thyng, to proue it thus. ------ And so of other in like maner, or els to vse in stede of these, the places of Logique. Therefore, when we go about to confirme any cause, wee maie gather these groundes aboue rehearsed, and euen as the case requireth, 310 so frame our Reasones. In confutyng of causes, the like maie he had, as we vsed to proue: if ve take the cotrarie of the same. For as thinges are alledged, so thei maie be wrested, & as houses are buylded, so thei mai be ouerthrowe. What though many coiectures be gathered, & diuerse matters framed, to ouerthrowe the defendaunt: yet witte maie finde out bywaies to escape, and suche shiftes maie be made either in auoydyng the dauger, by plain denial, or els by obieccions, and reboundyng again of reasons made, that smal harme shall turne to the accused persone, though the presuptions 311 of his offence be greate, and he thought by good reason to be faultie. The places of Logique, as I saied, cannot be spared, for the confirmacio of any cause. For, who is he, that in confirmyng a matter, wil not know the nature of it, the cause of it, theffect of it, what is agreing therunto, what likenesse there is betwixt that, and other thinges, what exaples maye be vsed, what is contrary, and what can be sayed against it. Therfore, I wish that euery manne should desire and seke to haue his Logique perfect, before he looke to profite in Rhetorique, consideryng the grounde and confirmacio of causes, is for the moste part gathered out of Logique. 312 all that, whiche was said before, stirryng the hearers by large vtteraunce, and plentifull gatheryng of good matter, either the one waie, or the other. 313 together briefly, al suche argumentes as wer before rehersed, reportyng the somme of theim, in as fewe wordes as can be, and yet after such a sorte that muche varietie be vsed, bothe when the rehersall is made, as also after the matter is fully reported. For, if the repeticion should be naked, and onelye set furthe in plain wordes, without any change of speach, or shift of Rhetorique: neither should the hearers take pleasure, nor yet the matter take effect. Therfore, when the Oratour shall touche any place, which maie geue iuste cause to make an exclamacio, & stirre the hearers to be sory, to be glad, or to be offended: it is necessary to vse arte to the outermoste. Or when he shal come to the repeatyng of an heinous acte, & the maner therof: he maie set the iudges on fire, and heate them earnestly against the wicked offendor. Thus in repeatyng, arte maie bee vsed, and nexte with the onely rehersall, matters maie bee handsomely gathered vp together. The other part of a conclusio resteth, either in augmentyng and vehemently enlargyng that, which before was in fewe wordes spoken, to set the iudge or hearers in a heate: or els to mitigate and asswage displeasure conceiued, with much lamentyng of the matter, and mouyng theim thereby the rather to shewe mercie. Amplificacion is of twoo sortes wherof I will speake more at large, in the nexte Chapiter. The one resteth in wordes, the other in matter. Such wordes muste be vsed, as be of greate weight, wherin either is some Metaphore, or els some large wnderstadyng is conteined. Yea, wordes that fil the mouth, and haue a sound with them, set forthe a matter very wel. And sometimes wordes twise spoken, make the matter appere greater. Again, when we firste speake our mynde in lowe wordes and after vse weightier, the fault likewise semethe to bee greater. As when one had killed a ientleman, thus might another amplifie his mynd. For one slaue to strike another, wer worthy of punishmet, but what deserueth that wretche whiche not onely striketh a manne, but striketh a ientleman and not onely strikethe a ientleman, but cowardly killeth a ientlemanne, not geuynge hym one wounde, but geuynge him twentie. To kill any manne in suche sorte, deserueth deathe, but what saye you to him, that not onely killeth him so, but also hangeth him moste spitefully vpon a tree. And yet not content with that, but scourgeth hym, and mangeleth hym when he is dedde, and last of all, maketh a ieste of his moste naughtie deede, leauynge a writyng there about the dedde manes necke. Now then seyng his crueltie is such that thonly killing, cannot content his deuelishe deede, and moste dedly malice: I aske it for Gods loue, and in the waie of iustice, that this wicked deuill, maie suffer worthy death, and be punished to the example of all other. Amplifiyng of the matter, consisteth in heapyng, and enlargyng of those places, whiche serue for confirmacion of a matter. As the definicion, the cause, the consequent, the contrary, the example, and suche other Again amplificacion maie be vsed, whe we make the law to speake, the ded persone to make his complainte, the countrey to crie out of suche a deede. As if some worthy manne wer cast awaie, to make the countrey saye thus: If Englad could speake, would she not make suche, & suche coplaintes? if the walles of suche a citee or toune, had a tongue, would thei not talke thus and thus? And to bee shorte, all suche thynges shoud be vsed, to make the cause seme greate, whiche concerne God, the commo weale, or the lawe of nature. For if any of these three bee hindered, we haue a large felde to walke in. In praisyng, or dispraisyng, we muste exaggerate those places towardes the ende, whiche make menne wouder at the straungenesse of any thyng. In perswadyng or disswading, the rehersall of commoditees, and heapyng of examples together, encrease muche the matter. It were a greate labour to tell all the commoditees, and all the properties, whiche belong vnto the conclusion. For suche arte maie bee vsed in this behalfe, that though the cause be very euill, yet a wittie manne maie gette the ouerhande, if he be cunnyng in his facultee. 314 The Athenians therfore did streightly forbid by a lawe, to vse any conclusion of the cause, or any enterance of the matter to wynne fauour. Cicero did herein so excell, that lightly he gotte the victorie in all matters, that euer he tooke in hande. Therefore as iuste praise ariseth by this parte, so I doubte not, but the wittiest will take moste paines in this behalf, and the honest, for euer will vse the defence of moste honest matters. Weapons maie bee abused for murder, and yet weapons are onely ordeined for saufgard. Emong all the figures of Rhetorique, there is no one that so muche healpeth forwarde an Oracion, and beautifieth the same with suche delitfull ornamentes, 315 as doth amplificacion. For if either we purpose to make our tale appere vehemente, to seeme pleasaunte, or to be well stored with muche copie: nedes must it be that here we seke helpe, wher helpe chiefly is to be had, and not elles where. And nowe because none shal better bee able, to amplyfie any matter then those, whiche beste can praise, or moste dispraise any thing her vpon yearth, I thinke it nedefull, firste of all to gather suche thynges together, whiche helpe best this waie. Therefore in praisyng, or dispraisyng, we muste be well stored euer with suche good sentences, as are ofte vsed in this our life, the whiche through arte being encreased, helpe much to perswasion. As for example, where it is saied (ientle behauioure wynneth good will, and clerelye quensheth hatered) I mighte in commendynge a noble ientlemanne for his lowlinesse declare at large, how commendable, and howe profitable a thynge, ientle behauioure is, and of the other side, how hatefull and howe harmefull, a proude disdainfull manne is, and how beastly a nature he hath, that beyng but a manne, thinketh hymself better then any other manne is, and also ouer good to haue a matche or felowe in this life. As thus, if lowelinesse and Charitee 316 maintayne life, what a beaste is he, that throughe hatered will purchace deathe? If God warneth vs to loue one another, and learne of him to be ientle, because he was ietle and humble in harte: howe cruell are thei, that dare withstande his commandement? If the subiect rebell against his kyng, we crie with one voyce, hang hym, hang hym, and shall wee not thynke him worthy the vilest death of all, that beeyng a creature, contempneth his creatour, beyng a mortal manne neglecteth his heauely maker, beyng a vile moulde of claie, setteth lighte by so mightie a God, and euer liuyng Kyng? Beastes and birdes without reason, loue one another, they shourde, and thei flocke together, and shal men endued with suche giftes, hate his euen christian, and eschew companie? When Shepe doe straie, or cattel doe striue one against an other, there are Dogges ready to call them in, yea, thei will bite them (as it hath been full often seen) if twoo fight together: and shal man wante reason, to barke against his lewde affeccios, or at the least shall he haue none to checke him for his fautes, and force him to forgeue? Likewise if you would rebuke one that geueth eare to backbiters and slaunderers, 317 ye muste declare what a greate mischief an euill tongue is, what a poysone it is, yea, what a murder, to take a mannes good name from hym. We compte hym worthy death that poisoneth a manns body, and shal not he suffer the like pain that poisoneth a manns honestie, and seketh to obscure and darken his estimacion? Menne bee wel accepted emong the wise, not for their bodies, but for their vertues. Now take a waie the thyng, wherby menne are commended: and what are men, other then brute beastes? For beastes doe nothing against nature, but he that goeth against honestie, the same manne fighteth against nature, which would that al menne should liue wel. When a manne is killed secretly, wee aske Iudgement for the offendour, and shall they escape without Iudgemente, that couertly murder a mannes soule? That separate hym from GOD, that Iudge him to helle, whose life hath euer been moste heauenly? When oure pursse is piked, we make streight search for it again, and emprisone the offendoure, and shall wee not seke recouery of our good name, when euill tongues haue stayned it? If our fame be of more price, then is either gold or grotes, what meane we to be so carelesse in kepynge the one, and so careful in kepynge the other? Fonde is his purpose that beinge in the raine, casteth his garmente in a Bushe, and standeth naked hym selfe, for sauynge the glosse of his gaie coate. And yet what other thing do they that esteme the losse of money for great lacke, and counte not the losse of their honestie for anye wate at all? Thus we se, that from vertues and vyces suche amplifications may be made, and no doubt he that can prayse or disprayse anye thynge plentifullye, is able moste copiouslye to exaggerate anye matter. 318 Agayne, sentences gathered and heaped together commende muche the matter. As if one shoulde saye Reuengemente belongeth to God alone, and therby exhorte menne 319 to pacience. He myghte brynge in these sentences with him and geue greate cause of muche matter. No man is hurte but of hym selfe, that is to saye: aduersitie or wrong suffreringe is no harme to him that hathe a constaunt harte, and liues vpright in all his doynges. He is more harmed that doeth wrong, then he that hath suffered wronge. He is the stowter that contemneth, then he is that committeth wronge. Yea, he gaineth not a litle, that had rather suffer muche losse, then trye his right by contention. Gaine gotte by fraude, is harme and no gaine. There is no greater victorie, then for manne to rule hys affections. It is a greater matter to ouercome anger, then to winne a forteresse or a tower. There is no greater token of a noble harte, then to contemne wronge. He that requiteth euill for euill: throughe hatred of an euill manne, is made euyll hym selfe, and therfore worthy to be hated. He that contemneth his enemye in battayle, is counted a goodman of warre, and a wise. He that requiteth good for euill, is an aungell of God. He that mindeth reuengemente, is at the next doore to manslaughter. God is moued wyth nothynge soner to forgeue vs oure offences, then if we for his sake forgeue one another. The requiting of iniuries hath no ende. Strife is best ended through Pacience. Anger is a madnesse, differyng from it in this poinct onely, that anger is shorte, and tarieth not long, madnesse abideth still. It is folie to suffer the fome of a Horse, or the strikyng of his foote, and not abide any thyng that a foole dooeth, or a noughtie disposed fellowe speaketh. No man trusteth a dronkard: and yet seyng the dronkennesse of rage, and madnesse of anger, are moche more daungerous, then surfetyng with wine: he doeth foolishely that trusteth his owne witte any thinge, when he is in a rage. Good deedes should alwaies be remembred, wrong dooyng should sone be forgiuen, and sone be forgotten. It is the propertie of a God, to helpe manne. He hath receiued a good tourne by giuyng, that hath bestowed his liberalitie vpon a worthie man. He giueth twise, that giueth sone and chearfully. God loueth the glad giuer. It is a poinct of liberalitie, somtime to lose a good turne. He that giueth to him, that will euill vse it, giueth no good thing, but an euill thing. Nothyng is more safelie laied vp, then is that, whiche is bestowed vpon good folke. Be not afraied to sowe good fruicte. Nothyng is better giuen to Christe, then is that, whiche is giuen to the poore. No one man is borne for himself. He is vnworthie to haue, that hath onely for hymself. The third kinde of Amplifiyng is, when we gather soche sentences as are commonly spoken, or els vse to speake of soche thinges, as are notable in this life. Of the first, these 321 maie be examples. In lamentyng the miserie of wardshippes, I might saie it is not for nought so commonly saied: I will handle you like a warde. She is a steppe mother to me: that is to saie, she is not a naturalle mother: who is worsse shodde, then the Shoomakers wife? That is to saie: gentilmennes children, full oft are kept but meanlie. Trotte sire, and trotte damme, how should the fole amble, that is, when bothe father and mother were nought, it is not like that the childe will proue good, without an especiall grace of God. Likeryshe of tongue, lighte of taile: that is, he or she that will fare dainetelye, wil ofte liue full wantonlie. Sone rype sone rotten. Honoure chaungeth maners. Enoughe is as good as a feaste. It is an euill Cooke that can not licke his owne fingers. I wil soner truste mine eye, then myne eare. But what nede I heape all these together, seynge Heywodes Prouerbes are in printe, where plentye are to be hadde: whose paines in that behalfe, are worthie immortal praise. 322 this: To se a man of an.C. yeres of age. A yong child as sober as a man of.L. yeres. A woman that hath had xxiiij. children. A man ones worthe three or.iiij. M. pounde now not worthe a Grote. A yong man fayrer then any woman that hath had.vii. or eyght husbandes. A man able to drawe a yarde in his bowe besides the feathers. A man merie nowe, and deade wythin halfe an houre after. There is none of all these, but serue muche to make our talke appere vehemente, and encrease the weight of communication. As for example. If one would perswade an olde manne to contemne the vanities of this worlde, he might vse the examples of sodayne death, and shewe that children haue dyed in their mothers lappe, some in their cradell, some striplinges, some elder, & that not one emong a.M. cometh to. lx. yeres. Or bee it that some lyue an hundred yeares, beyonde the which not one in this last age passeth, what is there in this lyfe, for the whiche anye manne shoulde desire to liue long, seyng that olde age bringeth this onely commoditie with it, that by longe liuing, we se many thynges, that wee would not see, and that manye a manne hath shortened his life, for wearines of this wretched worlde. Or what thoughe some pleasures are to be hadde in this life, what are they all to the pleasures of the life to come? Likewise in speaking of euill happe, I might bryng him in that was ones worthe three thousande pounde, and is not nowe worthe three grotes, and perswade menne either to set lyghte by riches, or elles, to comforte theim, and perswade them not to take thought, seyng great harmes haue happened to other heretofore, and tyme maie come when GOD will sende better. These sentences aboue reharsed, being largely amplified, encrease muche any suche kinde of matter. Amplification is a figure in Rhetorique, whiche consisteth moste in augmenting and diminishing of any matter, and that diuers waies. Al Amplification and diminishyng, either is taken oute of the substaunce in thinges, or ells of wordes. Oute of the substaunce and matter, affections are deriued: oute of wordes, such kindes of amplificatio, as I will nowe shew, and partly haue shewed before, when I spake of the conclusion, or lappynge vp of anye matter. The firste kinde of amplification is, when by chaunging a woorde, in augmentynge wee vse a greater, but in dimishynge, we vse a lesse. Of the firste, this may be an example. When I see one sore beaten, to saye he is slayne: to call a naughtye felowe, thiefe, or hangemanne, when he is not knowen to be anye suche. To call a womanne that hathe made a scape, a commune harlot: to call an Alehouse haunter, a dronkarde: to call one that is troubled with choler, and often angry, a madde manne: to call a pleasaunte ientilman, a raylynge iester: to call a couetous man, a deuill. beaten his felowe, for the same manne to saye that he hathe scant touched him: When one hath sore wounded another, to saye that he hurt him but a little: when one is sore sicke, to be saide he is a little crased. In like maner also, when we geue vices, the nanes of vertue, as when I call him that is a cruell or mercilesse man, some what sore in iudgement. When I call a naturall foole, a plaine symple man: when I call a notable flatterer, a faire spoken manne: a glutton, a good felowe at hys table: a spende all, a liberall ientilman, a snudge, or pynche penie, a good husbande, a thriftye man. they seme muche greater, if by correction the sentence be vtterde, and greater wordes compared with them, for whome they are vtterde. In the whiche kinde of speache, we shall seme as thoughe wee wente vp by stayres, not onelie to the toppe of a thinge, but also aboue the toppe. There is an example hereof in the seueth action that Tullie made against Verres. It is an offence to bynde a Citezen of Rome with chaines, it is an hainous deede to whip him: it is worse then manslaughter to kill hym: what shall I call it, to hang him vp vpon a Gibet? If one would commende the aucthoritie, whiche he alledgeth, he might saie thus. These wordes are no fables vtterde emong men, but an assured truth left vnto vs by writyng, and yet not by any common writyng, but by soche as all the worlde hath confirmed and agreed vpon, that it is autentique, and Canonicall: neither are thei the wordes of one, that is of the common sorte, but thei are the woordes of a Doctour in the churche of God, and yet not the wordes of a deuine, or doctour of the common sort, but of an Apostle: and yet not of one that is the worste, but of Paule, that is the beste of all other: and yet not Paules, but rather the woordes of the holy Ghoste, speakyng by the mouthe of Paule. He that loueth to enlarge by this kinde, must marke well the circumstaunces of thinges, and heaping them altogether, he shall with ease espie, how one thing riseth aboue an other. And bicause the vse hereof extendeth largelie, I will largely vse examples. As thus. If a gentleman and officer of the kynges, beyng ouer charged at Supper, with ouermoche drinke, and surfetyng with gorge vppon gorge, should vomite the nexte daie in the Parliamente house: I might enueigh thus: O shamefull deede, not onely in sight to be lothed, but also odious of all men to be heard. If thou haddest doen this deede at thine owne house, beyng at Supper with thy wife and childre, who would not haue thought it a filthie deede? But now for thee to doe it in the Parliament house, emong so many gentilmen, and soche, yea, the best in all Englande: beyng bothe an officer of the kynges, and a man of moche aucthoritie, & there to caste out gobbets (where belching wer thought great shame) yea, & soche gobbettes, as none could abide the smell, & to fil the whole house with euil sauor, & thy whole bosome with moche filthinesse, what an abhominable shame is it, aboue al other? it had ben a foule dede of it self, to vomite wher no soche gentilme wer: yea, where no ietilmen wer: yea, wher no Englishmen wer: yea, where no men were: yea, where no companie were at all: or it had been euill, if he had borne no maner of office, or had been no publique officer, or had not been the kynges officer: but beyng not onely an officer, but a publique officer, and that the kynges officer: yea, and soche a kynges, and doyng soche a deede: I can not tell in the worlde, what to saie to hym. Diuers examples maie be inuented, like vnto this. As thus, against an hedde officer, in a noble mannes house, I might enueigh thus. Now Lorde, what a manne is he, he was not ashamed being a gentilman, yea, a man of good yeres, and moche aucthoritie, and the hedde officer in a Dukes hous, to plaie at dice in an alehouse with boies, baudes, and verlets. It had been a great fault, to plaie at so vile a game, emong soche vile persones, being no getilman, being no officer, being not of soche yeres: but being both a man of faire landes, of an aunciet hous, of great aucthoritie, an officer to a duke, yea, & to soche a duke, and a man of soche yeres, that his white heeres should warne hym, to auoide all soche folie, to plaie at soche a game, with soche roisters, and soche verlets, yea, and that in soche a hous, as none come thether but thieues, Baudes, and Ruffians: now before God, I can not speake shame enough of him. There is an other kind of Amplificacion, when vnto the higheste, there is added some thing higher then it is. As thus. There is not a better preacher emong theim all, excepte Hugh Latimer, the father of all preachers. There is no better Latine man within Englande, except Gualter Haddon the Lawier. Again, we amplifie a matter, not ascending by degrees, but speakyng that thing onely, then the whiche no greater thing can be spoken. As thus. Thou hast killed thyne owne mother, what shall I saie more, thou hast killed thine owne mother. Thou hast deceiued thy soueraine lorde and king, what shall I saie more, thou haste deceiued thy Soueraine Lorde and King. Somtime we amplifie by comparing, & take our ground vpon the weakest and leaste, the whiche if thei seme greate, then must that nedes appere greate, whiche we would amplifie & increase. As Tullie against Catiline. My seruauntes in good soth, if thei feared me in soche sort, as all the citezes doe feare thee: I would thinke it beste for me, to forsake my hous. Thus by vsing the lesse first, this sentence is increased, fewe seruauntes are compared with all the Citezeins, bondmen are compared with free menne: Tullie the Maister, is compared with Catiline the Traitour, whiche was neither lord nor ruler ouer the Citezens: and Tullies house is compared with the Cytye. By comparing of examples, we vse also to encrease oure matter. As thus Did the Maior of London thrust throughe Iacke Straw beinge but a verlet rebell, and onely disquietinge the Citye: and shall the kinge suffer Capitayne Kete to liue in Englandes ground, and enioye the fruites of his realme, beinge a moste tyrannous traytoure, and suche a rebell as sought to ouerthrow the whole Realme? Here is Iacke Stawe compared with Capitaine Kete, the Citye of London, with the whole Realme, the Maior with the kinge. So that if he which is a priuate person, and hath no power of deathe, mighte punishe wyth deathe the disquietynge of a Citye: the kynge him selfe hauyng all power in his hande, maye iustelye punishe hym that seketh to ouerthrowe his whole realme. The places of Logique helpe ofte for Amplification. As, where men haue a wronge opinio, and thynke theft a greater faulte then slaunder, one myght proue the contrarye as well by circumstances, as by argumentes. And firste he might shew that slaunder is thefte, and that euerie slaunderer 325 is a thiefe. For as well the slaunderer as the thiefe, doe take away an other mannes possession againste the owners will. After that he migthe shewe that a slaunderer is worse then anye thiefe, because a good name is better then all the goodes in the worlde, and that the losse of money maye be recouered, but the losse of a mannes good name, can not be called backe againe, and a theife may restore that againe, whiche he hath taken awaye, but a slaunderer can not geue a man his good name againe, which he hath taken fro him. Againe, he that stealeth goodes or cattell, robbes onely but one man, but an euill tongued man infectethe all their mindes: vnto whose eares this reporte shall come. Besides this there are lawes and remedies to subdue theues: but there is no lawe againste an euyll tongue. Againe, all suche haynous Offences are euer the more greuouslye punished, the more closlie, and more craftelye they are committed. As it is thought a greater faulte to kyll one with poyson, then to kyll him with the swarde, & a more haynous offence to commit murder, then to commit manslaughter: we maye gather an argument also from the instrument or maner of doing. As a thiefe hath done this offence with his hande, a slaunderer hath done it with his tongue. Againe, by the iudgement of all menne, enchauntement is a notable euill: But they that infecte a prynce or a kinge wyth wycked counsayle, are not they more wycked enchaunters, considerynge they dooe as muche, as if one shoulde Poyson a conduite head, or a riuer from whence all men featche their water. And yet they do more, for it is a greater fault to poison the mynde, than the bodie. Thus by the places and circumstaunces, great matter might be made. By contraries set together, thynges oftentymes appere greater. As if one shoulde set Lukes Ueluet against Geane veluet, the Lukes will appere better, and the Geane will seeme worser. Or sette a faire woman against a foule, and she shal seeme muche the fairer, and the other much the fouler. According whereunto there is a saiyng in Logique: Contraria inter se opposita magis clucescunt. That is to saye, Contaries being set, the one against the other, appere more euident. Therefore if any one be disposed to set furthe chastitie, he may bryng in, of the contrarie parte, whordome, & shewe what a fouly offence it is to liue so vnclenly, and then the deformitie of whoredome shal muche set forthe chastitie: or if one be disposed to perswade his felowe to learning and knowledge, he may showe of the contrarie what a naked wretche, man is, yea how much a man is no man, & the life no life, whe learnyng ones wateth. The like helpe we may haue by comparynge like examples together, either of creatures liuyng, or of thyngs not liuyng: As in speaking of constauncie, to showe the Sone who euer kepeth one course: in speaknig of incostancie to showe the Mone which kepeth no certaine course. Againe, in younge Storkes wee may take 326 olde, and not able for her crooked bill to picke meate, the youngones feed her. In younge Uipers there is a contrary example (for as Plinie saieth) they eate out their dammes wombe, and so come forth. In Henes there is a care to bring vp their chickens, in Egles the contrarie, whiche caste out their egges if they haue any mo then thre: and all because thei woulde not be troubled with bryngyng vp of many. There is also a notable kinde of amplificacion, when we would extenuate and make lesse, greate faultes, whiche before wee did largely increase: to the ende that other faultes might seme the greatest aboue all other. As if one had robbed his Maister, thrust his felowe through the arme, accompaned with harlottes, kept the Tauerne till he had been as dronke as a Ratte: to saie after a large inuectiue, against al these offences. You haue heard a whole Courte rolle of ribauldrie, and yet all these are but flea bitynges, in respecte and comparison of that, whiche I shall nowe shewe you. Who doeth not looke for a marueilous greate matter, and a most hainous offence, when those faultes that ar thought moste greuous, are coumpted but flea bitynges, in respecte and comparison of that, whiche he mindeth to rehearse? In like maner, one might exhorte the people to Godlinesse, and whereas he hath set forthe, all the commodities that follow the same, as in shewyng a quiet conscience, not giltie of any greate fault, the libertie of spirit, the peace whiche we haue with God, the felowship with all the electe, for the seruaunt of Sathan, to be the sonne of God, the coumfort of the soule the greatnesse whereof, no man is able to conceiue: to saie at length, and what can be greater, what can be more excellent, or more blesfull? And yet all these are small matters, if thei bee compared with the blessed inheritaunce of the euerliuyng God, prepared for all those that liue Godlie here vpon yearth, fastenyng their whole trust vpo Christ aboue, whiche bothe is able, and will saue all those, that call vnto hym with faithe. We doe increase our cause by reasonyng the matter, and castyng our accoumpt, when either by thinges that folowe, or by thinges that go before, or els by soche thinges, as are annexed with the matter, wee giue sentence how greate the thing is. By thinges goyng before, I iudge when I se an enuious, or hastie man fight with an other as hastie, that there is like to be bloodshed. As who should saie, can enuious, or hastie menne matche together, but that thei must nedes trie ye matter with bloodsheding? Assuredly it ca not bee otherwise, but that blood muste appease their rage. Likewise seyng twoo wisemen earnestlie talkyng together, I can not otherwise iudge, but that their talke muste nedes be wittie, and concerne some weightie matter. For to what ende shoulde wyse menne ioyne, or wherfore shoulde they laye their heades together, if it were not for some earnest cause? What a shame is it for a strong man, of muche health and great manhode, to be ouercome with a cuppe of drinke. From thinges ioyned with the cause, thus. A woman hauynge her housbande emprisoned, and in daunger of death, soubdenly steppe before the Kyng and craued his pardon. Bold was that woman, whiche durste aduenture to knele before a Kyng, whose housband had so greuously offended. Though women by nature are fearful, yet in her appered a manly stomake, and a good bold harte, yea, euen in greatest daunger. By thynges that folowe, thus, al England lamet the death of Duke Henrie, and Duke Charles twoo noble brethren of the house of Suffolk. Then may we well iudge that these two ientlemen were wonderfully beloued, when they both were so lamented. There is a kynde of Amplifiyng, when in speaking of. ii. that fought together, wee praise hym muche that had the worse, because we would the other to haue more praise. Cosidering for a man to beate a boye, it wer no praise, but for a talle man to matche with an other; that were as talle as hym selfe: that were somwhat worthe. Therfore I woulde haue the Scottes wel praised, whom the Englishmen haue so often vanquished. He that praiseth muche the stronghold of Boleine, must nedes thereby praise king Henry the. viij. of England, who by martial power, wonne it, and kepte it al his lyfe tyme. Or thus. Suche a one kepes a marueilouse good house, for the worst boie in his house drynkes one and the same drynke with his master, and al one bread, yea euery one hath his meate in siluer, chamber vessels, and al are of siluer. We iudge by apparel, by armour, or by harnes what a man is of stature, or biggenes. We iudge by occasion, the goodnes of men, as when thei might haue doen harme, thei would not, when thei might haue slaine, thei sought rather to saue. From the place where one is, encrease maye bee gatherd As thus. Beyng euen in the Court, he was neuer moued to gammyng, beyng at Rome, he hated harlottes, where there is by reporte so great plentie, as there are starres in the element. the lawes of our Realme, that hath been a student this thirtie winter From the age: assuredly, he is like to bee good, for beyng but a childe he was euer moste godlie. From the state of lyfe: no doubt but he is honest, for beyng but a seruaunt he lyued so vprightely, as none coulde iustly blame his lyfe. From the hardenesse of a thing. That whiche is almoste onely proper to Angels must nedes be harde for man: there fore chastitie is a rare gifte, and harde for man to kepe. From the strangenesse of a thing. Eloquence must nedes bee a wonderfull thyng, when so fewe haue attained it. Lykewise notable aduentures doen by a fewe, are more praise worthy than such as haue been done by a great nomber. Therfore ye battail of Muskelborowe against the Scottes, where so fewe Englishemen were slaine, and so many Scottes dispatched: must nedes be more praise worthie, than if the nomber of Englishment had been greater. Uehemencie of woordes full often helpe the matter forwardes, when more is gatherde by cogitacion, than if the thyng had been spoken in plaine woordes. When we heare one say suche a ma swelled seyng a thing against his mynd, we gather that he was then, more than half angrie. Againe when wee heare one saie, suche a woma spittes fier, we gather streight that she is a Deuill. The Preacher thunderde in the Pulpite, belyke then he was metely hoote. But concernyng all suche speaches, the knowledge of a Metaphore, shall bryng men to muche knowlege, (wherof I wil speake hereafter emonge the figures (and therefore I surcease to speake of it in this place. We encrease our cause by heaping of words and sentences together, couching many reasons into one corner, which before were scaterde abrode, to thetent that our talke might appere more vehement. As when by many coniectures and great presumptions we gather that one is an offendor, heapyng them al into one plumpe, which before were sparpled 328 abrode, and therefore did but litle good. As thus: To proue by coiectures a murder comitted, I might thus say against a suspected person. My Lordes do not weye my wordes and sentences seuerally, but consider them all altogether. If the acused persone here shall receiue profite by this other mannes death, if his life heretofore hath euer been euil, his nature couetouse, his wealthe moste slender, and that this dead mans gooddes could turne to no mans auaile so much as vnto this accused person, and that no man could so easely dispatche him, and that this man could by no better meanes compasse his desier, and that nothyng hath been vnattempted whiche might further his naughtie purpose, & nothyng dooen that was thought needelesse, and seeyng a mete place was chefely sought for, and occasion serued very well, & the tyme was most apt for suche an attempte, and many means heretofore deuised to compasse this offence, and greate hope bothe to kepe it close, and also to dispatche it, and besydes that, seeyng this man was seen alone a litle before in the same place, where this other man was slaine, and that this mannes voice, whiche did slae him was hard a little before in the same place, where this other man was slaine, and seyng it is well knowne that this manne came home late the same night, and the nexte daie after beyng examined, did answer confusedlie, fearefullie, and as though he were amased, and seeyng all these thinges are partely showed by wittenesses, partely by good reason, partely by his owne confession, and partely by the reporte that comonly goeth of hym, whiche by lyke is not spoken without some ground: It shalbe your partes worthie iudges, wayng al these thinges together, to geue certaine iudgement of hym for this offence, and not to thinke it a matter of susspicion. For it might haue been that thre of foure of these coniectures beyng proued, might geue but onely a cause of susspicion, but whereas all these together are plainly proued by hym, it can not bee otherwise but that he hath offended. It is an excellent kynde af Amplifiyng when thinges encreased, and thynges diminished are bothe set together, that the one may the rather beautifie the other. As if, when Gods goodnesse towardes vs wer largely amplified, we did streight extenuate our vnthanfulnesse towards him again. As thus: Seyng God hath made manne a creature vnto his owne likenesse, seeyng he hath geuen hym lyfe and the spirite of vnderstandyng, endewyng hym with his manifolde graces, and redemyng hym not with vile money, but with his owne preciouse bodie, sufferynge deathe, and blodesheddyng vpon the Crosse, the rather that man might lyue for euer: what an vnthankefull parte is it, yea, what an hainouse thinge is it for man so ofte to offende, so ofte to wallowe in suche his wickednesse, and euermore for Goddes louyng kyndnesse, to showe hym selfe of all other creatures most vnkynde. Lykewise contraries beyng rehersed, and the euil immediatly vtterde after the good, make muche for encrease. As many men now a dayes for sobriete, folowe glouttonie, for chastitie, take leachery, for truthe, lyke falsehode, for ientlenesse, seeke crueltie, for iustice, vse wrong dealyng, for heauen, hell, for God, the Deuill: to whome they will without peraduenture, if Goddes grace be not greater. Because the beautie of Amplifiyng, standeth moste in apte mouyng of affections: It is needefull to speake 329 some what in this behaulfe, that the better it may be knowne what they are, and howe they maie bee vsed. Affections therefore (called Passions) are none other thyng, but a stirryng or forcyng of the mynde, either to desier, or ells to detest, and lothe any thing, more vehemently then by nature wee are commonly wonte to doe. We desier those thynges, we loue them, and lyke them earnestly, that appere in our iudgemet to be goodlie, we hate and abhore those thinges, that seeme naughte, vngodlye, or harmefull vnto vs. Neither onely are wee moued with those thynges which we thinke either hurtful, or profitable for our selues but also we reioyce, we sory, or we pity an other mans hap. And euermore there are twoo thinges, whiche moue vs, either this waie, or that waie. The matter selfe which doth happen, or is lyke to happen: and the persone also whom the matter doeth concerne. As for example: If a wicked wretche haue his desertes, we are al glad to heare it, but if an innocent shoulde be cast away, we thynke muche of it, and in stomake repine against wrog iudgement. If an euil man finde muche fauour, we enuie his good happe, yea, it greueth vs, that any suche shoulde haue suche fauour showed: And not onely doe we hate the euil, that are come to any wealth, but also we enuie commonly all suche as come to any preferrement, especially if either they haue been as poore men as we are, or elles came of a meaner house then we haue done No one man woulde haue any to be better than hym selfe, and euery one enhableth his owne goodnes, to deserue lyke dignitie with the best. And wheras some haue gotte before, startyng soubdeinly from an inche to an elle, we spare not to saye that flatterye made theim spede, and thoughe they haue muche gooddes, yet are they cleare voide of all goodnes, and therfore muche good maye it do theim, we woulde not come by gooddes in suche sorte to wynne all the worlde. for the Deuill and they (saye wee) shall parte stakes with theim one daie. And thus wee can neuer be content to geue our neighbour a good woorde. Yea, thoughe they haue serued right well, and deserued a greate rewarde, wee muste needes finde some faulte with theim to lessen their praises, and saye that though their desertes bee greate, yet their natures are nought: none so proude, thoughe fewe bee so hardy, none so enuiouse, though fewe so faithfull: none so couetouse, though fewe so liberall: none so glutonouse, though fewe kepe suche an house. And thus, thoughe wee graunt them one thyng, yet we will take another thinge as fast againe from them. speake the tongues well, he plaies of instruments few men better, he feyneth to the Lute merueillouse swetely, he endites excellently, but for all this (the more is the pitie) he hathe his faultes, he will bee dronke ones a daye, he loues women well, he will spende Godds coope if he had it, he wil not tarye longe in one place, and he is some what large of his tongue. That if these faultes were not surely, he were an excellent fellowe. Euen as one shoulde saye: If it were not for liyng and stealynge, there wer not an honester man than suche a one is that perchaunce hathe somme one good qualitie to set hym forwarde. These buttes bee to brode, and these barres be ouer bigge, for looke what is geuen to one by commendynge, the same is streight taken away by buttynge. Therfore suche are not to bee lyked that geue a man a shoulder of mutton, and breake his heade with the spitte when thei haue doen. And yet this is many a mans nature, especially where euuie hath any grounded dwelling place, whose propertie is alwaies to speake nothyng of other, without reproche and slaunder. In mouyng affections, and stirring the iudges to be greued, the weight of the matter must be so set forth, as though they saw it plaine before their iyes, the report must be suche and thoffence made so hainouse, that the like hath not been 331 seene heretofore, and al the circustances must thus be heaped  together: The naughtines of his nature that dyd the deed, the cruell ordering, the wicked dealing, and maliciouse handelyng, the time, the place, the maner of his doyng, and the wickednes of his wil to haue doen more. The man that susteined the wrong, how litle he deserued, how wel he was estemed emong his neighbours, howe small cause he gaue hym, how great lacke men haue of hym. Now, if this be not reformed, no good ma shal liue saufe, the wicked will ouerflowe al the world, & best it wer for saue garde to be nought also, and to toke parte with them, for no good man shal goe quiet for them, if there be not spedie redresse found, and this faulte punished to thexample of all other. Quintilian coucheth together in these fewe wordes, the full heape of suche an heanouse matter, by gatheryng it vp after this sorte. ------ 332 slain, we are muche more troubled. Again if a slaue or ruffine shall do suche a dede 333 we are displeased, but if an officer, a preacher, or an hed ientleman should vse any slauerie, wee are muche more agreued. Yea, or if a very notable euill man, commit suche an horrible offence, we thynke hym worthy to haue the lesse 334 fauor. If a sturdy felowe be stroken, we are not so muche disquieted, as if a child, a woman, an aged man, a good man, or 335 vpon a propensed minde, and wilfully, we make muche more a do, then if it wer doen by chauce medly. If it be doen 336 vpon an holy daie, or ells vpon the daie of Assise, or vpon the daie of a kinges coronacion, or about such a solempne time, or if it bee doen in the nighte, rather then at Noone daies, we make the matter greater, then if it had been dooen at another tyme. In the courte if one strike a man, it is thought 337 greater then if he should strike hym in the open streat. The maner of dooing also, doeth much moue the pacience of men as if one should cowardly kill one, and strike hym sodainly, 338 he wer worthy greater blame, then if he should manfully set vpon hym: or if one kill his felowe secretly with a gunne, he wer worthy more hatred, then if he killed him with a sword or if he wounded hym sore, or cruely mangeled him, we crie out much more, then if he had barely killed hym. And last of al, if his wil had been to haue doen muche more then he did: 339 we encrease our anger againste his rage muche more, then euer we would els haue doen. Now in mouyng pitee, and stirring menne to mercie, the wrong doen must first be plainly told: or if the Iudges haue susteined the like extremitee, the best wer to will them to remebre their awn state, how thei haue ben abused in like maner, what wronges thei haue suffered by wicked doers: that by hearyng their awn, thei maie ye better hearken to others. Again, whereas al other miseries, that befall vnto man, ar greuous to the eare, there is nothing more hainous, then to hear that the most honest men, are sonest ouerthrowen by them that are moste wicked, & vertue put to flight, through the onely might of vice. That if the like hath not happened, vnto the hearers of this cause, yet it wer mete to shew them that the like maie happe, and so require them to geue iudgement in this cause, as thei would doo in their awne, and remember that harme maie chauce to euery one, that perhappes chaunceth to any one. And no doubt euery man remembryng hymself, and his awne case, wil loke wel about him, and geue iudgement, accordyng to right. Neither can any good be doen at all, when we haue saied al that euer we can, excepte we bryng the same affeccions in our awne harte, the whiche wee would the Iudges shoulde 340 of any hainous acte, either in stomaking the naughtinesse of the dede, or in bewailing the miserable misfortune of the thing, or in fearing muche, the like euill here after: excepte the Oratour hymself vtter suche passions outwardly, and from his harte fetche his complaintes, in suche sort, that the matter maie appere, both more greuous to the eare, & therwith so heinous, that it requirs earnestly a spedy reformacion? There is no substaunce of it self, that wil take fire, excepte ye put fire to it. Likewise no mannes nature is so apt, streight to be heated, except the Orator him self, be on 341 fire, and bring his heate with him. It is a common saiyng, nothing kyndeleth soner then fire. And therefore a fierie stomack, causeth euermore a fierie togue. And he that is heated with zeale and godlinesse, shall set other on fire with like affeccio. No one man can better enueigh against vice, then he can do whiche hateth vice with al his harte. Again nothyng moisteth soner then water. Therefore a wepyng iye causeth 342 muche moysture, and prouoketh teares. Neither is it any meruaile: for suche men bothe in their coutenauce, tongue, iyes, gesture, and in al their body ells, declare an outwarde grief, and with wordes so vehemetly and vnfeinedly, settes it forward, that they will force a man to be sory with them, and take part with their teares, euen against his will. Notwithstanding, when suche affeccios are noued, it wer good not to stande log in them. For though a vehemet talke maie moue teares, yet no arte can long hold them. For as Cicero doth saie, nothing drieth soner, the tears, especially whe we lamet another mans cause, & be sory with him for his sake. But now that I haue taught men to bee sory, I will attempt again to make them mery, and shewe what learned men saie concerning laughter, in delityng the hearers whe tyme and place shall best require. 343 attetiue to heare, nor yet stirred to like or alow, any tale long told, except it be refreshed, or finde some swete delite: the learned haue by witte. & labor deuised muche varietee. Therefore sometymes in tellyng a weightie matter, thei bring in some heauie tale, and moue theim to be right sorie, whereby the hearers are more attentiue. But after when thei are weried, either with tediousnesse of the matter, or heauinesse of the report: some pleasaunt matter is inuented, bothe to quicken them again, and also to kepe them fro sacietie. But surely fewe there be, that haue this gift in due time to chere men. Neither can any doe it, who nature hath not framed, & giuen an aptnes therunto. Some mannes countenaunce will make pastime, though he speake neuer a woorde. Yea, a foolishe woorde vttered by an apt man, or a gesture straungely vsed by some pleasaunt bodie, settes men full oft vpon a laughter. And whereas some thinke it a trifle, to haue this gifte, and so easie, that euery varlet or common iesture is able to matche with the best: yet it appereth that thei, whiche vtterly can be pleasaunte, and when time serueth, can giue a merie answere, or vse a nipning taunt, shalbe able to abashe a right worthie man, and make him at his wittes ende, through the sodain quip, & vnloked frump giuen. I haue knowen some so hit of the thumbes, that thei could not tell in the worlde, whether it were best to fight, chide, or to go their waie. And no marueile: for where the iest is aptly applied, the hearers laugh immediatly, & who would gladly be laughed to scorne? Some can pretely by a worde spoken, take occasio to be right mery. Other can iest at large, and tell a roud tale pleasantly, though thei haue none occasion at that time giuen. But assuredly that mirthe is more worthe, whiche is moued by a worde newlie spoken, then if a long tale should pleasantly be told. For as moche as bothe it cometh vnlooked for, and also declares a quickenesse of witte, worthy comnendacion. There are fiue thinges, whiche Tullie noteth, concerning pleasant talke. ------ Now to tell you in plain wordes, what laughter is, how it stirreth and occupieth the whole bodie, how it altereth the countenaunce, and sodainly brasteth out, that wee can not kepe it in: Let some mery man on Goddes name, take thys matter in hande. For it passeth my cunnyng, and I thinke euen thei that can best moue laughter, would rather laugh merily when suche a question is put furthe, then geue aunswere earnestly, what, and how laughter is in deede. The occasion of laughter, and the meane that maketh vs merie (whiche is the second obseruacion) is the fondnes, the filthines, the deformitee, and all suche euill behauior, as we se to bee in other. For wee laugh alwaies at those thynges, whiche either onely or chiefly touche handsomely, and wittely some especial fault, or fonde behauior in some one body or some one thing. Sometymes we iest at a mans body that is not well proporcioned, and laugh at his countenaunce, if either it be not comely by nature, or els he through foly, can not wel set it. For if his talke be fond a mery man can want no matter to hit him home, ye maie be assured. Some iest is made, when it toucheth no man at al, neither the demunder neither the staders by, nor yet any other, and yet deliteth as muche the hearers, as any the other can do. Now when we would abashe a man, for some woordes that he hath spoken, and can take none aduauntage of his person, or makyng of his body, wee either doulte hym at the firste, and make hym beleue, that he is no wiser then a Goose: or els wee confute wholy his saiynges, with some pleasant iest, or els we extenuate and diminish his doynges, by some pretie meanes, or els we cast the like in his dishe, and with some other deuise, dashe hym out of countenance: or last of al, we laugh him to skorne out right, & sometymes speake almost neuer a worde 344 make sport, either the delit is vttered by coutenaunce, or by poynctyng to some thynge, or ells shewed at large by some tale, or els occasio taken by some word spoke. The. iij. question is, whether it stadeth with an Orators professio, to delite the hearers with plasaunt reportes, and wittie saiynges, or no. Assuredly it behoueth a ma, that must talke muche, euermore to haue regard to his audience, & not onely to speake so much as is nedefull, but also to speake no longer then thei be willing to heare Eue in this our tyme, 345 with chearefulnesse. Yea, the preachers of God, mynd so muche edefiyng of soules, that thei often forget, we haue any bodies. And therefore, some doo not so much good with telling the truthe, as thei doe harme with dullyng the hearers, beyng so farre gone in their matters, that oftentymes thei cannot tell when to make an ende. Plato therfore, 346 the father of learnyng, and the well of all wisedome, when he hard Antisthenes make suche a long oracio that he starke weried all his hearers, phy for shame man ([quoth] he) doest thou not knowe, that the measuryng of an oratio, standeth not in the speaker, but in the hearers. But some perhapps wil saie vnto me pascite quantum in vobis est, to whom I aunswere, 347 estote prudentes. And now bicause our senses be suche, that 348 in hearyng a right wholsome matter, wee either fall a slepe, whe we should most harken, or els are weried with stil hearyng one thyng, without any change, & thinke that the best part of his tale, resteth in making an ende: the wittie & learned haue vsed deliteful saiynges, and quicke sentences euer emong their weighti causes, cosidering that not onely good wil is got therby (for what is he that loueth not mirth?) but also men wounder at suche a head, as hath mennes harts at his comaundement, beyng able to make theim merie when he list, and that by one word speakyng, either in answering some thyng spoken before, or els oftentymes, in geuyng the onset, beyng not prouoked thereunto. Again, we se that men are full oft abashed, and putte out of countenaunce, by suche tauntynge meanes, and those that haue so doen, are compted to be fine men, and pleasaunt felowes, suche, as fewe dare set foote with them. Thus knowyng, that to moue sporte, is lawfull for an orator, or any one that shal talke, in any open assembly: good it were to knowe, what compasse he should kepe that should thus be merie. For feare he take to much groud, and go beyonde his boundes. Therfore, no such should be taunted, or 349 iested with all, that either are notable euill liuers, and heinous offendours: or ells are pitifull caitifes, and wretched beggers. For euery one thinketh it a better & a meter deede, to punishe noughtie packes, then to skoffe at their euill demeanour: and as for wretched soules, or poore bodies, none can beare to haue them mocked, but thinke rather, that thei should bee pitied, excep thei foolishely vaunte thenselues. Againe, none soche should bee made any laughyng stockes, that either are honest of behauiour, or els are generally wel beloued. As for other, we maie be bolde to talke with them, and make soche game and pastime, as their good wittes shal giue good cause. But yet this one thing, we had neede euer to take with vs, that in al our iesting we kepe a mean, wherin not onely it is mete to auoide al grosse bourding, and alehouse iesting, but also to eschue all foolishe talke, and ruffin maners, soche as no honest eares can ones abide, nor yet any wittie man can like well, or allowe. 350 taking occasion of some one woorde. The matter is told pleasantly, when some mannes nature (whereof the tale is tolde) is so set forthe, his countenaunce so counterfeicted, and all his iesture so resembled, that the hearers might iudge ye thing, to be then liuely doen, euen as though he wer there, whereof the tale was told. Some can so liuely set forthe an other mannes nature, and with soche grace report a tale: that fewe shall be able to forbeare laughter, whiche knowe bothe parties, though thei would the contrary neuer so faine. Now in counterfeicting after this sort, if soche moderacion be not vsed, that the hearer maie iudge more by himself, then the pleasaunt disposed man is willing fullie to set forthe: it will not bee well liked. For he that excedeth & telleth all: yea, more then is nedefull without all respect, or consideracion had: the same shalbe taken for a common iester, soche as knowe not how to make an ende, whe thei ones begin, being better acquainted with bible bable, then knowing the fruicte of wisedomes lore. 351 one worde, or of some one sentence. But euen as in reporting a tale, or counterfeicting a manne, to moche is euer naught: So scurrilitie or (to speake in olde plaine Englishe) knauerie in iesting, would not be vsed, where honestie is estemed. Therefore though there be some witte, in a pretie deuised ieste: yet wee ought to take heede, that wee touche not those, whom we would be moste loth to offende. And yet some had as leue lose their life, as not bestowe their conceiued iest, and oftentimes thei haue, as thei desire. But shall I saie of soche wilfull men, as a Spaniarde spake of an earnest Gospeller, that for woordes spoken against an Ecclesiasticall lawe, suffered death in Smithfield? Ah miser, non potuit tacere  & viuere? Ah wretche that he was, could he not liue, and holde his peace. Again, to ieste when occasion is giuen, or when the ieste maie touche all men: it is thought to be against all good maner. Therefore the consideracion of tyme, and moderacion 352 of pastyme, and seldome vsing of drie mockes, euen when neede moste requireth, make a difference, and shewe a seuerall vnderstandyng, betwixte a common iester, and a pleasaunt wise man. Nowe the tyme requireth, to shewe what kindes there are of mouyng laughter, and making the harte to be merie: notwithstandyng, this would first be learned, that out of diuers pleasaunte speaches, aunciente saiynges also maie bee gathered. As for example, wee maie by one woorde, bothe praise a faithfull seruaunt and if he be naught, we maie also ieste of hym, and dispraise him. Accordyng to that merie saiyng of Nero, vpon his man that was light fingered. I haue one at home ([quoth] he) emong all other, to whom there is no cofer lockt, nor doore shutte in all my hous, meanyng that he was a picklocke, and a false verlette, and yet these woordes might haue been spoken of a faithfull seruaunt. 353 make them a cleane contrarie, as though we would not seme to vnderstande, what thei would haue. As when one commyng from a faire, and beyng asked in good sadnesse of an other, how horses wente there. Murie [quoth] he, some trotte, and some amble. And thus being deceiued of our looking (for who would haue lookt for soche an aunswere?) We are oft delited with our owne errour. Again, one Pontidius beyng sore greued, that an other man had committed aduoutrie, came to a frende of his, and saied sadly: Ah lorde, what thinke you sir of him, that was taken in bedde of late, with an other mannes wife? Marie [quoth] the other, I thinke him to be a verie sluggarde. Pontidius hearyng him saie so, was abashed at the straungenesse of his aunswere, and lookeyng for no soche thyng, was driuen to laugh at his owne errour, although before, he was moche greeued, with the aduousterers moste wicked deede. One beeyng sore greued, with the euill behauiour of a certain ientleman, spake his pleasure largelie against him, whereupon an other merie manne, dissemblyng to take his part, saied he was an honester manne then so. Yea ([quoth] the other) what one thing hath he, whereby to proue hymself honest at all? Marie ([illeg.] the man) he hath the kynges Pardone, and what saie you to that? 354 a riche man, when he liste: for a poore man when he can. A noble man, that whilome kept a chapell, being disposed to serue God, went to his closette deuoutlie, and made hym self redy to praie, wherupon one came doune in hast, & saied to the Chaunter, you must begin sir. The Chaunter beyng a merie man, answered thus, as though he wer angrie. Begin [quoth] he? I will begin with non, except thei begin with me. And so made the whole Quier, that then was redy for synging, to fall streight a laughing. The whiche is all one, for sing we, or laugh we, what maketh matter, so we be merie? An Abbate in Italie, beyng grosse of his bodie, and vnweldie to behold, walking out of Florence for his pleasure, and hauyng farther trauailde towardes the euenyng, then he thought hymself well able to retourne, before the gates of the citee were shutte: mette a countrie manne commyng from thense, and because it was some what late, asked hym, if he might gette in at the gates: the housbande man seeyng this fatte Abbate, lokyng for a readie answere, and lothe to lose any time, for feare he should be kept out, saied pleasautly to the deuoute religious fatte Priest: Sir, bee not afraied, for a Carte loden with Haie, maie easelie get in at any gate in Florence, and therefore you nede not to doubte, although you were as bigge againe, whereas the Abbates meanyng was, if he might come in tyme, before the gates were lockt. A frende of myne and a good fellowe, more honeste then welthie, yea, and more pleasaunt then thriftie, hauyng nede of a nagge, for his iourney that he had in hande, and beyng in the countrie, minded to goe to Partnaie faire in Lincolnshire, not farre from the place, where he then laie, and meting by the waie one of his acquaintaunce, tolde him his arrande, and asked him, how horses went at the faire. The other answered merelie; and saied, some trotte sir, and some amble, as farre as I can se. If their pases be altered, I praie you tell me at our next meetyng. And so ridde awaie, as fast as his horse could carie hym, without saiyng any woorde more, whereat he there beyng alone, fell a laughyng hartelie to hymself, and loked after a good while, vntill the other was out of sight. A gentilman hauing harde a Sermon at Poules, and beyng come home, was asked what the Preacher saied. The gentilman answered, he would first heare what his manne could saie, who then waited vpon hym, with his hatte and cloke, and called his man to hym, saied, now sir, what haue you brought from the Sermon. Forsothe good Maister, said the seruaunte, your cloke and your hatte. An honeste true dealyng seruaunte out of doubte, plaine as a packesaddell, hauing a better soule to God, though his witte was simple, then those haue that vnder the colour of hearyng, gaue the selues to priuie pickyng, and so bryng other mennes purses home in their bosomes, in the steade of other mennes Sermons. In the tyme of Pope Iulie the seconde, or Alexander the sixte, I dooe not well remember (but either of theim bothe maie serue well for this purpose, beeyng bothe warriers, as what Pope is not) it so happened that a Cardinall of Spain hauyng charge vnder the Pope, of an armie, and seeyng it necessary to trie the fortune of battaile, against the enemies of the Popes holinesse, valiauntlie encouraged those souldiours, to shewe themselues like men, assuryng to theim that would hassarde their liues, in that conflict, not onely to haue ful pardon of their sinnes, but also that thei should that mornyng, goe dine with God and his Angelles in heauen. And when he had thus saied, he withdrewe himself from the battaile. Unto whom a souldiour saied that was nigh at hand. Right reuerende father, how happeneth your grace dooeth not whitesaue to tarie with vs, that you might also go dine this mornyng, with God and his Angelles. Holde thy peace knaue, [quoth] the Cardinale, I haue no liste to eate now, it is to earelie for me, my stomacke is not yet come to me. Woordes doubtfully spoken, giue often iuste occasion of moche laughter. Ah ([illeg.] a certain man) doe you see yonder felowe, 355 and dooe you knowe hym? Yea ([quoth] the other) I knowe him very well. I shall tell you sir (saied the gentilman) there is not a manne of greater vnderstandyng within this Citee then he is. Tushe it is not so ([illeg.] he.) No? (saied the other) marke well the bought of his legge, and you shall se his vnderstandyng, worthie to bee compared with the beste, and greatest of them all. 356 awaie some part of a worde, or adding somtymes a sillable, wee make an other meanyng. As one saied that meant full vnhappelie, enueighyng against those that helde of Christes Spirituall being in the Sacramente: some ([quoth] he) will haue a Trope to be in these wordes: This is my bodie: but surely I would wishe the T. were taken awaie, and thei had that for their labour, whiche is left behinde. A Gentilman beyng handfasted to a Gentilwoman, and suer to her, as he thought: afterwardes lost her, being made faster to an other man, then euer she was to hym. Whereupon he tooke greate displeasure, and sought by Lawe to winne her, notwithstandyng she had carnallie been acquainted with the other Gentilman. A noble manne beyng earnestlie desired of hym, that had first lost her, to helpe hym to her again: I meruaile ([quoth] the noble man) what you meane to be so earnest to recouer her, whom an other man hath alreadie couerde. If I were in your case, she should go for me, and he should haue her, that hath thus before hande seased vpon her. The Gentilman discouraged vpon this answere, departed with an vnquieted minde, and thought notwithstanding to be euen with the woman, if he could tell possible how, or whiche waie. What cary you master Person ([quoth] a gentilma) to a prieste that had his woman on horsback behinde him, haue you got your male behinde you? No sir ([quoth] the priest) it is my female. 357 The interpretacion of a worde doeth oft declare a witte.  As when one hath dooen a robberie, some will saie, it is pitie, he was a handsome man, to the whiche an other made aunswere, you saie truthe sir, for he hath made these shiftes by his handes, and got his liuyng with light fingering, and therefore beyng handsome as you saie he is, I would God he were handsomelie hanged. and not his meaning. As when one had saied to an other (whose helpe he must needes haue) I am sorie sir to put you to paines: the other answered, I will ease you sir of that sorowe, for I will take no paines for you at all. The tournyng of a worde, and deniyng that wherewith we are charged, and answeryng a moche worsse, dooeth often moue the hearer. There was one Bassus (as Quintilia 359 doeth tell) whiche seyng a Ladie called Domitia, to be verie nigh her self, spake his pleasure of her. Wherupon she being greued, charged hym with these wordes, that he should saie she was soche a pinche penie, as would sell her olde showes for money, wherupo he answered: no forsoth madame ([quoth] he) 360 I saied not so, but these were my wordes, I said you bought old showes, soche as you could get beste cheape for money. The Hollanders woordes are whorthye rehearsall, who beynge a pore man (as Erasmus telleth the tale) had a cow or two goyng in the commons, wherupon it happened that an Oxe of a riche mans, who then was Maior of the towne hadde gored the pore mannes cowe, and almoste kylled her. The pore man being in this case halfe vndon, thought notwithstandyng by a wittie deuise to get right iudgement of master Maior for the losse of his cowe, if he gotte nothynge els and therefore thus he framed his tale. Sir, so it is that 361 my cowe hath gored and almoste kylled your Oxe. What hath she (quod he) by sainte Marye thou shalte pay for hym then. Nay (quod the pore man) I crye you mercye, youre Oxe hathe gored my cowe. Ah (quod the Maior) that is an other matter, we will talke of that herafter at more leasure. These wordes were spoken of purpose, but now you shal heare what an olde woman spake of simplicitie. In the dotyng worlde, when stockes were sainctes, and dumme walles spake, this olde grandamme was deuoutelye kneling vpon her knees before the ymage of our Ladye. Wherupo a merye felowe asked her what she meante to crouche & knele there. Marie (quod the olde mother) I praye to our Ladye, that she maye praye to her Sonne for me: with that he laughed at her ignoraunce. Wherupon she thinkinge that 362 her wordes were spoken amise, corrected her owne saiynge in this wise. Naye, quod she, I praye to Christe in heauen, that he will praie for me to this good Ladie here. 363 Wordes rehersed contrary to that, which was spoken, & (as a man would saie) ouerthwartly answered, do moche abashe thopponent, and delite the hearers. As when Sergius Galba being sicke, & therefore keping his hous, had appoincted certain of his frendes, to hear a matter of one Libo Scribonius, Tribune of the people, a man moche noted for his noughtie and vncleane life: this Libo saied to hym in this wise. Good Lorde, when shall wee see you sir abrode, out of your Parlour. Marie([quoth] he) when thou kepest thy self out of an other mannes Chamber, meanyng that he was ouer familiar with an other mannes wife. Thus we se how and in what maner pleasaunt sawes are gathered and vsed, vppon the occasion of diuerse wordes spoken. Alphonsus king of Naples, had a Iester in his Courte, who made a booke, and kept a reckenyng of all folies, especially soche as he thought to bee folies, of all those Gentilmenne and others, that waited in the Courte, whereat the king tooke greate pleasure oftentimes. And so it happened, that the kyng hauyng a More in his house, sente thesame manne into Leuante, with three or fower thousande pound in his purse, to buie horses in Africa. The Iester seing this acte, did put it in his booke of remembraunce, for a plain folie. Now it happened, that within a little while after, the kyng asked this Iester for his booke, bicause he had not seen it of a long tyme before. And readyng vpon his booke, wher he founde many merie madde toyes, he hitte at length vpon himself, and the More, vnto whom he had giuen three thousande pounde, to buye horses for him in Barbarie. Whereupon the kyng somewhat chaunged in colour, asked him in his anger, why he had put him in his booke after that sorte. I haue put you in my booke ([quoth] the Iester) bicause you haue plaied the verie foole, to giue the bestowing of so moche money to a straunger, whom you shall neuer see againe. And what if he come againe ([quoth] the Kyng) and bryng the horses with hym, haue I then plaied the foole? Well ([quoth] the Iester) so sone as he is come, I will then put out your name out of my booke, and put his name in your place. For then I must needes take hym to bee a more foole then you are, a greate deale. But til he come, you shalbe in my boke, God willing. comely behauour, both moch delite the hearers, and giueth good cause of greate pastyme. And this difference is betwene a ieste in a woorde, and a ieste vttered in a longe tale. That whiche is still deliteful, with what woordes soeuer you tell it, is conteined  364 his grace, by alteracion of a worde, is conteined in the nature of a worde. Thei that can liuelie tell pleasaunt tales and merie dedes doen, and set them out as well with gesture as with voice, leauyng nothyng behinde, that maie serue for beautifiyng of their matter: are moste mete for this purpose, whereof assuredlie there are but fewe. And whatsoeuer he is, that can aptlie tel his tale, and with countenaunce, voice, and gesture, so temper his reporte, that the hearers maie still take delite: hym coumpte I manne worthie to bee highlie estemed. For undoubtedlie no manne can dooe any soche thing, excepte thei haue a greate mother witte, and by experience confirmed soche their comelinesse, whereunto by nature thei were moste apt. Many a man readeth histories, heareth Fables, seeth worthie actes dooen, euen in this our age but fewe can set theim out accordinglie, and tell theim liuelie, as the matter self requireth to be tolde. The kindes of deliting in this sorte are diuers: whereof I will set forthe many, as hereafter thei shall folowe. If there bee any olde tale, or straunge historie, well and wittelie applied, to some man liuing, all menne loue to heare it of life. As if one were called Arthur, some good fellowe that were well acquainted with king Arthures booke, and the knightes of his rounde table, would want no matter to make good sporte, and for a neede, would dubbe him knight of the rounde Table, or els proue him to be one of his kinne, or els (whiche wer moche) proue him to be Arthure himself. And so likewise of other names, merie panions would make madde pastime. enough to bee right merie, or els a picture in shape like an other man, will make some to laugh right hartely. One being greued with an other man, saide in his anger, I will sette thee out in thy coloures, I will shewe what thou arte. The other being therewith muche chafede, shewe, [quoth] he, what thou canste: with that he shewed hym, (pointing with his finger) a man with a bottell nose, blobbe cheaked, and as redde as a Bouchers bowle, euen as like the other mane as anie one in all the worlde could bee. I neede not to saye that he was angrie. An other good felowe beyng merely disposed, called his acquaintaunce vnto hym and saied: Come hither I saie, and I will shewe thee as verie a lowte as euer thou saweste in all thy life before, with that he offered hym at his commynge a steele glasse to looke in. But surelye I thynke hee looked a wrie, for if I hadde been in his case, I woulde haue tolde hym that I espied a much greater lowte before I sawe the glasse. 366 In augmentyng or diminishing without all reason, wee geue good cause of muche pastyme. As Diogenes seeyng a pretie Towne, hauinge a greate paire of Gates at the comming in: Take heede [quoth] he, you menne of this Towne, least your towne runne out of your gates. That was a marueylous bigge Gate I trowe, or ells a wonderfull litle towne, where suche passage shoulde be made. A Frier disposed to tell misteries, opened to the People that the soule of manne was so litle, that a leuen thousande might daunce vpon the naile of his thumbe. One marueiling muche at that, I praie your master Frier [quoth] he, where shall the piper stande then, when suche a number shall kepe so small a roume. 367 Mirthe is moued when vpon a trifle or a worde spoken, an vnknowen matter and weightye affaire is opened. As if one shoulde finde fault with some mannes sumptuous buildinge, or other suche thinge: whiche hadde founde much fauoure at the same mannes hande: an other might saie, well sir, he that builded this house, saued your worship from hanginge when the tyme was. A necessarie note for him thakefully to remembre the builder of that house, and not slaunderiouslye to speake euill of him. 368 It is a pleasaunt dissembling when we speake one thing merelye, and thinke an other earnestlye, or elles when we prayse that which otherwise deserueth dispraise, to the shamyng of those that are taken not to be most honest. As in speakinge of one that is wel knowen to be nought, to saie emong all men that are seen to, there is one that lacketh his rewarde. He is the diligentiest felowe in hys callinge of all other, he hath traueyled in behalfe of his countrey, he hath watched daie and night to further his comune weale, and to aduaunce the dignitie therof, and shall he goe emptie home? Who stode by it at soche a felde, who played the man and cried, stoppe the thiefe, when such a man was robbed? Who seeth good rule kept in suche a place? can anye here charge him with bawdrie? Whiche of you all dare saie or can saie euer you sawe him droken, if then these be true, ought not suche to be sene to: and rewarded accordingely? For praisinge the vnworthye, I remember once that our worthy Latimer dyd set out the deuyll, for his diligence wonderfullie, and preferred hym for that purpose before all the Bishopps in England. And no doubte, the wicked be more busye and stirrynge, then the children of light be in their generation. What talke you of suche a man (saithe an other) there is an honest man ye may be assured. For if a man had neade of one, he is ready at a pynche, his body sweates for honesty, if you come to him in a hotte sommers day, you shal se his honestie in suche sort to reeke, that it would pitie any christia soule liuynge. He hath more honestie wyth hym then he neades, and therefore bothe is able and will lende, where it pleaseth hym best. Beware of hym aboue all menne that euer you knewe. He hath no fellowe, there is none suche, I thinke he wil not liue longe, he is so honest a man, the more pitye that suche good felowes shoulde knowe what deathe meaneth. But it maketh no matter, when he his gone, all the worlde will speake of hym, his name shall neuer dye, he is so well knowen vniuersallye. Thus wee maye mockingelye speake well of hym, when there is not a noughtyer fellowe wythin all Englande again, and euen as well sette out his noughtines this waie, as though wee hadde in very deede vttered all his noughtie conditions plainlie, and without iestinge. Emonge all that euer were pleasaunte in this kinde of delite, Socrates beareth the name, and maye worthelye chalenge prayse. Sir Thomas More with vs here in Englande, had an excellent gift, not onelie in this kinde, but also in all other pleasaunt delites, whose witte euen at this houre, is a wonder to all the worlde, and shalbe vndoubtedly, euen vnto the worldes ende Unto this kinde of dissembling, is nexte adioinyng a maner of speache, when we giue an honest name to an euill deede. As when I would call one accordinglie, that is of a noughtie behauour, to saie: Ah sirrha, you are a Marchaunt in deede: where as I thinke a Marchauntes name is honest. Some old felowes, when thei thinke one to be an heretique, thei will saie, he is a Gospeller. Some newe felowes, when thei thinke one a Papist, thei will call him straight a catholique, and bee euen with him at the landes ende. Contrarywise, some will giue an euill name to a good thing: As a father louyng his sonne tenderlie, and hauing no cause to bee greued with him, will sometimes saie to him: Come hether sir knaue, and the mother merelie beyng disposed, will saie to her swete sonne: Ah you little horeson, will you serue me so. Where as I thinke some women, that ofte so saie, will sweare vpon a booke thei are none soche, and almoste I had saied, I dare sweare for some of them my self, if God had not forbidden me to sweare at all. This kinde also is pretie, whe we gather an other thing by a mannes tale, then he would gladlie we should gather. 369 When Liuius Salinator a Romaine Capitaine, had kepte the Castell of Tarentum, losing the toune to Hanniball his enemie, and thet Marimus thereupon had laied siege to the same toune, and gotte it again by the sweard: then Salinator, whiche thus kept the Castell, desired him to remember, that through his meanes he gotte the toune. Why should I not ([quoth] he) thinke so? For if you had neuer loste it, I had neuer gotte it. To dissemble sometymes, as though we vnderstoode not what one meante, declareth an apte witte, and moche deliteth soche as heare it. Diogenes was asked on a tyme, what 370 wine he loued beste to drinke. Marie([quoth] he) an other mannes wine, meanyng that he loued that drincke beste, that coste hym leaste. The same Diogenes likewise was asked what one should giue hym, to let hym haue a blowe at his hedde. Marie a Helmet [quoth] he. One Octauius a Libian borne (as witnesseth Macrtobius) saied vnto Tullie, when he spake his minde vpon a matter. Sir, I heare you not, I praie you speake louder. No ([quoth] Tullie)? That is marueile to me, for as I dooe remember, your eares are well bored through, meanyng that he was nailed vppon a Pillorie, or elles had holes made in his eares, whiche might well serue (as Tullie iested) to receiue open aire. An other, beyng sore offended vpon some cause with a felowe, who had loste his eares for good cause, saied in his heate, I will handle thee like a knaue, seest thou now. And heaping wordes vpon wordes, would gladly belike that the partie should haue caried them awaie, and well remembred them, and therefore saied fumouselie vnto hym, dooest thou heare me? Upon that, one that stode by, saied to this angrie Gentilman. I doubt sir, that this Pillerie felowe doeth not heare you at all. For as you remember he loste his eares of late, how can he heare, that hath no eares at all. With that the Gentilmannes anger, was altered to mirthe and laughter, and so thei all departed. When Mettellus toke muster, and required Cesar to bee there, not abiding that he should be absent, though his iyes greued him, and saied: what man, doe you se nothing at all? Yea Marie ([quoth] Cesar) as euill as I see, I can see a lordship of yours (the whiche was fower or fiue miles from Rome) declaring that his buildyng was ouer sumptuous, & so houge withall (moche aboue his degree) that a blind manne might almoste see it. Now in those daies ouercostlie buildyng was generally hated, bicause men sought by soche meanes to get fame, and bere rule in the common weale. The like also is of one Nasica, who when he came to the Poete Ennius, and askyng at the gates if Ennius were at home, the maide of the house, beyng so commaunded by her Maister, made answere that he was not within. And when he perceiued, that she so saied by her maisters commaundement, he went straight his waie, and saied no more. Now shortlie after, when Ennius came to Nasica, and called for hym at the doore, Nasica cried out a loude, and saied, Sirrha, I am not at home? What manne ([quoth] Ennius) I heare thee speake. Dooe not I knowe thy voice? Then ([quoth] 371 Nasica.) Ah shamelesse man that thou arte, when I sought thee at thy home, I did beleue thy maide, when she saied thou wast not at home, and wilte not thou beleue me, when I tell thee mine owne self, that I am not at home. 372 It is a pleasaunte hearyng, when one is mocked with the same that he bringeth. As when one Q. Opimius hauyng an euill name for his light behauoure, had saied to a pleasaunte manne, Egilius that semed to bee wanton of liuyng, and yet was not so: Ah my sweete darlyng Egilia, when wilte thou come to my house swete wenche, with thy rocke and thy spindle? I dare not in good faithe ([quoth] she) my mother hath forbidde me, to come in any suspected hous, where euill rule is kept. An Eremite of Italie, professyng a marueilous straighte life, and eschewyng the Citee, dwelte in deserte, where he made himself a Caue, wrought by his owne handes, with spade and shouell, and couered thesame with boughes, and yearth, laie there in his couche or cabine, liuyng in contemplacion, as one that vtterlie had forsaken the worlde, wherof he came in greate credite with the people, and especiallie with the women of that Toune, as by nature women are more apte to beleue, and readier giuen to Supersticion then men are. Afterwardes it appered that this Eremites holinesse, was altogether counterfeite, and he founde a verie leude manne. For it was knowen and well proued, that he had the companie of diuerse Gentilwomen in that Citee, and therefore beeyng examined openlie, and greuouslie rebuked, he confessed that he had thuse of diuerse ladies there. Whereupon a Register, that tooke the note of all their names, beyng moche greeued with his filthie behauiour, especiallie bicause he had vsed so many, saied thus. Ah thou vile man. Is there any other, with whom thou hast been acquainted? Saie on beast, and shame the deuil. The poore Eremite beeyng wonderfullie rebuked of euery bodie, and marueilous sorie of soche his folies priuelie committed, and openlie knowen. Said to the Register in this wise. Sir, seyng I am charged to saie the truth, and that the holie mother Church willeth me to leaue nothing vnrehearsed, that the rather vpon my plain confession, I maie the soner haue absolucion: In good faithe master Register ([quoth] he) I dooe not remember any other, sauyng your wife onely, who was the firste and the laste that I haue touched, sinse I made my Graue, and therfore if it please you, to put her into your booke also, you maie boldlie doe it. For surely, she was verie louyng to me. With that the Register in a greate heate stoode vp, and castyng his Penne out of his hande, would haue been at the Eremite, rather then his life. The people laughed hartely, to see the Register that was so hastie before, to charge the simple Eremite with his wanton folies, to be in soche sorte touched with his wiues defaulte. And many then there (as yong menne be in soche cases forward) would in any wise, that the Register should haue written his wiues name, in his owne booke, ad eternam rei memoriam. Those iestes are bitter, whiche haue a hid vnderstanding in them, whereof also a man maie gather moche more, then is spoken. A homely felowe made his wofull lamentacion to Diogenes, in moste pitifull sorte, bicause his wife had hanged her self vpon a Figge tree, hoping to finde some coforte at his hande. But Diogenes hearyng this straunge deede, 373 for the loue of God, [quoth] he giue me some slippes of that tree, that I might sette them in some orcharde. The fruicte liked hym well, and belike he thought that soche slippes, would haue been as good to dispatche noughtie women, as Lime twigges are thought mete to catche wilde birdes withall. An Archedeacon, beyng nothyng so wise, as he was welthie, nor yet so learned, as he was worshipfull, asked a yong man ones, whether be had a good witte, or no. Yes Marie sir, [quoth]he, your witte is good inough, if you keepe it still, and vse it not, for euery thynge as you knowe, is the worsse for the wearyng. Thou saiest euen truthe, [quoth] he, for that is the matter that I neuer vsed preaching: For it is nothing but a wasting of witte, & a spending of winde. And yet if I would preache, I thinke I could dooe as well as the beste of theim. Yea sir, [quoth] he, but yet I would ye should not proue it, for fear of straining your self to moche: why? Dooest thou feare that [quoth] he, naie thou maiest bee assured, I will neuer preache so long as I liue, God beyng my good Lorde. There are ouer many Heretiques, for good meaning menne to speake any thing now a daies. You saie euen truthe, [quoth] the yong man, & so went forthe, but to tell all, I had nede to haue tyme of an other worlde, or at the lest to haue breath of an other bodie. An vnlearned Orator made an Oration on a tyme, thinking that he had with his well doing delited muche al men, and moued them to mercie and pitie, and therefore sittynge doune, he asked one Catulus if he had not moued the hearers to mercie. Yes marie: [quoth] he: and that to great mercie and pitie bothe, for I thinke there is none here so hard harted, but thought your oration very miserable, and therfore nedefull to be greatly pitied. Churlishe aunsweres, lyke the hearers some tymes very well. When the father was cast in iudgement, the sonne seyng hym wepe: Why wepe you father?: [quoth] he: To whome his father aunswered: What? Shall I synge I praye the, seeynge by a lawe I am condempned to dye. Socrates lykewyse beeyng moued of his wife, because he should dye an innocent and giltesse in the lawe: Why for shame woman [quoth] he: wilt thou haue me to dye giltie and deseruyng. When one had falne into a ditche, an other pitiyng his fall, asked hym and said, Alas how got you into that pit? Why, Gods mother: [quoth] the other: doest thou aske me how I gotte in, nay tel me rather in the mischief, how I shall gette out. There is an other contrarie vnto this kind, when a man suffereth wronge, and geuethe no sharpe aunswere at all. As when Cato was stroken of one that caried a chest: some saie a long powle: when the other said, after he had hit him: Take hede sir I pray you: why: [quoth] Cato: doest thou cary any thynge elles. Folie and lacke of natural wit, or els wante of honestie, geue good matter of myrthe often tymes. When Scipio beyng Pretor, had appoincted vnto a certaine Sicilian, one to be his lawyer that was of a good house, and had an euill witte, litle better than halfe a foole: I praie you: [quoth] the Sicilian to Scipio, appoint this lawier for myne aduersarie, and let me haue none at all hardely. thereupon, a ieste may seme delitefull. When an eueill man had accused many persons, and non toke any harme by him but rather were acquited from tyme to tyme, and taken the sooner for honest men: Now would to Chirstes passion: [quoth] a naughtie fellow: that he were myne accuser, for then should I bee taken for an honest man also, through his accusation. Demonides hauyng crooked feete, lost on a tyme bothe his shoone, wherupo he made his praier to God that his shoone might serue his feete that had stolne them awaie. A shreude wishe for hym that had the shoone, and better neuer weare shoone, than steale them so dearely. they are, delite much the eares being well applied together. One was charged for robbyng a Churche, and almost euidently proued to be an offendour in that behaulfe, the saied man to saue hymself harmelesse, reasoned thus: Why: [illeg.] he how should this be, I neuer robbed house, nor yet was euer faultie in any offence besides, how then shoulde I presume to robbe a Churche? I haue loued the Churche more than any other, & will louers of the Churche robbe the Churche? I haue geuen to the Churche, howe happeneth that I am charged to take fro the Churche, hauing euer so good mind to church dignitie? assure your selues thei passed litle of the Churche, that would auenture to robbe the Churche. Thei are no Churche men, they are masterlesse men, or rather S. Nicolas Charks, that lacke liuing, and goyng in procession takes the Churche to be an Hospitall for waie fairers, or a praie for poore and nedie beggers: but I am no suche man. Alacke, alacke, if suche a one had somewhat to take to, & were not past grace: he would doe well enough without all doubt: I warrant hym, he wantes nothyng saieth an other of a couetouse man but one thynge, he hath neuer enoughe. Soche a man hath no fault, but one, and if that were amended, all were well: what is that [quoth] an other? In good (faith) he is nought. muche the hearers. Whe an vnlerned lawyer had been hourese and almost lost his voice with ouerlong speakynge, one Granius gaue him counsel to drynke swete wine colde, so sone as he came home. Why: [quoth] he: I shall lose my voice, if I do so. Marye: [quoth] he: and better do so, then vndo thy client and lose his matter altogether. spoken contrarie to thexpectatio of other. Augustus Emperour of Rome seeyng a handsome young man there, whiche was muche like vnto himself in countenance, asked hym if euer his mother was in Rome, as though he had been his bastard. No forsothe ([quoth] he) but my father hath been here very ofte: with that themperour was abasshed, as thought the emperours own mother had been an euil woma of her body. When an vnlearned Phisicion (as England lacketh none suche) had come to Pausanias a noble Ientleman, and asked him if he were not troubled muche with sicknes. No sir ([quoth] he) I am not troubled at all, I thanke God, because I vse not thy counsaill. Why dooe ye accuse me ([quoth] the Phisicion) that neuer tried me? Mary ([quoth] Pausanias) if I had ones tried thee, I should neuer haue accused thee, for then I had been deade, and in my graue many daies agone. An English Phisicio riding by the way: and seyng a great company of men gatherd together, sent his man to knowe what the matter was, wherupo his man vnderstadyng that one there was appointed to suffer for killyng a man: came ridynge backe in all post haste, and cried to his master, long before he came at hym: Get you hence sir, get you hence, for Gods loue. What means thou ([quoth] his master). Mary ([quoth] the seruaunt) yonder man shall dye for killyng of one man, and you I dare saye, haue kilde a hundreth mene in your daies: Get you hence therefore for Gods loue, if you loue your self. An Italian hauing a sute here in England, to Tharche-hishoppe of Yorke that then was, and commyng to Yorke Toune at that tyme, when one of the Prebendaries there, brake his breade, as thei terme it, and thereupon made a solemne longe diner, the whiche perhappes began at aleuen, and continued welnighe till fower in the after noone, at the whiche diner this Bishop was: It so fortuned that as thei were sette, the Italian knockte at the Gate, vnto whom the Porter perceiuing his errande, answered, that my lorde Bishop was at diner. The Italian departed, and retourned betwixte twelue and one, the Porter answered, thei were yet at diner, he came againe at twoo of the Clocke, the Porter tolde him, thei had not halfe dined: he came at three a clocke, vnto whom the Porter in a heate, answered neuer a worde, but churlishely did shutte the gates vpon him. Whereupon others tolde the Italian, that there was no speaking with my Lorde, almoste all that daie, for the solemne diner sake. The Gentilman Italian, wonderyng moche at soche a long sitting, and greatlie greued, bicause he could not then speak with the Bishoppes grace, departed streight towardes Lodon, and leauyng the dispatche of his matters, with a dere frende of his, toke his iourney towardes Italie. Three yeres after, it happened yt an Englisheman came to Rome, with who this Italian by chaunce falling acquainted, asked him if he knewe the Bishop of Yorke. The Englisehman saied, he knewe him right well. I praie you tell me ([quoth] the Italian) hath that Bishoppe yet dined? The Englishe manne moche marueilyng at his question, could not tell what to saie. The Italian vp and tolde him all, as I haue saied before, where at thei bothe laughed hartelie. Examples bee innumerables that serue for this purpose. A man may by hearing a loude lye, pretely mocke the lye by reportyng a greater lye. When one beyng of a lowe degre 379 & his father of meane welthe, had vaunted much of the good house that his father kepte, of two Beefes spent wekelie, and halfe a score Tunne of wyne dronke in a yeare, an other good fellowe hearyng him lye so shamefully: I deede ([quoth] he) Beefe is so plentiful at my master your fathers house that an Oxe in one daie is nothyng, and as for wyne, Beggers that come to the doore are serued by whole gallondes. And as I remember your father hath a spryng of wyne in the middest of his Court, God continue his good house kepyng. they wil not graunt to vs. When a base borne felow whose parentes were not honeste, had charged Lelius that he dyd not liue, accordyng to his auncesters: yea, but thou doest liue ([quoth] Lelius accordyng to thy elders. condiciones, called an other man in reproche begger and slaue. In dede Sir ([quoth] the poore ma) you are no begger borne, but I feare me ye will dye one. Another lykewise called Diogenes varlet and caitif, to whome Diogenes aunswered in this wyse. In dede suche a one haue I been as thou now art, but suche a one as I now am, shalt thou neuer be. 382 Salust beeyng a ientleman borne, and a man of muche welth, and yet rather by birth noble: than by true dealyng honeste: enuied muche the estimacion, whiche Tullie had emong all men, and said to hym before his face: Thou art no ientleman borne, and therefore not mette to beare office in this commune weale: In dede ([quoth] Tullie) my nobilitie beginnes in me, and thine doeth ende in thee. Meanyng thereby that though Salust were borne noble, yet he were lyke to die wretched, whereas Tullie beeyng borne both poore, and base, was lyke to dye with honour, because of his vertue, wherein chiefly cosisteth nobilitie. 383 There is a pleasaunte kinde of dissemblynge, when twoo meetes together, and the one can not well abyde the other: and yet thei bothe outwardely striue to vse pleasaunt behauioure, and to show muche courtesie: yea to cotende on both partes, whiche shoulde passe other in vsyng of faire wordes, and makyng liuely countenaunces: sekyng by dissemblyng, the one to deceiue the other. 384 When we see a notable lye vtterde, we checke the offendour openly with a pleasaunt mocke. As when one Uibius Curius did speake muche of his yeares, and made hym selfe to be much youger then he was ([quoth] Tullie) why than master Uibius as farre as I can gather by my reckenyng, when you and I declamed together last, you were not then borne by all lykelyhoode, if that be true whiche you saie. When Fabia Dolobella said to thesame Tullie that she was but thirtie yeres of age: as women by their good willes woulde neuer be olde: I thynke so: [quoth] Tullie: for I haue heard you saie no lesse, xx. yeres ago. A Souldiour that thought his estimacion stoode moste in the vertue of his hand gunne, made a merueilouse braggue of it, and said he was able to showte leauel a great deale farther, than any one there would beleue hym to say truth: whereupon he called for his man, to beare witnesse of the same, and asked him whether it were so, or no. In deede: [quoth] his man, you saie truth, but then you must remember sir, you had the wynd with you when you shotte so farre. Belike he thought, there would neuer come suche a wynde againe. I haue trauailed hetherto in teaching the right way to fynde meete matter for euery cause, vsyng suche Arte as my slender witte coulde beste yelde. And now, next and immediatly after inuentio, I thinke meete to speake of framyng and placyng an Oration in order, that the matter beeyng aptely satelde, and couched together: might better please the hearers, and with more ease be learned of all men. And the rather I am earnest in this behaulfe, because I knowe that all thinges stande by order, and without order nothyng can be. For by an order we are borne, by an order wee lyue, and by an order wee make our end. By an order one ruleth as head, and other obey as mebers. By an order Realmes stande, and lawes take force. Yea, by an order the whole worke of nature, and the perfite 385 state of al the elemetes haue their appointed course. By an order we deuise, we learne, and frame our doynges to good purpose. By an order the Carpenter hath his Squyre, his Rule, and his Plummett. The Tailour his mette yarde, & his measure: The Mason his Former, and his Plaine, and euery one accordyng to his callyng, frameth thinges thereafter. For though matter be had, and that in great plentie: yet all is to no purpose, if an order be not vsed. As for example: What auaileth Stone, if Masons dooe not woorke it: What good dothe clothe, if Tailours take no measure, or do not cutte it out? Though Tymber be had for makyng a Shippe, and al other thynges necessarie, yet the shippe shal neuer be perfite, tyl worke men begynne to set to their handes, and ioyne it together. In what a comelie order hath God made man, whose shape is not thought perfite, if any parte be altered: yea al folke would take hym for a monster, whose fete should occupie the place of his handes. An army neuer getteth victorie, that is not in araie, and sette in good order of batail. So an Oration hath litle force with it, and dothe smally profite, whiche is vtterde without all order. And needes must he wander, that knowes not howe to goe, neither can he otherwise chouse, but stumble: that gropyng in the darke, can not tel wher he is: Yea he must nedes both leaue muche vnspoken, repeate often, thynges spoke before not knowing what, not wher to speake best: that geues him selfe rather to take the chaunce of fortune, than to folowe the right waye of aduised counsell, What should a man do with a weapon that knoweth not howe to vse it? What though one haue mountaines of golde, what auaileth him to haue suche heapes, if he cannot tell how to bestow them? It is not enough to haue learnynge, but it is all to vse learnyng. Therefore because this parte of bestowyng matter, and placyng it in good order, is so necessarie: I will showe what the learned haue saied in this behaulfe, so muche as I shall thynke nedefull. Disposicion: as Tullie doeth definie it: is a certaine bestowynge of thynges, and an apte declarynge, what is meete for euery parte, as tyme and place do beste require. There are twoo kindes of disposyng, and placyng of matter. The one is when we folowe the appointed rule of Rhetorique, the whiche nature doth almost teache vs: The other is wholy fasshioned by the discretion of him that makes the Oration. 386 Rhetorique doeth teache vs, and nature also leadeth vs therunto, firste to speake somwhat before we open our matter, after that to tell the cause of our entente, settyng forthe the matter plainly that all may vnderstand it, then to proue our owne cause by good reason, and to confute all suche thinges as are contrarie to our purpose: last of all to gather the whole in a somme, concludyng the matter briefely, and so to make an ende. Nowe to place those reasons, whiche shoulde both serue to confirme and to confute, and to tell in what parte of the Oration it were beste to vse this reason, and that reason, that the rather wee mighte proue, teache, and perswade: a right wyse man had nede to take this matter in hande. For euen as the time, the place, the iudge, and the matter it self shall geue cause: so muste a wyse body take his aduantage. Sometymes it shalbe expedient to vse no preface at al, or ells when the matter is wel knowne, it will be good to leaue the matter vntolde, and streight to seke the confirmacion, vsyng some strong reason for the same purpose. Yea, sometymes it maie do good, to neglecte the naturall order, and begin firste to proue the cause, & afterward to tell it better, then it was tolde before. If the iudge, or the hearers, shalbe weried with other reportes before, it is best to goe to the matter, and proue it out of hande, with as brief reasons, and as stronge as can bee gathered possible. And in prouyng of our matters, we had nede euermore rather to weigh our reasons, tha to nomber them, & thinke not that then we shall doe best, whe we haue the moste, but then loke to doe best, when we haue the strongest. And first of all, the strongest should be vsed, & the other placed in the middest of the Oracion, the whiche being heaped together, will make a good mustar. And yet this also 387 would be learned, whereas we vsed the beste reasons at the first, we should also reserue some that were like good, for the latter ende: that the hearers might haue theim fresh in their remembraunce, when thei should giue iudgement. The sleder reasons that can dooe lesse good, and yet not all (for some maie better be omitted) would be placed in the middest (as I said) that bothe thei might be lesse marked, or being heaped there together, thei might dooe more good, especially when bothe weightie reasons went before, and weightie reasons also folowed after. Now a wiseman that hath good experience in these affaires, and is able to make himself a Rhetorique for euery matter, will not be bounde to any precise rules, nor kepe any one order, but soche onely as by reason, he shall thinke best to vse, being maister ouer arte, rather then arte should be maister ouer him, rather making art by wit, then confounding wit by arte. And vndoubtedly euen in so doing, he shall doe right well, and content the hearers accordingly. For what mattereth, whether we folow our booke, or no, if we folowe wit, & appoinct our self an order, soche as maie declare the truthe more plainly? Yea, some that be vnlearned, and yet haue right good wittes: will deuise with the selues, without any booke learning, what thei will saie, and how moche thei will saie, appoincting their order, & parting it into thre or fower partes, or more, if nede be, soche as thei shal thinke especiall poinctes, and moste mete to be touched. Whose doynges as I can well like, and moche commende them for thesame: so I would thinke theim moche more able to doe moche better: if thei either by learning folowed a paterne, or els knewe the preceptes, whiche leade vs to right order. Rules wer therfore giuen, and by moche obseruacion gathered together, that those whiche could not se Art hid in an other mannes doinges, should yet see the rules open, all 388 in an order set together: and therby iudge the rather of their doinges, & by earnest imitacion, seke to resemble soche their inuencion. I can not deny but that a right wise man vnlearned, shall dooe more good by his naturall witte, then. xx. of these common wittes, that want nature to help arte. And I knowe that rules were made first by wisemen, and not wise men made by rules. For these preceptes serue onelie to help our nede, soche as by nature, haue not soche plentiful giftes. And as for other, vnto who nature is more fauourable, thei are rather put the soner in remembraunce, that soche lessos are, then so taught, as though thei neuer knewe them, or els neuer would vse them. And therefore a certain learned man, and of moche excellencie, beyng asked what was soche a figure, & soche a trope in Rhetorique: I can not tel ([quoth] he) but I am assured, if you loke in the boke of mine oracions, you shal not faile but finde them. So that though he knewe not the name of soche and soche figures, yet the nature of them was so familiar to his knowlege, that he had thuse of them, whe soeuer he had neede. Now though this man could well thus doe, beyng of soche notable vnderstandyng, yet it were folie that all should folowe his waie, whiche want so good a wit. And I thinke euen he himself, should not haue lost by it neither, if he had seen that in a glasse, which he often vsed to do without knowledge. Man is forgetfull, and there is none so wise, but counsaill maie do him good. Yea, he shall do much better, that knoweth what arte other men haue vsed, what inuencion thei haue folowed, what order thei haue kept, and how thei haue beste doen in euery part. If he like not theirs, he maie vse his owne, and yet none dooeth so euill (I thinke but some good maie bee gotte by him. The wise therefore will not refuse to heare: and the ignoraunt for wante, had neede to seke a will. The ende of the seconde Booke. Elocucion. And now we are come to that part of Rhetorique, the whiche aboue al other, is most beautifull, whereby not onely wordes are aptly vsed, but also sentences are in righte order framed. For wheras Inuencion, helpeth to finde matter, and Disposicion serueth to place argumentes: Elocucion getteth wordes to set forthe Inuencion, and with soche beautie commendeth the matter, that reason semeth to bee cladde in Purple, walking afore, bothe bare and naked. Therefore Tullie saieth wel, to finde out reason, and aptly to frame it, is the part of a wise man, but to commend it by wordes, and with gorgious talke to tell our conceipte, that is onely proper to an Oratour. Many are wise, but fewe haue the gifte to set forthe their wisedome. Many can tell their minde in English, but fewe can vse mete termes, and apt order: soche as all men should haue, and wise men will vse: soche as nedes must be had, when matters should be vttered. Now then what is he, at whom al men wonder, and stand in a mase, at the view of his wit? Whose doinges ar best estemed? Who 389 doe we moste reuerence, and compt halfe a God emong me? Euen soche a one assuredly, that can plainly, distinctly, plentifully, and aptly vtter bothe wordes and matter, and in his talke can vse soche composicion, that he maie appere to kepe an vniformitee, and (as I might saie) a nomber in the vttering of his sentece. Now an eloquent man being smally learned, can do moche more good in perswading, by shift of wordes, and mete placing of matter: then a great learned clerke shalbe able with great store of learning, wanting wordes to set forth his meaning. Wherfore I moche marueile, that so many seke thonly knowlege of thinges, without any mynd to commende or set forthe their entendement: seing none ca knowe either what thei are, or what thei haue, without the gift of vtterance. Yea, bring them to speake their mind, and enter in talke with soche as are saied to bee learned, and you shall finde in the soche lacke of vtteraunce, that if you iudge them by their tonge, and expressing of their mind: you must needes saie thei haue no learnyng. Wherein me thinkes thei doe, like some riche snudges, that hauing greate welth, goe with their hose out at heeles, their showes out at toes, and their coates out at bothe elbowes. For who can tell, if soche menne ar worthe a grote, when their apparell is so 390 homelie, and all their behauour so base? I can call theim by none other name, but slouens, that maie haue good geare, and neither can, nor yet will ones weare it cleanlie. What is a good thing to a man, if he neither know the vse of it, nor yet (though he knowe it) is able at al to vse it. If we thinke it comelinesse, and honestie to set forth the bodie with handsome apparel, and thinke them worthie to haue money, that bothe can and will vse it accordinglie: I can not otherwise see, but that this part deserueth praise, whiche stadeth wholie in setting forthe matter, by apte woordes and sentences together, and beautifieth the toungue with greate chaunge of colours, and varietie of figures. i.  Plainnesse. ------ ij.  Aptenesse. iij.  Composicion. iv.  Exornacion. 391 Emong all other lessons, this should first be learned, that wee neuer affecte any straunge ynkehorne termes, but so speake as is commonly receiued: neither seking to be ouer fine, not yet liuyng ouer carelesse, vsyng our speache as moste men doe, and orderyng our wittes, as the fewest haue doen. Some seke so farre for outlandishe Englishe, that thei forgette altogether their mothers language. And I dare sweare this, if some of their mothers were aliue, thei were not able to tel, what thei saie, and yet these fine Englishe clerkes, wil saie thei speake in their mother tonge, if a man should charge them, for counterfeiting the kinges Englishe. Some farre iourneid gentilman, at their retourne home, like as thei loue to go in forrein apparell, so thei will pouder their talke, with ouersea language, He that cometh latelie out of Fraunce, will talke Frenche Englishe, and neuer blushe at the matter. An other choppes in with Englishe Italianated, and applieth the Italian phrase, to our Englishe speaking, the whiche is, as if an Oratour that professeth to vtter his minde in plaine Latine, would needes speake Poetrie, and farre fetched colours of straunge antiquitie. The Lawier will store his stomacke with the prating of Pedlers. The Auditour in making his accoumpt and rekening, cometh in with sise sould, and cater denere, for. vi.s.iiij.d. The fine Courtier will talke nothing but Chaucer. The misticall wise men, and Poeticall Clerkes, will speake nothing but quainte prouerbes, and blinde allegories, deliting moche in their owne darkenesse, especiallie, when none can tell what thei doe saie, The vnlearned or foolishe phantasticall, that smelles but of learnyng (soche felowes as haue seen learned men in their daies) will so Latine their tongues, that the simple can not but wonder at their talke, and thinke surelie thei speake by some reuelacion. I knowe them that thinke Rhetorique, to stande wholie vpon darke woordes, and he that can catche an ynke horne terme by the taile, him thei coumpte to bee a fine Englisheman, and a good Rhetorician. And the rather to set out this folie, I will adde here a soche letter, as William Sommer himself, could not make a better for that purpose. Some wil thinke and swere it to, that there was neuer any soche thing written: well, I will not force any man to beleue it, but I will saie thus muche, and abide by it to, the like haue been made heretofore, and praised aboue the Moone. A letter diuised by a Lincolneshire man, for a voide benefice, to a gentilman that then waited vpon the lorde Chauncellour, for the tyme beyng. ingent affabilitee, and ingenious capacitee, for mundane affaires: I can not but celebrate and extolle your magnificall dexteritee, aboue all other. For how could you haue adepted soche illustrate prerogatiue, and dominicall superioritee, if the fecunditee of your ingenie had not been so fertile, and wonderfull pregnaunt. Now therefore beyng accersited, to soche splendent renoume, and dignitee spledidious: I doubt not but you wil adiuuate soche poore adnichilate orphanes, as whilome ware condisciples with you, and of antique familiaritie in Lincolne shire. Emong whom I beyng a scholasticall panion, obtestate your sublimitie to extoll myne infirmitie. There is a sacerdotall dignitie in my natiue countrey, contiguate to me, where I nowe contemplate: whiche your worshipfull benignitee, could sone impetrate for me, if it would like you to extende your sedules, and collaute me in them, to the right honourable lorde Chauncellour, or rather Archigrammacian of Englande. You knowe my literature, you knowe the pastoral promocion, I obtesatte your clemencie, to inuigilate thus moche for me, according to my confidence, and as you knowe my codigne merites, for soche a compendious liuing. But now I relinquishe to fatigate your intelligence, with any more friuolous verbositie, and therefore he that rules the climates, be euermore your beautreur your fortresse, and your bulwarke. Amen. Dated at my Dome, or rather Mansion place, in Lincoln shire, the penulte of the moneth Sextile. Anno Millimo, quillimo trillimo. Per me Iohannes Octo. What wise man reading this letter, will not take him for a very Caulfe, that made it in good earnest, and thought by his ynkepot termes, to get a good Parsonage. Doeth witte rest in straunge wordes, or els standeth it in wholsome matter, & apt declaring of a mannes minde? Dooe we not speake bicause we would haue other to vnderstand vs, or is not the tongue giuen for this ende, that one might knowe what an other meaneth? And what vnlearned man canne tell, what halfe this letter signifieth? Therefore, either we must make a difference of Englishe, and saie some is learned Englishe, and other some is rude Englishe, or thone is courte talk, the other is coutrey speache, or els we must of necessitie, banishe all soche affected Rhetorique, and vse altogether, one maner of language. When I was in Cambrige, and student in the kinges College, there came a man out of the toune, with a pinte of wine in a pottle pot, to welcome the prouost of that hous, that lately came from the court. And bicause he would bestowe his present like a clerke, dwelling emong the scholers: he made humblie his. iij. curtesies, and said in this maner. Cha good euen my good lorde, & well might your lordship vare: Understanding that your lordship was come, and knowing that you are a worshipfull Pilate, and kepes a bominable hous: I thought it my duetie to come incantiuante and bring you a pottell a wine, the which I beseche your Lordship take in good worthe, Here the simple man beyng desirous to amende his mothers tongue, shewed hymself not to be the wisest man, that euer spake with tongue. An other good fellowe of the countrey, beyng an officer, and Maior of a toune, and desirous to speake like a fine learned man, hauing iuste occasion, to rebuke a runnegate felowe, saied after this wise in a greate heate. Thou yngram 393 and vacacion knaue, if I take thee any more, within the circumcision of my dampnacion: I will so corrupt thee, that al vacacion knaues, shall take ilsample by thee. An other standing in moche nede of money, and desirous to haue some helpe, at a Gentemannes hande, made his complaint in this wise. I praie you sir, be so good vnto me, as forbeare this halfe yeres rente. For so helpe me God and halidome, we are so taken on with contrarie Bishops, with reuiues, and with Southsides to the king, that all our money is cleane gone. These wordes he spake for contribucio, relief, and subsidie. And thus we see that poore simple men are moche troubled, and talke oftentimes, thei knowe not what, for lacke of wit, and want of Latine & Frenche, wher of many of our strange wordes, ful often are deriued. Those therfore that will eschue this folie, and acquaint themselues with the best kinde of speache, must seke from time to time, soche woordes as are commonly receiued, and soche as properly maie expresse in plain maner, the whole conceipte of their minde. And loke what woordes we beste vnderstande, and knowe what thei meane: the same should soneste be spoken, and first applied to the vtteraunce of our purpose. Now whereas wordes be receiued, aswell Greke as Latine, to set forthe our meaning in the Englishe tong, either for lacke of store, or els bicause wee would enriche the langauge: it is well doen to vse theim, and no man therein can be charged for any affectacion, when all other are agreed to folowe the same waie. There is no man agreued, when he heareth (letters patentes) and yet patentes is Latine, and signifieth open to all men. The Communion is a felowship, or a comming together, rather Latine then Englishe: The kinges prerogatiue, declareth his power roiall aboue all other, & yet I knowe no man greued for these termes, beyng vsed in their place, nor yet any one suspected for affeccio, whe soche generall wordes are spoken. The folie is espied, when either we will vse soche wordes, as fewe men doe vse, or vse them out of place, when an other might serue moche better. Therfore, to auoide soche folie, we maie learne of that most excellente Oratour Tullie, who in his thirde booke, where he speaketh of a perfecte Oratour, declareth vnder the name of Crassus, that for the choise of woordes, fower thynges 394 should chieflie bee obserued. First, that soche wordes as we vse, should be proper vnto the tongue, wherein we speake, againe, that thei bee plaine for all menne to perceiue: thirdlie, that thei be apte and mete, moste properlie to set out the matter. Fowerthlie, that wordes translated from one significacion to an other (called of the Grecians, Tropes) be vsed to beautifie the sentece, as precious stones are set in a ring to commende the golde. Soche are thought apt wordes, that properly agree vnto that thyng, whiche thei signifie, and plainlie expresse the nature of thesame. Therfore, thei that haue regarde of their estimacio, doe warely speak, and with choise, vtter wordes moste apte for their purpose. In weightie causes, graue wordes are thought moste nedefull, 395 that the greatnesse of the matter, maie the rather appeare in the vehemencie of their talke. So likewise of other, like order muste bee taken. Albeit some, not onelie dooe not obserue this kinde of aptnesse, but also thei fall into moche fondnesse, by vsyng wordes out of place, and appliyng them 396 to diuers matters, without all discrecion. As thus. An ignoraunte felowe, commyng to a gentlemannes place, and seeyng a greate flocke of shepe in his pasture, saied to the owner of them, now by my truthe sir, here is as goodlie an audience of shepe, as euer I sawe in all my life. Who will not take this felowe meter to talke with Shepe, then to speake emong men? An other likewise, seing a hous faire builded, saied to his felowe thus: Good Lorde, what a handesome phrase of building is this? Thus are good woordes euill vsed, when thei are not well applied, and spoken to good purpose. Therefore, I wishe that soche vntowarde speakyng, maie giue vs a good lesson, to vse our tongue warely, that our wordes and matter maie still agree together. When wee haue learned vsuall and accustomable wordes, to set furthe our meanyng, wee ought to ioyne them together in apte order, that the eare maye delite, in hearynge the harmonie. I knowe some Englishe men, that in this poincte haue suche a gifte in the Englishe, as fewe in Latine haue the like, and therefore, delite the wise and learned so muche, wyth their pleasaunt composicion: that many reioyce, when thei maie hear suche, and thynke muche learning is gotte, when thei maie 397 talke with them. Composicion therfore, is an apte ioynyng together of wordes in suche order, that neither the eare shall espie any ierre, nor yet any man shalbe dulled with ouerlong drawyng out of a sentence, nor yet much confounded with myngelyng of clauses, such as are nedelesse, being heaped together without reason, and vsed without nomber For by suche meanes the hearers will be forced, to forgette full oft, what was saied first, before the sentence be halfe ended: or els bee blynded with confoundyng of many thynges together. Some again will bee so shorte, and in suche wise curtall their Sentences, that thei had nede to make a commentarie 398 immediatly of their meaning, or els the most that heare them, shalbe forced to kepe counsaill. Some will speake oracles, that a man cannot tell, which waie to take theim, somme will be so fine, and so Poeticall with all, that to their semynge, there shall not stande one haire amisse, and yet euery body els, shall thinke them meter for a ladies chamber, then for an earnest matter in any open assemblie. Some will roue so muche, and bable so farre without order, that a manne woulde thynke, thei had a greate loue, to heare themselfes speake. Some repeate one woorde so often, that if suche woordes could be eaten, and chopte in so oft, as thei are vttered out, thei would choke the widest throte in al England. As thus. If a man knew, what a mans life wer, no man for any manes sake, would kil any man, but one ma would rather help another man, considryng ma is borne for man, to help man, & not to hate man. What ma would not be choked, if he chopt al these men at ons into his mouth, and neuer drok after it? Some vse ouermuche repeticio or some one letter, as pitiful pouertie praieth for a peny, but puffed presumpcio, passeth not a poinct, papering his panche, with pesstilent pleasure, procuring his passe port, to poste it to hel pit, there to be punished with pains perpetual. Some wil so sette their words that thei muste be faine to gape after euerye word spoken, endinge one woorde with a vowell, and beginning the next wyth an other, whych vndoubtedlye maketh the talke to seme mooste vnpleasaunte. As thus, Equitie assuredlye, euerye iniurye auoydeth. Some will set the carte before the horse, as thus. My mother and my father are both at home, euen as thoughe the good man of the house weare no breaches, or that the graye Mare were the better Horse. And what thoughe it often so happeneth (God wotte the more pitie) yet in speakinge at the leaste, let vs kepe a natural order, and set the man before the woman for maners sake. An other comming home in haste after a long iourney, sayeth to his manne: come hither sir knaue, helpe me of with my bootes and my spurres. I praye you sir geue hym leaue firste to plucke of youre spurres, ere he meddle wyth your bootes, or els your man is like to haue a madde pluckinge, Who is so folyshe as to saye the counsayle and the kyng, but rather the kynge and his counsayle, the father and the sonne, and not contrary. And so likewise in al other as they are in degree firste, euermore to set them so formost. The wise therfore talkinge of diuers worthye menne together, will firste name the worthiest, and kepe a decent order in reportynge of their tale. Some eande their sentences all alike, making their talke rather to appere rimed meter, then to seme playne speache, the whiche as it muche deliteth beynge measurablye vsed, so it muche offendeth when no meane is regarded. I heard a preacher delityng much in this kinde of composition, who vsed so often to ende his sentence with wordes like vnto that whiche wente before, that in my iudgemente, there was not a dosen sentences in hys whole sermon,but they ended all in ryme for the most part. Some not beste disposed, wished the Preacher a Lute, that with his rimed sermon he might vse some pleasaunt melodye, and so the people myghte take pleasure diuers wayes, and daunce if they liste. Certes there is a meane, and no reason to vse any one thinge at all tymes, seynge nothynge deliteth (be it neuer so good) that is alwayes vsed. Quintilian likenethe the coloures of Rhetorique to a mannes eye sighte. And nowe ([quoth]he) I woulde not haue all the bodie to be full of eyes, or nothynge but eyes: for then the other partes shoulde wante their due place and proporcion. Somme ouerthwartely sette their worodes, placyng some one a myle frome his felowes, not contented with a playne and easye composicion, but seke to sette wordes they can not tell how, and therfore one not likyng to bee called, and by printe published Doctoure of Phisike, woulde neades be named of Phisike Doctour, wherin appeared a wonderfull composition(as he thought) straunge vndoubtedlye, but whether wise or no, lette the learned sitte in iudgement vpon that matter. An other. As I rose in the mornynge ([quoth] one) I mette a carteful of stones emptye. Belike the manne was fasting, when the cart was ful, and yet we se that through straunge composicion his sentence appeareth darke. Some will tell one thing twentie tymes, nowe in now out, and when a man would thinke thei had almoste ended, they are ready to beginne againe as freshe as euer they were. Suche vaine repeticions declare both wante of witte, and lacke of learning. Some are so homely in all their doinges, & so grosse for their inuention, that they vse altogether one maner of trade, & seke no varietie to eschew tediousnes. Somme burden their talke wyth nedelesse copye, and will seme plentifull, when they shoulde be short. An other is so curious and so fine of his tongue, that hee can not tell in all the worlde what to speake. Euerie sentence semeth commune, and euerye woorde generallye vsed, is thought to bee folyshe, in his wise iudgemente. Some vse so manye interpositions bothe in their talke and, in their wrytynge, that they make their saynges as darke as hell. Thus whan faultes be knowen, they may be auoyded: and vertue the soner may take place, when vice is forsene, and eschewed as euill. When wee haue learned apte woordes and vsuall Phrases to sette forthe oure meanynge, and can orderlye place theim without offence to the eare we maie boldelye commende and beautifie oure talke with diuers goodelye coloures, and delitefull translations, that oure speache maye seme as brighte and precious, as a riche stone is fayre and orient. 399 Exornation is a gorgiouse beautifiynge of the tongue with borowed wordes, and chaunge of sentence or speache, with muche varietie. Firste therfore (as Tullie saithe) an Oration is made to seme ryghte excellent by the kinde self, by the colour and iuice of speache. There are three maner of stiles or enditinges, the greate or mighty kind, whe we vse great wordes, or vehemet figures. 400 The smal kinde, when we moderat our heate by meaner wordes, and vse not the most stirring sentences. The lowe kinde, when we vse no Metaphores, nor translated wordes, nor yet vse any amplificatios, but go plainelye to worke, and speake altogether in commune wordes. Nowe in al these three kindes, the Oration is muche commended, and appeareth notable, when wee kepe vs styll to that style, whiche wee firste professed, and vse suche wordes as seme for that kinde of writinge most conuenient. Yea, if we minde to encrease, or diminishe: to be in a heate, or to vse moderation: To speake pleasauntlie, or grauelye: To bee sharpe, or softe: to talke Lordlye, or to speake finelie: to wae auncient, or familiar (whiche al are comprehended vnder one of the other three:) we muste euer make our woordes apte and agreable to that kind of stile, whiche we first begane to vse. For as frenche hodes do not become Lordes: so Parliament Robes are vnfitting for Ladies. Comelinesse therefore must euer be vsed, and al thinges obserued that are moste mete for euery cause, if we loke by attemptes to haue our desire. 401 There is another kind of Exornacion that is not egually sparpled throughout the whole oration, but is so disseuered and parted, as starres stand in the firmament, or floures in a garden, or prety deuised antiques in a clothe of Araise. A Figure is a certaine kinde, either of sentence, Ooratio, or worde, vsed after somme newe or straunge wise, muche vnlike to that, whiche men communely vse to speake. Ther are thre kindes of figures, the one is when the nature of wordes is chaunged from one signification to an other, called a Trope of the Grecians: The other serueth for woordes, when they are not chaunged by nature, but onely altered by speaking, called of the Grecians a Scheme: The third is when by diuersity of inuencion, a sentence is many wayes spoken, and also matters are amplified by heapynge examples, by dilatynge argumentes, by comparynge of thynges together, by similitudes, by cotraries, and by diuers other lyke, called by Tullie Exornacion of sentences, or coloures of Rhetorique. By all wiche Figures, euerye Oration maye be muche beautified, and without the same, not one can attaine to be counted an Oratoure, thoughe his learnynge otherwise be neuer so greate. their tongue, and sought with greate vtteraunce of speache to commende causes: they founde full ofte muche wante of wordes, to set out their meanyng. And therfore remembryng thynges of like nature, vnto those whereof they speake: they vsed suche woordes to expresse their minde, as were more like vnto other. As for example. If I shoulde speake againste some notable Pharisee. I might vse translation of wordes in this wise: Yonder man is of a croked iudgement, his wittes are clowdie, he liueth in deepe darkenes, dusked altogether wyth blynde ignoraunce, and drowned in the raging sea, of bottomeles superstition. Thus is the ignoraunte set out, by callyng him croked, clowdie, darke, blynde, and drownde in superstition. All whiche wordes are not proper vnto ignoraunce, but borowed of other thynges, that are of like nature vnto ignoraunce. For the vnskilfull manne hath his witte set out of order, as a mannes bodie is set out of ioynte, and thereupon it maye be sayed to bee croked. Likewise hee maye be called clowdye, for as the clowdes keepe the Sunne shining from vs, so doeth his Ignoraunce keepe him blindfolde from the true vnderstandinge of thinges. And as when the eyes are out, no manne can see anye thing: So when perfecte iudgemente is wantinge, the truthe can not be knowen. And so likewise of all other. Thus as necessitye hath forced vs to borowe wordes translated: so hath tyme and practice made theim to seeme moost pleasaunt, and therfore thei are much the rather vsed. Yea, when a thynge full ofte can not be expreste by an apte and mete woorde, we do perceiue (when it is spoken by a woorde translated) that the likenes of that thynge whiche appeareth in an other worde, muche lighteneth that, whiche we woulde most gladly haue perceiued. And not onely do menne vse translation of wordes (called Tropes) for neede sake, when they can not finde other: but also when they maie haue mooste apte wordes at hande, yet wyll they of a purpose vse translated wordes. And the reason is this. Menne coumpte it a pointe of witte to passe ouer suche woordes as are at hande, and to vse suche as are farre fetcht and translated: or elles it is, because the hearer is led by cogitacion vpon rehearsall of a metaphore, and thinketh more by remembraunce of a word translated, then is there expreslye spoken: or elles because the whole matter semeth by a similitude to be opened: or last of al, bicause euery translatio is commenly, and for the most part referred to the senses of the body, and especially to the sense of seynge, whiche is the sharpeste and quickeste aboue all other. For when I shal saie that an angrie mane fometh at the mouth, I am brought in remebrance by this translation to remember a bore, that in fightyng vseth muche foming, the which is a fowle and lothelye sighte. And I cause other to thinke that he brake pacience wonderfully, when I set out his rage comparable to a bores fominge. An other being offended with checkes geuen, will saie, I maruaile sir what you meane to be euer snarringe at me, wherin is declared a brutishenes, consideringe he speaketh bitting wordes, as muche without reason and as vncomelie as a dogge dothe, when he snarreth, the whiche wee see is nothinge semely. There is nothinge in all the worlde, but the same may haue the name of some other word, the which by some similitude is like vnto it. Notwistandinge there oughte muche warenesse to be vsed in chosynge of wordes translated, that the same be not vnlike that thing, wherunto it is applied, nor yet that the translation be vncomely or suche as may geue occasion of any vncleane meanig. the proper signification, to that which is not proper. speache or sentence. Tropes of a worde are these. --- Tropes of a longe continued speache or sentence are these. --- and naturalle meaning, to that whiche is not proper, and yet agreeth therevnto, by some lykenes that appeareth to be in it. An Oration is wonderfullye enriched, when apte Metaphores are gotte and applied to the matter. Neither can anye one perswade effectuouslye, and winne men by weyght of his Oration, withoute the helpe of woordes altered and translated. Firste we alter a worde from that, whiche is in the minde, to that whiche is in the bodie. As when we perceiue one that hath begiled vs, we vse to saye: Ah sirrha, I am gladde I haue smelled you out. Beinge greued with a matter, we saie communelye we can not digest it. The Lawyer receiuing money more then neadeth oftentimes, will saye to his Cliente without any translation. I fele you well, when the pore man thinketh that he dothe well vnderstand his cause, and will helpe him to some good ende. For so, commonly wee saie, when wee knowe a mannes minde in any thinge. This kinde of mutacion is muche vsed, when we talke earnestlye of any matter. The seconde kinde of translation is, when we goo from the creature without reason, to that whiche hath reason, or contrary from that whiche hath reason, to that whiche hath no reason. As if I should saie, suche an vnreasonable brauler, did nothing els but bark like a dogge, or like a Fox. Women ar said to chatter, churles to grunt, boies to whine, & yong me to yell. Cotrariwise we call a Fox false, a Lion proude, and a Dogge flattering. From the lyuynge to the not liuyng, wee vse many translations. As thus. You shall praye for all men dispersed throughoute the face of the earthe. The arme of a tree. The syde of a Bancke. Te lande cryeth for vengeaunce. From the liuyng, to the not liuing. Hatred buddeth emonge malicious men, his wordes flowe out of his mouthe. I haue a whole world of busines. In obseruing the worke of nature in all seuerall substauces we maie finde translations at will, then the whiche nothing is more profitable for any one, yt mindeth by his vtteraunce to stirre the hartes of men, either one waye or other. 406 A worde makinge called of the Grecians Onomatopeia is when we make wordes of oure owne mynde, suche as be deriued from the nature of thynges. As to call one Patche or Cowlson, whom we se to do a thynge folyshelye, because these two in their tyme wer notable foles. Or when one is lustye to say Taratauntara, declaryng thereby that he is as lustie, as a Trumpette is delitefull, and styrring: or when one woulde seme galaunte, to crye hoyghe, whereby also is declared courage. Boies being greued; will saie some one to an other: sir I will cappe you, if you vse me thus, and withholde that from me, whiche is mine owne: meaning that he will take his cap from him. Again, when we se one gaie and galaunt, we vse to saie, he courtes it. [illeg.] one that reasoned in Diuinitie with his fellowe, I like well to reason, but I can not chappe these textes in Scripture, if I should die for it: meanyng that he could not tell in what Chapiter, thynges wer conteined, although he knewe full well, that there wer soche saiynges. Trope, when we gather or iudge, the whole by the part, or part, by ye whole. As thus. The King is come to London, meaning therby that other also be come with him. The Frenche manne is good to kepe a fort, or to skirmishe on horsbacke, wherby we declare the Frenchmen generally. By the whole, the part, thus. All Cambridge sorowed for the death of Bucer, meanyng the moste parte. All Englande reioiseth that Pilgrimage is banished, and Idolatrie for euer abolished: and yet all Englande is not gladde but the moste parte. The like phrases are in the scripture, as when the Magians came to Hierusalem, and asked where he was, that was borne kyng of the Iewes. Herode starte vp, beyng greatlie troubled, and all the Citee of Hierusalem with him, and yet all the citee was not troubled, but the moste parte. By the signe we vnderstande the thing signified, as by an Iuie garland, we iudge there is wine to sell. By the signe of a Bear, Bull, Lion, or any soche, we take any hous to bee an Inne. By eating breade at the Communion, we remember Christes death, and by faithe, receiue him spirituallie. for a certaine proper woorde, wee vse that whiche is moste nigh vnto it: As in calling some water, a fishe Pond, though there be no fishe in it at all: or els whe we saie, here is longe talke, and small matter. Whiche are spoken vnproperlie, for we can not measure, either talke, or matter by length, or breadth. is, when a worde hath a proper significacion of the own, and being referred to an other thing, hath an other meaning, the Grecians call it Metonymia of a thing, for the thing self. As thus. Put vpon you the lorde Iesus Christe, that is to saie, be in liuing soche a one, as he was. The Pope is banished Englande, that is to saie, all his supersticion, and Hypocrisie, either is, or should be gone to the Deuill, by the kynges expresse will, and commaundemente. 410 Againe, when that whiche dooeth conteine, is vsed for that, whiche is conteined. As thus. I haue dronke an Hoggesheade this weeke: Heauen maie reioice, and Helle 411 maie lamente, when olde men are not coueteous. Contrariwise, when the thing conteined, is vsed for the thing conteinyng. As thus. I praie you come to me, that is to saie, 412 come to my hous. Fowerthlie, when by the efficient cause, the effecte is streight gathered thereupon. As thus. The Sunne is vp, that is to saie, it is daie. This felowe is good with a long bowe, that is to saie, he shuteth well. Transumpcion is, when by degrees we goe to that, whiche is to be shewed. As thus: Soche a one lieth in a darke doungeon, nowe in speakyng of darkenesse, we vnderstande closenesse, by closenesse, wee gather blacknesse, and by blacknesse, we iudge depenesse. 413 Chaunge of a name, is whe for the proper name, some name of an Office or other calling is vsed. As thus: the Prophete of God saieth: Blessed are thei, whose sinnes bee not imputed vnto theim, meanyng Dauid. The Poete saieth: It is a vertue, to eschue vice, wherein I vnderstande Horace. 414 Circumlocucion is, a large discripcion, either to sette forthe a thing more gorgeouslie, or els to hide it, if the eares can not beare the open speaking: or when with fewe wordes, we can not open our meaning, to speake it more largelie. Of the first thus. The valiaunt courage of mightie Scipio, subdued the force of Carthage and Numatia. Henry the fiueth, the moste puissaunt king of England, with seuen thousande men, toke the Frenche king prisoner with all the flower of nobilitie in Fraunce. Of the seconde. When Saule was easing himself vpon the grounde, Dauid tooke a peece of his garment, toke his weapon that laid by him, and might haue slaine him. Soche a one defiled his bodie with soche an euill woman. For the thirde parte, the large commentaries written, and the Paraphrasis of Erasmus Englished: are sufficient to the we the vse thereof. An Allegorie is none other thinge, but a Metaphore, vsed throughout a whole sentence, or Oracion. As in speaking against a wicked offedour, I might saie thus. Oh Lorde, his nature was so euill, and his wit so wickedlie bente, that he meante to bouge the ship, where he himself sailed, meaning that he purposed the destruccion of his owne country. It is euill putting stronge wine into weake vesselles, that is to saie, it is euill trusting some women with weightie matters. The Englishe Prouerbes gathered by Ihon Heiwoode, helpe well in this behaulfe, the whiche commonlie are nothing els but Allegories, & darcke deuised sentences. Now for the other fower figures, bicause I minde hereafter to speake more largelie of them, & Quintilian thinketh them more meete to be placed, emong the figures of Exornacion, I will not trouble the reader with double inculcacion, and twise telling of one tale. diuers Schemes, whiche are woordes or sentencies altered, either by speaking, or writing, contrarie to the vulgare custome of our speache, without chaunging their nature at all: but bicause I knowe the vse of the figures in worde, is not so greate in this our tongue, I will run them ouer, with as moche haste as I can. Straunge vsyng of any woorde or Sentence, contrarie to our daily wonte, is either when we adde, or take awaie a sillable, or a woorde, or encrease a Sentence by chaunge of speache, contrarie to the common maner of speaking. Those be called figures of a worde, when we change a worde, and speake it contrary to our vulgare, and daiely speache. Of the whiche sorte, there are sixe in nomber. j.  Addicion at the first. ------ ij.  Abstraccion from the first. iij.  Interlacing in the middest. iiij.  Cutting from the middest. v.  Adding at the ende. vj.  Cutting from the ende. 416 Of Addicion. As thus. He did all to berattle hym. Wherein appeareth that a fillable is added to this word (rattle) Here is good nale to sel, for good ale. 417 Of Abstraccion from the first, thus, As I romed all alone, I gan to thinke of matters greate. In whiche sentence (gan) is vsed, for began. 418 Interlacing in the middest. As. Relligion, for Religion. 419 Cutting from the middest. Idolatrie, for Idololatrie. 420 Adding at the ende. Hasten your businesse, for, Hast your businesse. 421 Cutting from the ende. A faire maie, for maide. Thus these figures are shortlie set out, & as for the other Schemes, which are vttered in whole sentences, and expressed by varietie of speache: I wil set them forth at large emong the colours and ornamentes of Elocucion, that folowe. 422 Now, when we are able to frame a sentence handesomelie together, obseruyng nomber, and kepyng composicion, soche as shall like beste the eare, and doe knowe the vse of Tropes, and can applie them to our purpose: then the ornamentes are necessary in all Oracion, and sentences would be furnished with moste beautifull figures. Therefore to the ende that thei maie be knowen, soche as moste commende and beautifie an Oracion: I will set them forthe here in soche wise, as I shall beste bee able, folowing thorder, whiche Tullie hath vsed in his boke, made of a perfecte Oratour. 423 When we are earnest in a matter, & feele the weight of our cause, we rest vpon some reason, which serueth best for our purpose. Wherein this figure appereth moste, & helpeth moche to set forth our matter. For if we still kepe vs our strongest holde, & make ofter recourse thither, though we be driuen through bitalke to go from it now and then: we shall force the at length, either to auoide our strong defence, or els to yeld into our handes. presently doen. of a thing, as though we sawe it euen now dooen. An example. If our enemies shall inuade and by treason win the victorie, we al shal die euery mothers sonne of vs, and our citee shalbe destroied stick and stone. I se our children made slaues, our daughters rauished 425 our wiues caried a waie, the father forced to kill his owne soonne, the mother her daughter, the soonne his father, the sucking child slain in the mothers bosome, one standing to ye knees in an others blood, Churches spoiled, houses pluckte doune, and all set in fire round about vs, euery one cursyng the daie of their birth, children criyng, women wailing, and olde men passing for verie thought, and euery one thinking himself moste happie, that is first rid out of this world, soche will the crueltie be of our enemies, and with soche horrible hatred, will thei seke to dispatche vs. Thus, where I might haue saied, we shall all be destroied, and saie no nore, I haue by descipcion set the euill forthe at large. It moche auaileth to vse this figure in diuers matters, the whiche whosoeuer can doe, with any excellent gift, vndoubtedly he shall moche delite the hearers. The circumstaunces well considered in euery cause, giue moche matter, for the plain opening of the thinge. Also similitudes, examples, comparisons, from one thing to an other, apte translacions, and heaping of allegories and all soche figures, as serue for amplifiyng, do moche commende the liuely setting forthe of any matter. The miseries of the courtiers life, might well bee described by this kinde of figure. The commoditie of learning, the pleasure of plowe men, and the care that a kyng hath. And not onelie are matters set out by descripcion, but men are painted out in their colours, yea, buildinges are set forthe, kingdomes, and realmes are portured, places, and times are described. The Englishman for feding, and changing of apparel: 426 The Ducheman for drinking: The Frencheman for pride and inconstance: The Spaniard for nimblenes of body, and moche disdain: the Italian for great witte and pollictie: The Scottes for boldnesse, and the Boeme for stubbornesse. Many people are described by their degree, as a man of good yeres, is coumpted sober, wise, and circumspect: a yong man wilde, and carelesse: a woman bablyng, inconstaunte, and readie to beleue all that is tolde her. By vocacion of life, a Souldiour is coumpted a greate bragger, and a vaunter of himself: a Scholer simple: a Russet coate, sadde, and sometimes craftie: a Courtier, flattering: a Citezein ientle. 427 In describyng of persones, there ought alwaies a comelinesse to be vsed, so that nothing be spoken, whiche maie be thought is not in theim. As if one shall describe Henry the sixth, he might call him ientle, milde of nature, ledde by perswasion, and readie to forgiue, carelesse for wealthe, suspecting none, mercifull to all, fearfull in aduersitie, and without forecast to espie his misfortune. Again, for Richard the thirde, I might bryng hym in, cruell of harte, ambicious by nature, enuious of minde, a deepe dissembler, a close manne for weightie matters, hardie to reuenge, and fearfull to lose his high estate, trustie to none, liberalle for a purpose, casting stilll the worste, and hoping euer the beste. By this figure also wee imagine a talke, for some one to speake, and according to his persone, wee frame the Oracion. As if one should bring in nobelle Henry the eight, of moste famous memorie, to enueigh against rebelles, thus he might order his Oracion. What if Henry the eight were a liue, and sawe soche rebellion in this Realme, would not he saie thus, and thus? Yea, me thinkes I heare him speake euen now, And so set forthe soche wordes, as we would haue him to saie. Sometimes it is good to make GOD, the Countrey, or some one Toune to speake, and looke what wee would saie in our owne persone, to frame the whole tale to them. Soch varietie dooeth moche good to auoide tediousnesse, for he that speaketh all in one sorte, though he speake thinges neuer 428 so wittelie, shall sone wearie his hearers. Figures therfore were inuented, to auoide sacietie, and cause delite: to refreshe with pleasure, and quicken with grace, the dulnesse of mannes braine. Who will loke of a whit waull, an houre together, where no woorke manship is at all? Or who will eate still one kinde of meate, and neuer desire chaunge? Certes as the mouthe is daintie: so the witte is tickle, and will sone lothe an vnsauerie thing. tolde it. As thus. Thou that art a young manne of soche towardnesse, hauing soche frendes, to plaie me soche a parte, well, I wil saie no more, God amende all that is a misse. Or thus. Doeth it become thee to be, shall I tell all: Naie, I will not for verie shame. then is openlie expreste. A naughtie fellowe that vsed moche robberie, founde hymself greeued, that the greate Oratour Demosthenes, spente so moche Oyle, whereby he watched from tyme to tyme, in compassing matters for the common weale: In deede ([quoth] Demosthenes, 431 darcke nightes are beste for thy purpose, meanyng that he was a greate robber in the night. One also beyng set in a heate, bicause an other had contraried him, for the choise of meates, was moche more greued, when he gaue him this taunte. You maie boldlie ([quoth] he) speake for fishe eating, for my maister your father, hath many a time and ofte, wipte his nose vpon his sleeue: meanyng that his father was a Fishemonger. speeake at a woorde, parte of our mynde, and nexte after speake as brieflie againe, vsyng to make almoste euery woorde a perfecte sentence. As thus. The manne is sore wounded, I feare me he will die. The Phisicions mistrust him: the partie is fledde, none persueth: God sende vs good lucke. woordes wee extenuate and lessen thesame. As when one had giuen his fellowe a sounde blowe, beyng rebuked for thesame, saied he scant touched hym. Likewise, when twoo haue fought together, to saie, that the one had his legge prickte with a sworde, when perchaunce he had a greate wounde. 434 Many pleasante ientlemen are well practised in merie coceited iestes, and haue bothe soche grace and delite therein, that thei are wonderful to behold, and better wer it to be sharply chid of diuers other then pleasauntlie taunted by any of the. When a ientleman of greate landes and small wit, had talked largelie at a supper, and spake wordes scant worth the hearing, an other being moche greued with his folie, saied to him: sir, I haue taken you for a plain meaning ientleman, but I knowe now, there is not a more deceiptfull bodie in all Englande: with that, other being greued with the yong ientlemannes folie, boldlie began to excuse hym for deceipt, and therefore saied, he was to blame, to charge him with that fault, considering his nature was simple, and fewe can saie, that euer he was craftie. Well ([quoth] the other) I must nedes saie, he is deceptful, for I toke him heretofore for a sober wittie young man, but now I perceiue, he is a foolishe babling felowe, and therfore I am sure he hath deceiued me, like a false craftie chide, as he is: with that thei all laughed, and the ientleman was moche abashed. But as touchyng sharpe tauntes, I haus largely declared them in place, where I treated of laughter. 435 We swarue sometimes from the matter, vpon iuste consideracions, makyng thesame to serue for our purpose, as well as if we had kept the matter still. As in making an inuectiue againste rebellies, and largelie setting out the filthe of their offece, I might declare by the waie of digression, what a noble countrey Englande is, howe greate commodities it hath, what traffique here is vsed, and how moche more nede other Realmes haue of vs, then we haue nede of them. Or when I shall giue euidence, or rather declame against an hainous murtherer, I maie digresse from the offence doen, and enter in praise of the dedde manne, declaring his vertues in moste ample wise, that the offence doen, maie be thought so moche the greater, the more honest he was, that hath thus been slain. Notwithstanding, this would be learned, that (whe we make any soche digression) thesame maie well agree to the purpose, and bee so set out, that it confounde not the cause, or darken the sense of the matter deuised. mynde to speake. I will tell you ([illeg.] one) there is none hath a worse name then this felow, none hath been so often in trouble, he maye be fautelesse, but I can hardely beleue it, there are enowe that will testifie of his naughtinesse, and auouche his euill demeanour to bee suche, that the like hath not been hard heretofore. kynde of phrase. I haue tolde you the cause of all this euill, nowe I will tell you a remedy for the same. You haue heard of iustification by faith onely, now you shal here of the dignitee of workes, and how necessary thei are for euery christian body. our returne, and shewe that whereas we haue roued a litle, we will now kepe vs within our boundes. In this kynd of digression, it is wisedome not to wander ouer farre, for feare wee shall werie the hearers, before we come to the matter again. I knew a preacher, that was a whole houre out of his matter, and at lenght remembryng hymself, saied, well, now to the purpose, as though al that, whiche he had spoken before, had been litle to the purpose, whereat many laughed, and some for starke wearinesse were fain to go a waye. repeate in fewe wordes, the somme of his saiyng. As if one should be charged with felonie, that is a man of welth and honestie, he mighte thus gather his mynd together after a long tale told. First, I will proue there is no cause that I should steale, againe, that I coulde not possible at suche a tyme steale, and last, that I stole not at all. whiche we haue said before. As thus. If reason can perswade, if examples maie moue, if necessitee maie helpe, if pitee maie prouoke, if daungers foreseen, maie stirre vs to be wise: I doubte not but you will rather vse sharpe lawes, to represse offendours, then with dissolute negligence, suffer all to perishe. 441 Mountyng aboue the truthe, is when wee doe sette forthe thinges excedingly & aboue all mennes expectacion, meanyng onely that thei are very great As thus, god promised to Abraham, that he would make his posteritee, egual with the sandes of ye yearth. Now it was not so said, that there should be so many in dede, but that the number should bee infinite. For whether we shall vnderstand those, to bee the children of Abraham, that came of his stocke in flesh, or els take the for the children of Abraham, that haue the faithe of Abraham: we shall neuer proue the nomber of men, to bee eguall with the sandes of the sea, though we could reken all that haue been, from the beginnyng of the worlde. Therfore in this speache, we muste vnderstand there is a mountyng, called of the Grecians hyperbole. We vse this figure muche in English. As thus. He is as swift as a swalowe, he hath a belly as bigge as a barrell, he is a giaunt in makyng. The whole Teimese is litle enough to serue hym, for wasshyng his handes. In all whiche speaches wee mounte euermore a great deale, and not meane so as the wordes are spoken. 442 By askyng other, and answeryng to the question our self, we muche commende the matter, and make it appere very pleasaunt. If I would rebuke one that hathe committed a robberie, I mighte saie thus. I wounder what you ment to commit suche felonie. Haue you not landes? I knowe you haue. Are not your frendes worshipfulll? Yes assuredly. Wer you not beloued of them? No doubt you were. Could you haue wanted any thyng that they had? If you would have eaten gold, you might haue had it. Did not thei alwayes bid you seeke to them, and to none other? I knowe they did. What euill happe had you then to offende in suche sorte, not goynge to your frendes, whiche would not se you want, but seking for that, whiche you should not haue, endaugeryng your self by vntrue dealyng, to fele the power and strength of a lawe, when otherwise you might haue liued in sauegarde? The like kynd of writyng is also vsed, when we make another body to speake, and yet not aske them any question at al As when. D. Haddon had comforted the Duches of Suffolkes grace for her childre, and had said thei wer happily gone, because thei might haue fallen hereafter, and lost that worthy name, whiche at their death thei had; at last he bringeth in the mother, speaking motherlike, in her childrens behalfe of this sort, and answereth still to her saiyngs. But al these euilles wherof you speake ([quoth] he) hadde not chaunced: Yet suche thynges doo chaunce. Yet not alwayes: Yet full ofte. Yet not to al:Yet to a great many, Yet thei had not chaunced to myne: Yet we knowe not. Yet I might haue hoped: Yet better it had been to haue feared. we do aske also, because we would chide, and sette forthe our grief with more vehemencie, the one is called Interrogatio, the other is called Percontatio. Tullie enueighyng against Catiline, that Romane rebell, beginneth his oracion chidingly, questioning with Catiline of this sort. How long (Catiline) will thou abuse our sufferaunce? How long will this rage and madnesse of thine go aboute to deceiue vs? grigge our felow, when in wordes we speake one thyng, & meane in hart another thyng, declaryng either by our countenauce, or by vtteraunce, or by some other waie, what our whole meaning is As when we se one bostyng himself, & vain glorious, to hold him vp with ye and naie, and euer to ad more to that, which he saieth. As I knowe one that saied hymself, to be in his awn iudgemet one of the vest in all England, for triyng of metalles, & that the counsaill hath often called, for his helpe, & cannot want hym for nothing. In deede ([quoth] another) Englande had a sore losse, if God should call you. Thei are al Bungelers in comparaison of you, and I thinke the best of theim, maie thank you for all that he hath: but yet sir your cunnyng was such, that you brought a shillyng to nyne pence, naie to sixe pence and a grote to two pence, and so gaue him a frumpe, euen to his face, because he sawe him so folish. A glorious ientlema that had twoo seruauntes, and belike would be knowe not onely to haue them, but also to haue mo, said in the presence of a worshipfull man, I meruaile muche where all my seruauntes are? Marie sir ([quoth] one) that thoughte to hitte hym home: thei wher here al two, eue now. Thus he closly mockt hym, and worthely. For, the nomber is not great, that standeth vpo. ij. and (all) is to much, when we speake of so fewe. 445 Doubtfulnesse is then vsed, whe we make the hearers beleue, that the weight of our matter causeth vs to doubt, what were beste to speake. As when a kyng findeth his people vnfaithful, he maie speake in this wise. Before I begin, I doubt what to name ye. Shal I call you subiectes? You deserue it not. My frendes ye are not. To cal you enemies wer ouerlitle, because your offence is so greate. Rebelles you are, and yet that name doeth not fully vtter your folie. Traitors I maye cal you, and yet you are worse then traitors, for you seke his heath, who hath giuen you life. Thoffence is so great, that no man can comprehend it. Therfore I doubt what to call you, except I should call you by the name of them all. Another. Whether shall I speake, or holde my peace? If I speake, you will not heare, if I holde my peace, my conscience condempneth my silence. 446 Distribucion, is whe we apply to euery body, suche thinges as are due vnto them, declaringe what euery one is in his vocation. It is the duetie of a Kyng, to haue an especiall care ouer his whole realme. It is thoffice of his nobles, to cause the kynges will to be fulfilled, and with all diligence to further his Lawes, and to se iustice doen euery where. It is the parte of a subiecte, faithfully to dooe hys princes commaundement, and wyth a willynge hart to serue hym at all nedes. It is the office of a bishop to set furthe Gods worde, and with all diligece to exhort men to al godlinesse. It is an husbandes duetie to loue his wife, and with ientle meanes to rule her. It is the wifes office, hubly to submit her self to her husbandes will. Seruantes shoulde be faithfull to their maisters, not onely for feare of a law, but also for conscience sake. Masters should vse their seruates accordingly, paiyng them that, whiche is due vnto the. A father should bryng vp his children in the feare of God. Children should reuerence their fathers with all submission. It is also called a distribucion, when we diuide the whole, into seuerall partes, & saie we haue fower pointes, wherof we purpose to speake, comprehendyng our whole talke within compasse of the same. then we haue spoke before, purposyng therby to augmet the matter, and to make it appere more 448 vehement. Tullie against Uerres, geueth a good example. We haue broughte before you my Lordes, into this place of iudgement, not a thefe, but an extorcioner and violent robber, not an aduouterer, but a rauisher of maides, not a stealer of churche goodes, but an errant traitor, bothe to God and all godlinesse: not a common ruffin, but a moste cruel cut throte, suche as if a man should rake hell for one, he could not find the like. Again, if one would enueigh against bacbiters, after this sort. Thou hast not robbed hym of his money, but thou hast taken awaie his good name, whiche passeth all wordly goods, neither hast thou slaundered thine enemie, but thine awne brother, and frende, that meant thee well, and hath doen thee pleasures: nay thou hast not slandred hym, but thou hast stain him. For a man is halfe hanged, that hath lost his good name. Neither hast thou killed him with the sworde, but poisoned hym with thy tongue, so that I maie call it rather an enchanting, then a murther. Neither hast thou killed one ma alone, but so many as thou hast brought out of charite, wyth thy moste venemous bacbityng. Yea, and last of all thou hast not slain a man, but thou hast slain Christe in his members, so muche as laie in thee to doo. But of this figure I haue spoken heretofore, where I wrote of amplification. vs, as our enemies would charge vs with al, saiyng it is foly to thynke any such thyng, muche more to speake it: or els to saie, suche a mannes word is no slaunder, or it nedeth not to talke of suche toies. Or thus. Who wold thinke that I woulde do suche a deede? Or is it like that I would do such a deede: Antony charged Tully, that he was the occasion of ciuill bataill. Nay ([quoth] Tullie) it is thou, it is thou manne and none other, that settes Ceasar on to worke, to seke the slaughter of his countrey. 450 A buttresse is a fense made for that, which we purpose to hold vp, or go about to compasse. As thus. I hope my Lordes, bothe to perswade this man by reason, and to haue your iudgemente in this matter. For whereas it is a sore thyng to be iustly accused, for breakyng frendship, then assuredly if one be wrongfully slandered, a man had nede to loke about hym. 451 Communicacion is then vsed, when wee debate with other, and aske questions, as thoughe we loked for an answer, and so go through with our matter, leauyng the iudgement therof to their discrecion. As thus. What thinke you in this matter? Is there any other better meanes to dispatch the thing? What would you haue doen, if you were in the same case? Here I appeale to your awne conscience, whether you would suffer this vnpunished, if a man should do you the like displeasure. 452 We describe the maners of men, when we set them furthe in their kind what thei are. As in speaking against a couetous man, thus. There is no suche pinche peny on liue, as this good felow is. He will not lose the paryng of his nailes. His heire is neuer rounded, for sparyng of money, one paire of shoen serueth hym a xij. moneth, he is shod with nailes like a horse. He hath been knowen by his cote this. xxx. winter. He spent ones a grote at good ale, beyng forced thorow companie, and taken short at his worde, where vpon he hath taken suche conceipt sins that tyme, that it hath almost cost him his life. Tullie describeth Piso for his naughtines of life, wonderfully to heare, yea, worse then I haue setfurthe this coueteous man. Read the Oracion against Piso, suche as be learned. truth is. As when we haue conceiued a good opinio of some one ma, and are often deceiued, to saie, who would haue thought, that he euer would haue doen so. Now of all men vpo yearth, I would haue least suspected him. But suche is the worlde. Or thus. You thinke suche a man a worthy personage, and of muche honestie, but I will proue, that he is muche otherwise: a man would not thinke it, but if I do not proue it, I will geue you my hedde. makyng, and therfore I little nede to renue them here in this place. another would saie, and disproue theim as vntrue, or at least wise answer vnto them. A Godly Preacher enueihghed earnestly against those, that would not haue the Bible to bee in English, and after earnest probacion of his cause, saied thus: but me thynkes I heare one saie. Sir, you make muche a dooe, aboute a little matter, what were we the worse, if we had no scripture at all? To whom he answered: the scripture is left vnto vs by Goddes awne will, that the rather we might knowe his commaundementes, and liue therafter all the daies of our life. Sometymes this figure is vsed when we saie, we will not speak this or that, and yet doo notwithstandyng. As thus. Soche a one is an Officer, I will not saie a briber. Righte is hyndered throughe mighte, I will not saie, ouerwhelmed. Thus in sayng we will not speake, we speake our mynde after a sort, notwithstandyng. two, ar so copared and resembled together, that thei bothe in some one propertie seme like. Oftentymes brute beastes, and thinges that haue no life, minister greate matter in this behalfe. Therefore those that delite to proue thynges by similitudes, must learne to knowe the nature of diuerse beastes, of metalles, of stones and al soche, as haue any vertue in them, & be applied to mannes life. Some times in a worde appereth a similitude, which being dilated helpeth wel for amplificatio. As thus, You striue against the streme, better bowe then breake. It is euil runnyng against a stone wall. A man maie loue his house well, & yet not ride vpon the ridge. By alwhiche, any one maie gather a similitude, and enlarge it at pleasure. The prouerbes of Hewode help wonderfull well for this purpose. In comparinge a thyng from the lesse to the greater. Similitudes helpe well to set out the matter. That if we purpose to dilate our cause 457 hereby wyth poses and sentences, we may with ease talke at large. This shall serue for an example. The more precious a thyng is, the more diligently shoulde it bee kepte, and better hede taken to it. Therfore tyme (cosideryng, nothyng is more precious) should warely bee vsed, and good care taken, that no tyme be lost, without some profite gotten. For if they are to be punished, that spend their money, and waist their landes, what folie is it, not to thynke theim worthie muche more blame, that spend their tyme (whiche is the chifest treasure that God geueth) either idlely, or els vngodly. For what other thing doeth manne lose, when he loseth his tyme, but his life. And what can be more deare to man, then his life. If wee lose a litle money, or a ryng of golde with a stone, in it, we compt that greate losse. And I praie you, whe we lose a whole daie, whiche is a good porcion of a mannes life, shall wee not compte that a losse, consideryng thoughe our noney bee gone, wee maye recouer the same again, but tyme lost can neuer be called backe again. Again, when we lose our money, some bodye getteth good by it, but the losse of time turneth to no mannes auaile. There is no man that loseth in anye other thynge, but some bodye gaynethe by it sauynge onelye in the losse of tyme. Yea, it hath saued the lyfe of some, to lose all that they hadde. For riches be the occasion sometymes of muche mischiefe in this lyfe, so that it were better sometymes wastefully to spende, then warely to kepe: by the losse of tyme, no man hath profited him selfe any thing at all. Besides this. the better & more precious a thyng is, the more shame to sped it fondly. Thuough me kepe their goodes neuer so close, and locke them vp neuer so fast, yet often tymes, either by some mischaunce of fyre, or other thinge, they are lost, or els desperate Dickes borowes nowe and then against the owners will, all that euer he hath. And now though the owner be vndon, yet is he not therefore disshonest, considering honestie standeth not in welth, or heapes of money: but the losse of time, seyng it happeneth thorowe our owne folie, not onely doeth it make vs wretches but also causeth men to thinke, that we are past all grace. A wonderfull kind of infamie, whe the whole blame shall rest vpon none other mannes necke, but vpon his onely that suffereth all the harme. With money a man maie buy lande, but none can get honestie of that price: and yet with well vsing of time, a man not onely might get him moche worship but also might purchase himself a name for euer. Yea, in a small time a man might get greate fame, and liue in moche estimacion. By losing of money, we lose little els: but losing of time, we lose all the goodnesse and giftes of God, whiche by labour might bee had. Thus a similitude might bee enlarged, by heaping good sentences, when one thing is compared with an other, and a conclusion made thereupon. Emong the learned men of the Churche, no one vseth this figure, more then Chrisostome, whose writinges the rather seme more pleasaunt & swete. For similitudes are not onely vsed to amplifie a matter, but also to beautifie thesame, to delite the hearers, to make the matter plain, & to shew a certain maiestie, with the report of soche resembled thinges, but bicause I haue spoke of simitudes heretofore, in the boke of Logique, I will surcesse to talke any further of this matter. with examples. And therfore moche are thei to be commended, whiche searche Chronicles of all ages, and compare the state of our elders, with this present time. The historie of Gods boke to the christian is infallible, and therefore, the rehearsall of soche good thinges, as are therin coteined, moue the faithfull to all vpright doing, and amendment of their life. The Ethnicke aucthours stirre the hearers, being wel applied to the purpose. For when it shal be reported that thei, whiche had no knowlege of God, liued in a brotherly loue, one towardes an other, detested aduoutrie, banished periures, hanged the vnthanckefull, kept the idle without meate, til thei laboured for their liuing, suffred none extorcion, exempted bribers, from bearing rule in the comon weale: the christians must nedes be ashamed of their euill behauioor, and studie moche to passe those, whiche are in calling moche vnder theim, and not suffer that the ignoraunt and Paganes life, shall counteruaile the taught children of God, and passe the Christias so moche in good liuing as the Christians passe theim in good learning. Uneguall examples commende moche the matter. I cal them vnegual, when the weaker is brought in against the stronger, as if children be faithfull, moche more ought men to be faithfull. If women be chaste, and vndefiled: men should moche more be cleane, and without faulte. If an vnlearned man will do no wrong, a learned man and preacher, must moche more bee vpright, and liue without blame. If an housholder will deale iustly with his seruauntes, a king must moche the rather deale iustlie with his Subiectes. Examples gathered out of histories, and vsed in this sort, helpe moche towardes perswasion. Yea, brute beastes minister greate occasion of right good matter, considering many of them haue shewen vnto vs, the paternes and Images of diuers vertues. 459 Doues seing an Hauke, gather all together, teaching vs none other thing, but in aduersitie to sticke one to an other. 460 Craines in the night haue their watche, warning vs neuer to bee carelesse, for if their watche faile them, thei all neuer leaue till thei haue killed that one Crane, teaching vs that no traitours are worthie to liue vpon yearth. The watche for his safegarde, and bicause he would not slepe: holdeth a stone in his foote, the whiche falleth from him, when he beginneth to wae heauie, and so kepeth himself still waking. Whereby we maie learne that all menne in their vocacion, should bee right ware and watchfull. The Henne clocketh her chickens, feedeth them, and kepeth them from the Kite. Women muste clocke their children, bryng theim vp well, and kepe them from euill happe. Now I might in speaking of some odious vice, largely set out some exaple, belonging to the same, and compare it with other, by heaping of Chronicles, 461 and matching of thinges together. The vnthankefull in this age (whereof there is no small nomber) can not haue enough saied against theim. And therefore I am minded to saie some what against theim, to the vtter abhorring of al soche vnkinde dealing. For he that is vnthankfull, and for hartie loue, sheweth cakard hatred: wateth all other vertues, that are required to be in manne, The chief perfeccion and the absolute fulfilling of the lawe, standeth in the loue, whiche man oweth first to God, and next to his neighbour. Let a manne haue faithe, that he maie bee able to translate Mountaines (as sainct Paule saith): yea, let him haue neuer so good qualities, or bee he neuer so politique a man, for the saufegard of his countrey, be he neuer so wise, so ware, and so watchfull: yet if he want loue, he is nothing els but as a soundyng brasse, or a tincklyng Cymball. Now, he that is churlishe and vnthankefull, muste needes wante loue, and therefore wanteth he all other goodnes. The Persians therfore, 462 seyng the greatnesse of this offence, and that where it rested, all vices for euer were banished: prouided by a lawe, that soche should suffer death as Felons, whiche wer found faultie with vnthankfulnes. And yet I can not se, but thei deserue rather an exquisite kinde of death (soche as few haue seen, or fewe haue felte) then to suffer like death with other, that haue not like offended with theim. But now bicause this offence, is an euill moste odious, and the principall occasion of all other mischief: I will sette forthe three notable examples, the one of a Dragon, the seconde of a Dogge, and the third of a Lion (whiche all three in thankfulnesse, if that be true, whiche is reported of theim wonderfullie exceaded) and the rather I seke to set theim out, that the wicked hereby maie well knowe, what thei them selues are, when brute beastes shall set them all to schole. There was a man (as Plinie writeth) whiche fostered vp a young Dragon, who seyng thesame beaste to wae wonderfull 463 greate, feared to kepe his dragon any longer within in his house and therfore he put him out into a wilde forest. It happened afterward, that thesame manne trauailing on his iourney, through, the Foreste, was beset with Thieues. And now beyng in this distresse, and lokyng for none other eande but death, made (as lothe to departe) a greate shoute and outcrie: straight vpon whose noise, and at the knowlege of his voice, the Dragon came to him in all the hast possible. Whereupon the Thieues beyng greatly afraied, ran clean awaie, to saue theimselues harmelesse. Thus through the thankefulnesse of a Dragon, this mannes life was saued. 464 The Dogge of the Romaine Fuluius, is more wonderfull. This Fuluius trauailing by the waie, was slain with slaues, that laie in waite for him. His Dogge seyng his master ded, laie by him for the space of two daies. Whereupon when the man was missyng, and searche made for him: thei found him dedde, with his Dogge liyng by him. Some marueiling to se the Dogge lie there, by his dedde master, stroke him, and would haue driuen him from the ded corse, & could not: some seing soche kindnes in the Dogge, & pitiyng hym, that he should lie there without meate, twoo or three daies before: cast him a pece of fleshe, wherupon the Dogge straite caried the meate to his masters mouthe, and would not eate any whit himself, though he had forborne meate so long before. And last of al, when this ded body should be cast into the riuer (according to the maner of the Romaines) the Dogge lept in after, and holding vp his master so long as he could, did chuse rather to die with him, then to liue without him. 465 The Lio (wherof Appian the Grammarian doth speake) is also straunge for his kindnesse, and almoste incredible. A seruaunt that had run awaie from his Maister, and hid him self for feare in a caue, within a greate woode, toke a thorne out of a Lions foote, whiche then came to him for succour, as he laie there. Now when he had doen, the Lion to requite his good turne, brought soche meate to the caue, as he could kill in the woode. The whiche meate, the seruaunt rostyng against the Sunne (beyng in the moste hotte countrey of all Affrica) did eate from time to time. At length yet being wearie of soche a lothsome life, he left the caue, and came abrode, by meanes whereof, he was taken again, and being a slaue to his maister (who had power of life and death ouer him) he was condempned to be caste to the wilde beastes at Roome, there to be deuoured of a Lion. The poore caitife stode pitifully in the sight of thousandes, euer loking when he should be deuoured. It happened at the same time, when this felow was thus adiudged to dye: that the same Lion was taken, whose foote he healed in the woodde. When the Lion was put to him, he came firste verie terriblie towardes this fellowe, and immediatlie knowyng what he was, stoode still, and at length fauned gentlie vpon him. The fellowe at first beyng amased, began to take harte vnto him afterwardes, as halfe knowing hym likewise, and thus thei began bothe to take acquaintaunce the one of the other, and plaied together a good space, without all daunger, whereupon the people beyng amased, moche wondered at the straungenesse of this thing. And standing thus astonied, thei sent to know of the slaue, what this matter should meane. Unto whom this poore wretche opened the whole thynge altogether, euen as it happened. When the people heard this, thei not onelie reioised moche at the sight therof, but also thei made earnest request to his master for his life. His master marueiling as moche as any of the, at soche an vnwont kindnes: gaue him not onely his life, but also his fredome. And now to the ende he might haue somewhat wherupon to liue, the people gaue him a fee for terme of his life. The felowe by & by got him a lime and a coler, and caried the Lion vp and doune the citee in soche sort, as huntesmen carie a greihound, or a spaniell, the people still wondering, and saiyng, euer as he came by: behold a man that hath cured a Lio, behold a Lion that hath saued a man. The whiche example, the more straunge it is the more ashamed maie thei bee that are vnnaturall, & maie learn kindnes of a brute beast. For soche me being ouercum with kindnes by beastes, ar worse then beastes, & more mete rather to be tormented with deuils, then to liue with men. And now bicause examples enriched by copie, helpe moche for amplificacio: I will giue a taste, how these and soch like histories maie be encreased. And for the better handling of them, nedefull it is to marke well the circumstaunces: that being well obserued, and compared together on bothe partes, thei maie the rather be enlarged. As thus. That whiche brute beastes haue doen, shalt thou 466 being a man, seme not to haue doen? Thei shewed themselues naturall, and wilte thou appere vnnaturall? Naie, thei ouercame nature, and wilt thou be ouercome of them? Thei became of beastes in bodie, men in nature, and wilt thou become of a man in bodie, a beast in nature? Thei being without reason, declared the propertie of reasonable creatures, and wilte thou beyng a man endued with reason, appere in thy dooynges altogether vnreasonable? Shall Dogges bee thankfull: and men, yea, christen men want soche a vertue? Shall wormes shewe soche kindnes: and men appere gracelesse? It had been no matter if thei had been vnthankful: but man can neuer escape blame, seing God hath commaunded, and nature hath graffed this in all men: that thei should doe to other, as thei would be dooen vnto. Again, thei for meate onely, shewed the selues so kinde:and shall man for so many benefites receiued, and for soche goodnes shewed, requite for good will, euill deedes: for hartie loue, dedly hatred: for vertue, vice: and for life giuen to him, yelde death to other? Nature hath parted man and beast: and shall man in nature be no ma? Shamed be that wretche that goeth against nature, that onely hath the shape of man, & in nature is worse then a beast. Yea worthy are al soche, rather to be torne wt deuils then to liue with men. Thus an exaple might most copiously be augmented, but thus moche for this tyme is sufficiente. 467 The saiyng of Poetes, and all their fables, are not to bee forgotten, for by them we maie talke at large, and win men by perswasio, if we declare before hand, that these tales wer not fained of soche wisemen without cause, neither yet continued vntill this time, and kept in memorie without good consideracion, and therevpon declare the true meaning of al soche writing. For vndoubtedly, there is no one tale emong al the Poetes, but vnder thesame is coprehended some thing that perteineth, either to the amendement of maners, to the knowlege of truthe, to the setting forthe of natures worke, or els to the vnderstanding of some notable thing doen. For what other is the painfull trauail of Ulisses, discribed so largely by Homere, but a liuely picture of mannes miserie in this life. And as Plutarche saieth: & likewise Basilius Magnus: In the Iliades are described strength, & valiantnes of the body: In Odissea is set forth a liuely paterne of ye minde. 468 The Poetes were wise men, and wished in harte the redresse of thinges, the whiche when for feare, thei durste not openlie rebuke, thei did in colours paint theim out, and told men by shadowes, what thei should doe in good sothe, or els bicause the wicked were vnworthie to heare the truthe, thei spake so, that none might vnderstande, but these vnto who thei pleased to vttter their meanyng, and knewe theim to be men of honest conuersacion. We read of Danae the faire damosell, who Iupiter tempted 469 full oft, and could neuer have his pleasure, till at legth he made it raine golde, and so as she satte in her chimney, a greate deale fell vpon her lap, the whiche she toke gladlie,  & kept it there: within the whiche golde Iupiter himselfe was comprehended, whereby is none other thing els signified, but that women haue been, and will be ouercome with money. not haue his wille, till he tourned himself into a faire white Bull, whiche signified that beautie maie ouercome the best. If a man would speake againste couetous caitifes, can he better shewe what thei are, then by setting forth the strange plague of Tantalus, who is reported to be in helle, hauyng 471 Water commyng still to his Chinne, and yet neuer able to drinke: and an Apple hangyng before his mouthe, and yet neuer able to eate? wherupon when he had them set together with wae, & ioined to his side, he mounted vp into the aire. But so sone as the Sunne had somewhat heated him, and his wae bega to melt, he fell doune into a great riuer, & was drouned out of hand, the which water was euer after called by his name. Now what other thing doeth this tale shewe vs, but that euery ma should not meddle with thinges aboue his copasse. might bee golde: whereupon when Iupiter had graunted him his bounde: his meate, drinke, and all other thynges tourned into gold, and he choked with his owne desire as all couetous menne lightlie shall be, that can neuer be content when thei have enough. but that reason should withstande affeccion, and the spirite foreuer should fight, against the fleshe? We Christians had like fables heresofore of ioily fellowes, the Images whereof were set vp (in Gods name) euen in our Churches. But is any man so mad to thinke, that euer there was soche a one as S. Christofer was painted vnto vs? Marie God forbid. 475 Assuredlie when he liued vpon yearth, there were other houses builded for hym, then wee haue at this tyme, and I thinke Tailers wer moche troubled, to take measure of him for making his garmentes. He might be of kin to Garganteo, if he were as bigge as he is set forth in Antwerpt. But this was the meaning of our elders (and the name self doth signifie none other) that euery man should beare Christ vpo his back, that is to saie, he should loue his brother, as Christ loued vs, & gaue his bodie for vs: he should trauaile through hunger, cold, sorowe, sickenes, death, and al daungers, with al suffrance that might be. And whether should he trauaile? To the euerliuing God. But how? In darknes? No forsoth by the light of his worde. And therfore S. Christofer being in the sea, and not well able to get out (that is to saie, beyng almoste drouned in sinne, and not knowing which waie best to escape) an Eremite appeared vnto him with a laterne and a light therin, the whiche doeth signifie none other thing to the Christian, but the true worde of God, whiche lighteneth the hartes of men, and giueth vnderstanding to the younglinges 476 (as the Prophete doeth saie.) Again, S. George he is set on horsebacke, & killeth a Dragon with his speare, which Dragon would haue deuoured a virgine, wherby is none other thing meant, but that a king and euery man, vnto who thexecucion of iustice is comitted, should defende thinnocent against the vngodlie attemptes of the wicked, & rather kille soche Deuilles by marciall lawe, then suffer the innocentes to take any wrong. But who gaue our clergie any soch authoritie, that those monsters should be in Churches, as laie mennes bokes? God forbad by expresse woorde, to make any grauen Image, & shal we be so bolde to breake Gods wil for a good entent, & call these Idols laie mennes bokes? I could talke largely of exaples, and heape a nomber here together, aswel of Ethnike aucthors, as of other here at home: but for feare I should be tedious, these for this time shall suffise. 477 The feined fables, soche as are attributed vnto brute beastes, would not be forgotten at any hande. For not onely thei delite the rude and ignorant, but also thei helpe moche for perswasion. And bicause soche as speake in open audience, haue euer moe fooles to heare the, then wisemen to giue iudgement: I would thinke it not amisse, to speake moche, according to the nature and fasie of the ignorant, that the rather thei might be wonne through fables, to learn more weightie & graue matters, for all men cannot brooke sage causes, and auncient collacions:but wil lyke earnest matters the rather, if some thing be spoke there emong agreing to their natures. The multitude (as Horace doth say)is a beast, or rather a moster that hath many heades  478 and therefore like vnto the diuersitie of natures, varietie of inuencion must alwaies be vsed. Talke altogether of moste graue matters, or depely searche out the ground of thynges or vse the Quiddities of Dunce to sette forth Godes misteries: & you shal see the ignoraunt (I warrant you) either fal a slepe, or elles bid you farewell. The multitude must needs be made mery: & the more folish your talke is the more wise will thei counte it to be. And yet it is no foolishnesse, but rather wisedome to winne men, by tellynge of fables to heare of Gods goodnesse. Undoubtedly fables well sette forthe haue doen moche good at diuerse tymes, and in diuerse commune weales. The Romaine Menenius Agrippa allegyng vpon a time a fable of the conflicte, made betwixt the partes of a mannes body, and his belie: quieted a merueilous stirre that was lyke to ensewe and pacified the vprore of sediciouse rebelles, whiche els thoughte for euer to destroy their countrie. Themistocles perwaded the Athenias not to chaunge their Officers, by rehersyng the fable of a scabbed foxe. For ([quoth] he) when many flees stode feedyng vpon his rawe fleshe, & had well fedde themselues, he was contented at anothers persuasion, to haue them flapte away: wherupon there ensewed soche hungry flees afterwardes, that the sorie Foxe beeyng all alone, was eaten vp almoste to the harde boone, and therfore cursed the time that euer he agreed to any soche euill counsell. In like maner ([illeg.] Themistocles) if you will chaunge Officers, the hungry flees will eate you vp one after another, whereas now you liue beyng but onely bitten, and lyke to haue no farther harme, but rather moche welth and quietnesse hereafter, because they are filled, and haue enough, that heretofore suckte so moche of your bloud. Now likewise, as I gaue a lesson how to enlarge en example, so many fables also in like sorte be sette out, and augmented at large by Amplification. Thus moche for the vse of fables, Againe sometymes feined Narrations and wittie inuented matters (as though they were true in deede) helpe wel to set forward a cause, & haue greate grace in the, being aptely vsed and wel inuented. Luciane passeth in this pointe: and sir Thomas More for his Eutopia ca soner be remebred of me, then worthely praised of any, according as thexcellencie of his inuencio in that behaulf doeth moste iustly require. 479 Digesteon is an ordely placing of thynges, partyng euery matter seuerally. Tullie hath an example hereof in his Oration, whiche he made for Sextus Roscius Amarinus. There are three thynges ([quoth] Tullie) whiche hynder Sertus Roscius at this tyme, the accusacion of his aduersaries, the boldenes of them, and the power that they bear. Cruscus his accuser hath taken vpon him to forge false matter, the Roscians kinsfolke haue boldly aduentured, and wil face out their doynges, and Chrisogonus here, that most can do, wil presse vs with his power. 480 A Whisht, is when we bid them holde their peace that haue least cause to speake, and can do litle good with their talkyng. Diogenes beeyng vppon the Sea emong a nuber of naughtie packes in a greate storme of wether, when diuerse of these wicked felowes cried out for feare of drownynge, some with faineth prayour to Iuppiter, some to Neptune, and euery one as they beste fantaised 481 the goddes aboue: whishte ([quoth] Diogenes) for by Godes mother, If God hymselfe knowe you be here, you are lyke to be drowned euery mothers sonne of you. Meanynge that they were so nought, and so fainedly made their prayour to false Godes, without mynde to amende their naughtie life, that the lyuyng GOD would not leaue theim vnpunished, though they cried neuer so fast. We vse this figure likewise whe in speakyng of any man: we saie, whisht, the woulfe is at hand, when the same manne cometh in the meane season, of whome wee spake before. 482 Contrarietie is, when our talke standeth by contrarie wordes, or sentences together. As thus, wee mighte despraise some one man, he is of a straunge nature as euer I sawe, for to his frende he is churlishe, to his foe he is ientle: geue him faire wordes, and you offend him: checke him sharpely, and you wynne him. Let hym haue his will, and he will flye in your face: kepe hym shorte, and you shall haue hym at commandement. and without feare, euen to the proudeste of them, whatsoeuer we please, or haue list to speake. Diogenes herein did excelle, and feared no man, when he sawe just cause to saie his mynde. This worlde wanteth suche as he was, and hath ouer many soche, as neuer honest man was, that is to say, flatterers, fawners, and sothers of mennes saiynges. as hotte as a toste. We neede no examples for this matter, hote men haue so many, of whom thei may bee bolde and spare not, that finde theim selues a cold. Some tymes we entreate earnestly and make meanes by praier to winne fauour. Sometymes we seke fauour by 485 speaking well of the companie present. As. Thorowe your helpe my lords this good deede hath been done. Sometymes we speake to hurt our aduersaries, by setting forth their euil 486 Sometymes we wish vnto God for redresse of euil. Sometymes we curse the extreme wickednes of some paste 488 or yet any rehersal had been greately necessarie, considering al these come without any great learnyng, sauynge that for apt bestowing, iudgement is right nedefull. When any sentence vpon the placyng, or settyng of wordes, is said to be a figure: thesaied is alwaies called a Scheme, the whiche wordes beynge altered, or displaced, the figure streight doeth lose his name, and is called no more a scheme. Of this sorte there be diuerse, soche as hereafter folowe. worde twise together. Ah wretche, wretche, that 491 I am. Tullie against Catiline inueighyng sore against his traiterouse attempts, saith after a long rehersed matter, and yet notwithstandyng all this notourious wickednesse: the man liueth still, liueth? Nay Marie he comethe into the counsell house whiche is more. An other: Darest thou shewe the face, thou wretched theef, thou thefe I saie to thine owne father, darest thou looke abrode? Thus the ofte repeatynge of one woorde dooeth muche stirre the hearer, and makes the worde seeme greater, as thoughe a sworde were ofte diggede and thruste twise, or thrise in one place of the bodie. 492 Altering part of a worde, is when we take a letter, or sillable fro some worde, or els adde a letter, or sillable to a worde. As thus. William Somer seing moche a dooe for accoumptes makyng, and that the Kynges Maiestie of moste worthie memorie Henry theighte wanted money, soche as was due vnto hym: And please your grace ([quoth] he) you haue so many Frauditours, so many Conueiers, and so many Deceiuers to get vp your money, that thei get al to themselues. Whether he said true, or no, let God iudge that, it was vnhapely spoken of a foole, and I thynke he had some Scholemaister: he should haue saied Auditours, Surueyours and Receiuours. 493 Repeticion is when we begynne diuerse sentencies one after another, with one and thesame worde, As thus: When thou shalte appere at the terrible daie of iudgement before the high maiestie of God, wher is then thy richesse? Where is then thy deintie faire? Where is tha thy great band of men? Where are then thy faire houses? Where are then al thy lades, pastures, parkes, & forestes? I mighte saie thus of our soueraine lorde the Kynges maiestie that nowe is, Kyng Edwarde hath ouerthrowne idololatrie: Kyng Edwarde hath bannished superstition: Kynge Edward by Gods helpe hath brought vs to the true knoweledge of our creation: Kyng Edwarde hath quieted our consciences, and laboured that al his people should seeke health by the death and Passion of Christ alone. 494 Conuersion is an ofte repeatying of the last worde, & is contrarie so that which went before. When iust dealing is not vsed: wealth goeth awaye, frendship goeth away, truthe goeth awaie, all goodnes (to speake at a worde) goeth awaie. Wher affections beare rule, there reason is subdued, honestie is subdued, good wil is subdued, and al thinges elles that withstande euill, for euer are subdued. are in one kynd of speakyng vsed, so that bothe one first worde must ofte be rehersed, and likewise all one last word. What winneth the hartes of men? Liberalitie. What causeth men to aduenture their lifes, & dye willyngly in defence of their masters? Liberalitie. What continueth the estat of a King? Liberalitie. What becometh  496 a woman best, and fist of all? Silence. What seconde? Silence. What third? Silence. What fourth? Silence. Yea, if a ma should aske me til dowmes day, I would stil crie, silence, silence, without the which no woman hath any good gifte, but hauing thesame, no doubt she must haue many other notable giftes, as the which of necessitie do euer folow soche a vertue. answer one another. If we would rebuke a naughty boie, we might with comending a good boie, say thus. What a boie art thou in comarison of this fellow here. Thou sleapes: he wakes: thou plaies: he studies: thou art euer abrode: he is euer at home: thou neuer waites: he still doth his attendaunce: thou carest for no body: he doeth his dutie to all men: thou doest what thou canst to hurt all, and please none: he dothe what he can, to hurte none, and please all. words do end in lyke sillables, which do lacke cases. Thou liues wickedly, thou spekes naughtely. The rebelles of Northfolke ([quoth] a most worthie man that made an inuectiue against the) through slauerie, shew Nobilitie: in dede miserably, in fashio cruelly, in cause deuililishly Sentencies also are said to fal like, when diuerse wordes in one sentence ende in lyke cases, and that in ryme. By great trauaile is got moche auaile, by earnest affection, men learne discretion. when contrarie thynges are repeated together: when that ones again is vtterde, whiche before was spoken: when sentencies are turned, and letters are altered. Of the firste this may be an example: Where learnyng is loued, there labour is estemed: but wher sleuth is thought solace, there rudenes taketh place. A kyng is honoured, that is a kyng in deede, wil you drynk or you go, or wil you go or you drinke; There is a difference betwixt an horsemilne, & a milnehorse. He is a meter man to driue the Carte, than to serue in the Courte. Through labour cometh honour, through ydell lyuyng foloweth hangyng. Diuerse in this our tyme, delite moche in this kind of writyng, whiche beyng measurably vsed, delyteth moche the hearers, otherwise it offendeth, and werieth 499 mennes eares with sacitie. S. Augustin had a goodly gift in this behaulf, & yet some thinks he forgot measure, and vsed ouermoche this kynde of figure. Notwithstandyng the people were soche where he liued, that thei toke moche delite in rimed sentences, & in Oratios made ballade wise. Yea, they were so nyce & so waiwarde to please, that except the Preacher from tyme to tyme, could ryme out his Sermon, they 500 woulde not long abide the hearyng. Tacitus also sheweth that in his tyme, the Iudges & Seriauntes at the lawe, wer driuen to vse this kind of phrase, both in their writyng, & also in their speakyng. Yea, great lordes would thinke theselfes 501 contepned, if learned men (when they speake before the) sought not to speake in this sorte. So that for the flowynge stile, & ful sentence, crepte in mynstrelles elocution, talkyng matters altogether in rime, & for weightinesse & grauitie of words, succeded nothing els but wantonnesse of inuencion. Tullie was forsaken, with Liuie, Cesar, & other: And Apuleius, Ausonius, wyth soche mystrell makers were, altogether folowed. And I thynke the Popes heretofore (seeyng 502 the peoples folie to be soche) made all our Hymnes & Anthemes in rime, that with the singyng of me, plaiyng of organnes, ringyng of belles, & rimyng of Hymnes, & Sequencies the poore ignoraunt might thynke the Harmonie to be heauenly, and verely beleue that the Angels of God made not abetter noise in heauen. I speake thus moche of these two figures, not that I thinke folie to vse them (for they are pleasaunt & praise worthie) but my talke is to this end, that thei should neither onely, nor chefely be vsed, as I knowe some in this our tyme, do ouermoch vse them in their writinges. And ouermoche (as al men knowe) was neuer good yet. Yea a man way haue ouermoche of his mothers blessyng, if she will neuer leaue blessyng. Therefore a measure is best, yea, euen in the best thinges. And thus farre for these. ij. figures. sentence answereth to thother, with iust proporcio of nomber, not that the sillables of necessitie, should be of iust nobre, but that the eare might iudge them to bee so eguall, that there maie appere small difference. As thus. Lawe without mercie, is extreme power, yet men thorowe folie, deserue soche iustice. Learnyng is daungerous, if an euill man haue it. The more noble a man is, the more ientle he should be. Isocrates passeth in this behalfe, who is thought to write altogether in nomber, keping iust proporcion in framyng of his sentence. Sentences are called like, when contraries are set together, and the first taketh asmuche as the other 504 folowyng: and the other folowyng, taketh asmoch awaie, as that did, whiche wente before. As thus. Lust hath ouercome shamefastenesse, impudecie hath ouercome feare, and madnesse hath ouercome reason. Or els sentences are said to be like emong themselfs, when euery part of one sentence is egual, and of like weight one with another As thus. Is it knowen, tried, proued, euident, open, and assured that I did soche a deede? Another. Soche riote, Dicyng, Carding, piking, stealyng, fighting, ruffins, queanes and harlottes, muste nedes bryng hym to naught. nexte before, and bryng another woorde thereupon that encreaseth the matter, as though one should go vp apaire of staiers, and not leaue til he come at the toppe. Or thus. Gradacion is when a sentence is disseuered by degrees, so that the worde, which endeth the sentence goyng before, doeth begin the next. Labour getteth learnyng. learning getteth fame, fame getteth honour, honour getteth blesse for euer. Another. Of slouth cometh pleasure, of pleasure cometh spending, of spedyng cometh whoryng, of whoryng cometh lacke, of lacke cometh thefte, of thefte cometh hangyng, and there an ende for this worlde. 506 That is called regression, when we repeate a worde eftsones, that hath ben spoken, and rehersed before, whether the same bee in the beginnyng, in the middest, or in the latter ende of a sentence. In the beginnyng, thus. Thou art ordeined to rule other, and not other to rule thee. In the middest, thus. He that hath money, hath not geuen it, and he that hath geuen money, hathe not his money still: but he that hath geuen thankes, hath thankes still, and he that hath them still, hath geuen them notwistandyng. In the latter ende, thus. Manne must not liue to eate, but eate to liue. Man is not made for the Sabboth, but the Sabboth is made for man. If man do any filthy thyng, and take pleasure therin: the pleasure goeth awaie, but the shame tarieth stil. If manne do any good thing with pain, the paines go awaie, but the honestie abideth still. 507 Wordes louse are soche, whiche as are vttred without  any addicion of coniunctions, soche as knitte wordes and sentences together. As thus. Obeye the Kyng, feare his lawes, kepe thy vocacion, doo right, seke reste, like well a little, vse all men, as thou wouldest thei should vse thee. 508 Out criyng is when with voyce we make an exclamacion. Oh Lorde, O God, O worlde, O life, O maners of menne? O death, where is thy styng? O hell where is thy victorie? Can he haue any mannes harte in hym, or deseruethe he the name of a man, that cruelly killeth a poore innocent man, who neuer thought hym harme. I fear not myne aduersarie, because I am not giltie, I mistrust not the Iudges, because they are iust, the quest will not cast me, the matter is so plain. Better it were to rule, then to serue: For, he that ruleth, liueth: because he is free. But he that serueth, cannot be saied to liue. For where bondage is, there is no life properly. a time wil come when accompt shalbe made. Whe thynges cannot be, that we would haue, we should will that, whiche we can haue. Pacience is a remedy for euery disease. or bothe? Another. What made hym to commit soche a robberie? Lacke of money, or lacke of wit, or lacke of honestie? I doubt whether to call hym a foolishe knaue, or a knauishe foole. When moche matter was here in England, for callyng the Pope, supreme hedde 511 of the Churche ([illeg.] a Spaniarde, that whilome was of the Popes court in Rome) you doubt moche here in England, whether the Pope be hedde of the churche or no, and greate variaunce there is emonges you, at the which foly of yours I do moche maruaill, for we doubte moche at Rome, whether he be a member of the Churche at all, or no. There is no streate, no house, no man, no child, no shop, no lodgyng in all this toune, but he hath been in it. There is no stone, no Diamond, no Saphire, no Rubie, no Christal: no Turcasse, no Emerode, but he knoweth theim pefectly. By this figure we may enlarge that, by rehersyng of the partes, whiche was spoken generally, and in fewe wordes. This maie be an example. Suche a ientleman beyng an vnthrifte, hath spent all that 513 euer he had. Thus the sentece maie be amplified, if we shew particularly what he had, and tell seuerally how he spent it. Loke what enheritaunce came to him (which was no small thyng) by the death of his awn kinne, & his wifes kinsfolke: What dower soeuer he had by mariage of his wife, whiche by report was a very greate thyng: What soeuer he got by executorship: What soeuer the kinges Maiestie gaue him. What booties soeuer he gotte in warrefare, looke what money he had, what plate, what apparell, what householde stuffe, what lande and Lordeshippes, what Sehpe, goodes, Parkes, and Medowes, yea, what soeuer he had, moueable, or vnmoueable, his house, and al that euer he had: he hath so spent in fewe daies, so wasted it, and made soche hauocke of all together, emong the beastly companie of filthy queanes, emong abhominable harlottes, with banquetyng from daie to daie, wyth sumptueous reare suppers, wyth drinkyng in the nighte, with daintes and delicates, and all soche sweete delites, with Dicing, Carding, and al maner of gamenyng: that he hath nowe left neither crosse nor crucifixe, no not a dodkin in all the worlde, to blesse hym selfe with all. Thus these wordes (he hath spent al his goodes in riot, are dilated and set furthe at large, by rehearsyng seuerally euery thing one after another. 514 Then wee reason the matter wyth our selfes, when we aske questions of our selfes, and answer therevnto. As thus, Howe came this good felowe by all that he hath? Did his father leaue hym any lande? Not a foote. Did his frendes geue hym any thynge? Not a grote. Hath he serued in any vocacion, to heape vp so moche wealth? None hath liued more idlely. Doeth he not leane to some noble man? Yea, but he neuer receiued more then. iiij. marke wages. How then cometh he by al that euer he hath, liuyng without labour, hauyng no frendes to helpe him, hauyng so litle to take vnto by all outwarde apparaunce, and spendyng so liberally, and owyng no man a grote in all the world? Assuredly, it cannot be other wise, but that he cometh naughtily by moste of that, which he hath. Another. Seyng thou art so basely borne, so poore in state, so smally learned, so hard fauoured, and hast no witte at al, what meanest thou to vaunte thy selfe so moche, and to make soche bragges as thou doest. What doeth make thee to waxe so proude? Thy stocke whereof thou diddest come? Why man, thei are verie base folke. Thyne awne wealth? tushe, thou art as poore as Iob. Thy learning? Marie thou neuer camst yet where any learnyng did growe. Thy beautie? Nowe in good sothe, a worse fauoured manne can there not be vpon yearth again. Thy witte? Nowe God he knoweth, it is as blounte as may bee. What other thyng then, in all this thy braggyng, but plain madnesse. of looke, with looke, shape, with shape, and one thynge with another. As when I see one in a greate heate, and fiersely set vpon his enemie, I might saie, he lette flee at hym like a Dragon. Or thus. He lokes like a Tiger, a man would thinke he would eate one, his countenance is so ougle. He speakes not, but he barkes like a dogge: he whettes his tethe like a Bore, he beates the grounde with his foote, like a greate Horsse: he is as raumpyng as a Lion. By this figure called in Latine Imago, that is to saie an Image, we mighte compare one manne with another, as Salust compareth Ceasar and Cato together, or we mighte heape many men together, and proue by large rehersall, any thyng that we would, the whiche of the Logicians is called induccion. tell our self, what we will do. Phedria in Terence beyng moch troubled and out of quiet, because he was not receiued of his woman, but shutte out of dores, when he was most willyng to se her, made as though he would not come to her afterwardes, nor yet se her at all, when she did moste iently sende for him. And therefore being in his anger, thus he saied: Well, what shall I dooe? Shall I not go, not euen now when she sendes for me, of her awn accorde? Or shall I be of soche a nature, that I cannot abide the despitefulnesse of harlottes? She hath shutte me out, she calles me again. Shal I go to her? Naie I will not, though she entreate me neuer so faire. is prferred, and set before. As a man is sette before a woman. The seconde is, when in amplification, the weightiest wordes are sette last, and in diminishyng, thesame are sette formoste. With what looke, with what face, with what harte dare thou do soch a dede? 518 Circumscription, is a briefe declaryng of a thynge. As thus. He is free, that is subiect to no euill. It is a vertue to eschewe vice. There are diuerse other colours of Rhetorique, to comende and set furthe a sentence, by chaunge of wordes, and moche varietee of speache, but I had rather offende in speakyng to little, then deserue rebuke in saiyng to moche. For asmoche as close silece maie soner be pardoned, then immoderat babling can want iust blame, & therfore thus an ende. As I haue labored to set out thother partes of Rhetorique, in soch ample wise as I thought moste nedefull, so it standethe me in hande, not to slacken myne endeuor, now that I am come to speake of memorie. For, though man haue vnderstading and iudgement, which is one parte of wisedome: yet wanting a remembraunce to apply thynges aptly, when time and place shal best require: he shall do but small good with al his vnderstandyng. And therfore it is said not without reaso, that thesame is memorie to the mynde, that life is to the body. Nowe then what elles must they do that esteme reason, and loue knowlege, but cherishe the memorie from tyme to tyme, as an especial and soueraine preseruatiue, against thinfeccion of cankard obliuio. The faulkners saie it is the first point of haukyng to hold fast. And yet I cannot thinke otherwise, but that in all good learnyng also, it is best & moste expedient, euermore to hold fast. For, what auaile good thinges, if we cannot kepe theim, if we receiue theim in at one eare, and let them out as fast again at the other eare? A good thriftie man will gather his gooddes together, in tyme of plentie, and laie theym out agayne in tyme of nede: and shall not an Oratour haue in store good matter, in the cheste of his memorie, to vse and bestowe in tyme of necessite? I doubte not, but all menne desire to haue a good remembraunce of thynges, the whyche what it is, howe it is dyuived, and howe it maye be preserued, I will shewe in as fewe woordes as I can. kepe those thinges, whiche by mannes wit are coceiued, or thus. Memorie is the power of the mind that conteineth thynges receiued, that calleth to mynde thynges past, & renueth of freshe, thinges forgotten. The Phisicians declare, that in the former parte of the hed, lieth the common sense, the whiche is therfore so called, because it geueth iudgemet, of al the fiue outward sences, onely when thei are presently occupied aboute any thyng. As when I heare a thyng, or see a thyng, my common sense iudgeth, that then I doe heare, or se thesame. But the memorie called the Threasure of the mynde, lieth in the hynder parte, the whiche is made moste perfect by temperatnesse, and moderacion of qualities in the brain. For wher humours excede or want, there must nedes ensue moche weakenesse of remembraunce. Children therefore 520 being ouer moyste, and olde men ouer drie, haue neuer good memories. Again, where ouer moch cold is, & extreme moysture, there is euer moche forgetfulnesse. Therfore it auaileth greatly, what bodies we haue, and of what constitucion thei bee compacte together. For soche as bee hotte and 521 moyste, do sone conceiue matters, but thei kepe not long. Again, thei that been colde and drie, dooe hardely conceiue, but thei kepe it surely, when thei ones haue it. And the reason is this, heate beyng chief qualite, dooeth drawe thinges vnto it (as we maie se by the Sonne) the whiche notwithstandyng are sone after dissipated & resolued. Again, who hath seen a print made in water of any erthly thing? Tha though heate and moysture together, drawe thinges vnto them, yet (we se plainly) thei cannot long hold them. But when the brain is cold and drie, thinges are therfore the faster holden, because it is the propertie of colde and droughte, to thicken all thynges, and to harden theim faste together, as we see the water through coldenesse, is congeled, and softe thynges are frosen oftentymes, almoste as harde as a stone. So that moysture, through heate being chief qualitie, doth drawe: and drought throughe coldnesse, whiche is chief contrary to heate, doeth harden & make thynges faste together. But now how dooe wee knowe, that the memorie resteth in the latter parte of 522 the hedde? No doubte, expeperience hath proued, and confirmed this to be most true. For, there hath been some, that beyng hurt in that parte, haue vtterly forgot their awn name. I do remember one man, that (beeyng hurte in that place, at the insurreccion of the Lincolne Shire men, xv. yeres past) could not deuise the makyng of some Letters, in his Crosse rowe, when he tooke penne and ynke, to write to his frende, whereas before that tyme, he wrote bothe fast and faire, and was learned in the Latine. And therfore when he wrote, he would stande musyng agreate while, before he could call to his remembraunce, howe he vsed to make a. P. a O. or soche another letter, whereupon diuerse moche maruailed what he would haue, or what he ment at the first tyme. For being greued, and willing to aske help, he could not vtter his meanyng, for lacke of remembraunce, and yet his tongue serued hym well otherwise, to vtter what soeuer came in his hedde. 523 Memorie is partely naturall, and partly artificiall. Naturall memorie is, when without any preceptes or lessons, by the onely aptenesse of nature, we beare awaie soche thinges as wee heare. Wherein in some heretofore, did moche excell, and greatly passe all other. 524 As Themistocles, who had so good a memorie, that when one proffered to teache hym the arte of memorie, naye by saincte Marie ([quoth] he) teache me reather the arte of forgettyng. Declaryng thereby that his memorie was passyng good, and that it was more pain for hym, to forgette soche thynges, as he would not kepe, then hard to remember soch thinges as he would knowe. that whereas he was Lorde and ruler ouer. xxij. straunge countries that speake diuers speches, one from an other: he was able to talke wyth eyerye one of theym in their owne countreye language. 526 Lykewise Cyrus Kynge of the Persians, hauynge a greate armye of menne, knewe the names of all his Souldiours. one by his name that was in the Parliamente house at Rome, the seconde daye after he came thither, the number of theim beyng four times as many as they be, that belonge vnto the Parliament here in Englande. and tell one what he should writ, so fast as his penne could runne, and endite letters hym selfe altogether at one time. Thus we see that naturallye menne haue hadde wonderfull memories, as contrarywise there haue bene hearde of as straunge forgetfull wittes. Some hathe not knowen his right hande from his lefte. An other hathe forgotte his 529 owne name. An other hathe caried his knyfe in his mouth: and hath runne rounde aboute the house sekynge for it. An other hath tolde a tale halfe an houre together, and immediatly after hath forgotte what he speke all that while. Cicero telleth of one Curio, that whereas he woulde make a deuision of three partes, he would either foget the thirde, or make vp a fourthe, contrarie to his firste purpose and entente. This I remember beings a boye, that where as a preacher hadde taken vpon him to set for thethe. xij. Articles of 530 our beliefe, he coulde not in all the worlde finde oute paste nine. So that he was faine to saye, he was assured there was twelue, where soeuer the other thre were become, and he doubted not but the hearers knewe theim better then he did, and therefore he woulde for his parte saye no more, but commit them all to God, and those nine (thoughte he) were enoughe for him at that time, to set forthe and expounde for their vnderstanding. Now the beste meane bothe to mend an euil memorie, and to preserue a good, is firste to kepe a diet, and eschewe 531 surfites, to slepe moderatlye, to accompanye with woman rarelye, and laste of all to exercise the witte with cunnynge of manye thinges without Booke, and euer to be occupied with one things or other. For euen as by laboure the witte is whetted, so by lithernes the witte is blounted. But nowe concerning the other kinde of memorye called artificiall, I had nede to make a long discourse, consideringe, the straungenesse of the thynge to the English eare, and the hardnes of the matter, to the ignoraunte & vnlearned. But firste I wil shew from whence it hath beginning, and vpon what occasion it was firste inuented, before I aduenture to declare the preceptes that belonge vnto the same. 532 same man (as the fable recordeth) had made in behalfe of a triumphat Champion called Scopas, for a certain summe of money a Ballade, soche as was then wonte to bee made for Conquerours: he was denied a piece of his rewarde, because he made a digression in his songe (whiche in those daies was customablye vsed) to the praise and comendacion of Castor and Pollux (who were then thoughte being Twinnes, and gotte by Iupiter to be Goddes) of whome the Champion willed hym to aske a porcion, because he hadde so largelye set forthe their worthye doynges. Nowe it chaunced, that where as there was made a great feast, to the honour of the same Uictorye, and Simonides had bene placed there as a geste, he has sodainelie called from the table, and tolde that there was two yong men at the dore, & both on horsebacke, whiche desired moste earnestlye to speake with him oute of hande. But when he came out of the dores, he sawe none at all, notwithstandynge, he was not so sone out, and his fote on the threshoulde, but the Parlour fel downe immediatlye vpon theim al that were there, and so crusshed their bodies together, & in soche sorte, that the kinsfolke of those whiche were dead, commyng in, and desirous to burie theim euery one according to their callyng, not onely could they not perceive them by their faces, but also they coulde not discerne theim by any other marke of any parte in all their bodies. Then Simonides well remembryng in what place euerye one of theim did sitte, tolde theim what euery one was, and gaue them their kinsfolkes carkases, so many as wer there. Thus the arte was first inuented. And yet (thoughe this be but a fable) reason might beat thus moche into our heades, that if the like thing had bene doen, the like remembraunce might haue ben vsed. For who is he that seeth a dosen sit at a table, whom he knoweth very well, can not tel, after they are all risen, where euery one of them did sitte before? And therfore, be it that some man inuented this tale: the matter serueth well our purpose, and what nede we any more? Thei that will remember many thinges and rehearse them together out of hande: must learne to haue places, and digest Images in them accordinglie. A place is called any roume, apt to receiue thinges. An Image is any picture or shape, to declare some certain thing thereby. And euen as in wae we make a printe with a seale, so we haue places where liuely pictures muste be set. The places must be greate, of small distaunce, not one 533 like an other, and euermore the fifte place, must be made notable aboue the rest, hauing alwaies some seuerall note fro the other, as some antique, or a hande poinctyng, or soche like, that the rather hauing a greate nomber of places, wee might the better knowe where we are, by the remembrauce of soche notable and straunge places. And thus hauyng the well appoincted, we must kepe them freshe in our memorie, and neuer chaunge them, but vse them still, whatsoeuer we haue to saie. But the Images we maie chaunge, as the matter shall giue iuste cause, vsing soche as shall serue beste for the knowlege of thinges. The whiche Images must be set 534 forthe, as though thei were stirring, yea, thei must be sometimes made raumping, and laste of all, thei must be made of thinges notable, soche as maie cause earneste impression of thinges in our minde. As a notable euill fauoured man, or a monstruous horse, soche as sainct Georges horse was wonte to be, or any soche like, helpe well for remembraunce. i.   The places of Memorie, ar resembled vnto Wae and Paper. --- ij.   Images are coumpted like vnto Letters, or a Seale. iij.   The placyng of these Images, is like vnto wordes written. iiij.   The vtteraunce and vsing of them, is like vnto reading. And therefore, as wee dooe reserue Paper, and yet chaunge our writting, putting out wordes as occasio shall serue, and setting other in their roume: so maie we doe for the Images inuented, chaunge our pictures oft, and reserue the papers still. Some gather their places and ymages oute of the crosse rowe, beginninge euerye letter with the name of some Beaste, and so go thorowe the whole, makyng in euerie beaste fyue seuerall places, where the impression of thynges shalbe made, that is to saye, in the Heade, the Bealye, in the Taile, in the former parte of the legges, and also in the hinder part. So that by this meanes, there shall be gathered, and hundreth and fiftene places. Some again wil set their places in his head or, body with is who they speake. As to make the nose, the eyes, the forhead, the heere, the eares & other partes, to serue for places. And for making places in any house, church or other rowme this lesson is also geuen, that we enter oure first places alwaies vpon the right hande, neuer returning backe: but goinge on styll as I might saye in a circuite, till we come to that place where we first beganne. But first before the Images be inuented, the places must be learned perfitelye & therfore one geueth cousaill that wee shoulde go into some solitary place where no copany is & there make our places, walking vp & downe four or fiue times, & callyng styl to our remebraunce what, & where the places are. And not onelye to do this once or twise, but labor in it two or thre daies at seueral times vntil we shal be able to tel our places vpo our fingers endes. An nowe to make this harde matter somewhat plaine, I wil vse an example. My frende (whom I toke euer to be an honest man) is accused of thefte, of aduoutrie, of ryot, of man slaughter, & of treason, if I would kepe these wordes in my remembraunce, & rehearse them in order as they were spoken, I must appointe fiue places, the whiche I hadde neade to haue so perfectly in my memorye, as could be possible. As for example, I will make these in my chamber. A dore, a windowe, a presse, a besteade, & a chimney. Nowe in the dore, I wil set Cacus the thefe, or some soche notable verlet. In the windowe I will place Venus. In the presse I will put Apitius that famous glutton. In the besteade I wil set Richard the thirde kinge of Englande, or some like notable murtherer. In the chimneye I will place the blake Smythe, or some other notable traitoure. That if one repete these places, and these Images twise or thrise together, no doubte though he haue but a meane memorie, he shall carie away the wordes rehearsed with ease. And like as he maye do with these fiue wordes, so may he do with fiue score, if he haue places fresh in his remembraunce, and do but vse him selfe to this trade one fortenight together. Therfore though it seme strauge and folish to them that know it not, yet the learned haue taken this way, & doubte not but maruayles maye be done, if one haue places readye made for the purpose, &I haue them fresh in his remebraunce. For what other thing els do they yt appoint ymages in certain placs made for that purpose, but write (as a man would saye) vpon Paper, that whiche is spoken vnto them? What maketh the olde manne (that for lacke of naturall heate and moisture, scant knoweth his right had fro his lefte) remeber in the morning wher he laied his purse al nyght, but ye beddes heade which lyghtlye is the appointed place for al mennes purses, especiallie soch as be wayfairers, & haue but litle store. Shal some gentilman playe blindefold at the chesse and ca not a learned man be able to rehearse vp a score or .ij. of straung names together? A Neteherd hauing the charge and keping of twentie score hed of beastes in a wyld Fenne. that belonge to diuers menne, will not onely tell who be the owners of al soch cattel, but also he wil shew a manne twise a weeke where any one is feading, & if he want one among the whole, he will tel immediatly what it is, and whose it is that is wantinge. Then fonde are they that counte the Art of Memorie so harde, seynge they wil neither proue the hardenes of it, nor yet blowsh at the matter, when they se pore neteherdes go so farre beyonde them. Howe many thinges dothe Memorie conteine marueilous to beholde, and moche more woulde, if we were not altogether slouthfull, and as carelesse to kepe, as we are to gette, good thinges I meane, not goodes of this world. Euerye Artificer hath through exercise and laboure, an artificial memorye, sauynge the learned, man onelye, who hath moste nede of it aboue all other. When we come to a place wher we haue not bene many a daye before, we remembre not onely the place it selfe, but by the place, we call to remembraunce manye thinges done there. Yea sometimes a window maketh some remeber, that they haue stolen in their daies some thinge out of it. Sometimes a chimney telleth them of manie late drinkinges and sittinges vp by the fire. Sometimes a bedestead putieth the in remembraunce of many good morowes, sometymes a doore, and sometymes a parler. Thus wee see places euen without Images, helpe ofte the memorie, moche more then shall we remember, if we haue bothe places and Images. But now, bicause I haue halfe weried the reader with a tedious matter, I will harten him again with a merie tale. At the tyme of rebellion in Northfolke, there was a Prieste emong all other, adiudged to dye vpon a Gibet, in a greene place, a little from the high waie side. This Priest seyng the place at his last ende, stode a while musing with himself, and 535 saied to the companie there. Now Lorde God, what a thing is this. It comes to my remembraunce now, that about, xiiij yeres paste, I was merie here vpon this bancke, with an other Prieste, and wallowyng me doune vpon the Grasse, I saied these wordes: H aec requies mea in seculum seculi, hic habitabo quoniam elegieam. The whiche Sentence beeyng a Psalme of Dauid, is nothyng els in Englishe: But this is my resting place for euer and euer, here shall bee my dwelling, bicause I haue chosen it. And now ([quoth] he) I finde it to be ouer true, so that I thinke it bee Gods will I should dye, and therefore I take it in good worth, and thus I desire you all to praie for me. Thus we see that the place brought hym in remembraunce of a sentence, spoken .xiiij. yeres before. Therefore, this knowledge is not to bee neglected, no though we doe contempne it, yet we haue the vse of it. For if we be fully disposed to remember a thing, we dooe call vp the memorie, & stirre it to minde thinges like thereunto. As 536 if one be called Wingfeld, and I fear to forget this name, I might remember the wing of a birde, & a grene feld to walk in. Sometimes we remember the whole, by keping in mind some part of a worde. As when one is called Crowcrofte, I might by remembring of a Crow, the rather minde his name. Notwithstanding there be some (emong who is Erasmus) whiche like not this arte of Memorie, but saie it rather hindereth, then helpeth a mannes wit. And yet Tullie the greteste Orator emong the Romaines, did well allowe it, and proued it good by a natural reason. For where as we know some thynges (saieth he) onelie by vnderstandyng, and some by the sense of seyng, those wee keepe beste in our myndes, whiche we knowe by sight, and haue marked with our iyes. As for example. When I see a Lion, the Image thereof abideth faster in my minde, then if I should heare some reporte made of a Lion. Emong al the senses, the iye sight is moste quicke, and conteineth the impression of thinges more assuredlie, then any of the other senses doe. And the rather when a man dothe heareth and seeth a thing (as by artificiall memorie, he doeth almost se thinges liuely) he doeth remember it moche the better. The sight printeth thinges in a mannes memorie, as a seale dooeth printe a mannes name in wae. And therefore, heretofore Images wer sette vp for remembraunce of sainctes, to bee laie mennes bookes, that the rather by seyng the pictures of soche men, thei might be stirred to followe their good liuing. The whiche surely had been well dooen, if God had not forbidden it. But seyng thynges must be doen, not of a good entent, but euen as God hath comaunded, it is well dooen that soche Idols are cleane taken out of the churche. Marie for this purpose, whereof we now write, thei would haue serued gailie well. Thus the arte is sone told, but the practise of it is all. And therefore, if one desire to excell herein, let him take paines to gather his places together, and kepe them wel in remembraunce, prouing by halfe a score, how he shalbe able to vse a. C. And no doubte, but time and exercise shal make him perfect. For the best art of memorie that can bee, is to heare moche, to speake moche to reade moche, and to write moche. And exercise it is that doeth all, when we haue saied all that euer we can. countenaunce, and all the whole body, according to the worthines of soche woordes and matter, as by speach are declared. The vse hereof is soche, for any one that liketh to haue praise, for telling his tale in open assembly, that hauing a good toungue, and a comelie countenaunce, he shall bee thought to passe all other, that haue the like vtterance: though thei haue moch better learning. The tongue giueth a certain grace to euery matter, & beautifieth the cause in like maner, as a sweete sounding Lute, moche setteth forthe a meane deuised Ballade. Or as the sounde of a good instrument, stirreth the hearers, and moueth moche delite, so a cleare soundyng voice, coumforteth moche our deintie eares, with moche sweete melodie, and causeth vs to allowe the matter, rather for the reporters sake, then the reporter, for the matters sake. Demosthenes therefore, that famous Orator, being asked what was the chiefest poincte in 538 all Oratorie, gaue the chief and onely praise to Pronunciation, being demaunded, what was the second, and the third he still made answere, Pronunciacio, and would make none other aunswere, till thei left asking, declaring hereby, that arte without vtteraunce can doe nothing, vtteraunce without, arte, can doe right moche. And no doubt, that man is in outward apparaunce, halfe a good clarke, that hath a cleane 539 tongue, and a comelie gesture of his bodie. Aeschines likewise, beyng banished his Countrie through Demosthenes, when he had red to the Rhodians his owne Oracion & Demosthenes answere thereunto, by force whereof he was banished, and al thei marueiled moche, at the excellencie of the same: then (cp Aeschines) you would haue marueiled moche more, if you had heard himself speake it. Thus beyng cast in miserie, and banished for euer, he could not but giue soche greate reporte of his moste dedlie and mortall enemie. Pronunciacion, standeth partlie in fashionyng the tongue, and partlie in framing the gesture. The tongue or voice, is praise worthie, if the vtteraunce be audible, strong, and easie, and apt to order as wee liste. Therefore, thei that minde to get praise, in telling their minde in open audience, must at the first beginning, speake some what softlie, vse mete pausing, and being somwhat heated, rise with their voice, as the time and cause shall best require. Thei that haue no good voices by nature, or can not well vtter their woordes, must seke for helpe elswhere. Exercise of the bodie, fasting, moderation in meate, and drinke, gaping wide, or singing plaine song, and counterfeicting those that dooe speake distincly, helpe moche to haue a good deliueraunce. Demosthenes being not able to pronounce the firste letter of that Arte, whiche he professed, but would saie, for, Rhetorique, Letolike, vsed to put little stones vnder his tong, and so pronounced, where by he spake at length so plainlie, as any manne in the worlde could doe. Musicians in England haue vsed, to put gagges in childres mouthes, that thei might pronounce distinctlie, but nowe with the losse and lacke of Musicke, the loue also is gone of bringing vp children to speake plainlie. Some there be that 540 either naturally, or through folie haue soche euil voices, and soche lacke of vtteraunce, and soche euill gesture, that it moche defaceth all their dooynges. One pipes out his wordes so smalle, through defaulte of his winde pipe, that ye would thinke he whisteled. An other is hource in his throte, that a manne would thinke, he came latelie from scouryng of harnesse. An other speakes, as though he had plummes in his mouthe. An other speakes in his throte, as thoughe a good Ale crumme stacke faste. An other ratles his woordes. An other choppes his wordes. An other speakes, as though his woordes had neede to be heaued out with leauers. An other speakes, as though his woordes should bee weighed in a ballaunce. An other gapes to fetche winde at euery thirde woorde. This manne barkes out his Englishe Northrenlike, with I saie, and thou ladde. An other speakes so finely as though he were brought vp in a Ladies Chamber. As I knewe a Priest that was as nice as a Nonnes [illeg.]anne, when he would saie Masse, he would neuer saie Dominus vobiscum Commendementes of GOD, Blacke Uellet, for Commaundementes, and blacke veluet. Some blowes at their nostrilles. Some sighes out their woordes. Some synges their sentences. Some laughes altogether, whe thei speake to any bodie. Some gruntes like a Hogge. Some cackels like a Henne, or a Iacke Dawe. Some speakes as though thei should tell a tale in their sleue. Some cries out so loude, that thei would make a mannes eares ake to heare theim. Some coughes at euery word. Some hemmes it out. Some spittes fire, thei talke so hotelie. Some makes a wrie mouth and so thei wreste out their woordes. Some whines like a Pigge. Some suppes their wordes vp, as a poore man doth his porage. Some noddes their hed at euery sentence. An other winckes with one iye, and some with bothe. This man frouneth alwaies when he speakes. An other lokes euer as though he wer mad. Some cannot speake, but thei must go vp and doune, or at the least be stirring their fete, as though thei stoode in a cockeryng Boate. An other will plaie with his cappe in his hande, and so tell his tale. Some when thei speake in a greate companie, will looke all one waie, as I knewe a reader in my daies, who looked in like sorte, when he redde to Scholers, whom one thought to disappoincte of soche his constante lookes: and therefore againste the nexte daie, he painted the Deuill with hornes vppon his hedde, in the self same place, where the Reader was wonte alwaies to looke, the whiche straunge monster, when the Reader sawe, he was halfe abashed, and tourned his face an other waie. Some pores vpon the ground, as though thei sought for pinnes. Tullie telles of one Theophrastus Tauriscus, who is saied to declaime arsee versee. Some swelles in the face, and filles their Chekes full of winde, as thoughe thei would blowe out their woordes. Some settes forthe their lippes, twoo ynches good beyonde their teeth. Some talkes as though their tongue wente of patins. Some shewes all their teeth. Some speakes in their teeth altogether. Some lettes their woordes fall in their lippes, scant opening them when thei speake. There are a thousande soche faultes emong menne, bothe for their speache, and also for their gesture, the whiche if in their young yeres, thei bee not remedied, thei will hardlie bee forgotte, when thei come to mannes state. But the rather that these faultes maie bee redressed: I haue partly declared heretofore, the right vse of vtteraunce, and now I minde by Gods help, to shewe the right vse of gesture. 541 Gesture is a certain comely moderacion of the countenance, and all other partes of mannes body, aptlie agreeyng to those thinges, whiche are spoken. That if we shall speake in a pleasaunt matter, it is meete that the looke also should bee cherefull, and all the gesture stirring thereafter. The hedde to bee holden vpright, the forehedde without frounyng, the browes without bendyng, the nose without blowyng, the iyes quicke and pleasaunt, the lippes not laied out, the teeth without grenning, the armes not moche caste abroade, but comelie sette out, as tyme, and cause shall beste require: the handes sometymes opened, and sometymes holden together, the fingers poinctyng, the breaste laied out, and the whole bodie stirryng altogether, with a semelie moderacion. By the whiche behauiour of our bodie, after soche a sorte, we shall not onelie delite menne with the sight, but perswade them the rather the truthe of our cause. had soche grace in that behalfe: that I doubte whether men had a greater desire to see him, then thei had to heare hym. His countenaunce so well agreed with his wordes, and his wordes were so meete for his countenaunce: that not onelie he did please the iudgemente of his hearers, and contented their minde; but also he pleased their iyes, and delited their eares, so moche as could be wished. Tullie saieth well: The gesture of manne, is the speache of his bodie, and therfore reason it is, that like as the speach must agree to the matter, so muste also the gesture agree to the minde, for the iyes are not giuen to manne onelie to se, but also to shewe, and set forthe the meanyng of his minde, euen as vnto a Bore, are giuen briselles: To a Lion, the taile: to a horse, his eares: whereby their inclinacions and sodaine affections are sone espied. When wee see a manne looke redde in the iyes, his browes bente, his teethe bityng his vpper lippe, we iudge that he is out of pacience. Therefore as wee ought to have good regarde, for the vtteraunce of our woordes, so we ought to take hede that our gesture bee comelie, the whiche bothe beeyng well obserued, shall encrease fame, and get estimacion vniuersallie. But heare an ende. And now as my will hath been earneste, to dooe my beste: so I wishe that my paines, maie bee taken thereafter. And yet what needes wishyng, seing the good will not speake euill: and the wicked can not speake well. Therefore beyng staied vppon the good, and assured of their ientle bearyng with me: I feare mone, bicause I stande vppon a saufe ground. 
