  How by the euyll counsayll of the Arche byshop there was newe customes reysed in the cyte of Constantynoble, and how thys treason was knowen. Ca.  vii. How the Emperour Alexader by the cousayll of ye wisest sent for the kynge Pepyn for to se the trouth of the quarel of the marchaut & of the Arche byshop. ca.  viii. How the Arche bysshop and the marchaut foughte in a felde for to knowe the occasyon of Bellyssant, & how the arche bysshop was dyscomfyted. ca.  ix. How kyng Pepyn toke leue of ye Emperour for to retorne into Fraunce, & how he went vnto Rome afterwarde agaynst the sarazyns that had take ye cyte. ca.  x. How kinge Pepyn besyeged Rome, And how Ualentyne Iusted wyth the admyrall & slewe hym, by whose prudence thei cyte was gotten agayne. ca.  xi. How Haufray and Henry had enuy at Ualentyne bicause that the kyng loued hym so well. ca.  xii. How Ualentyne conquered his brother Orson in ye forest of Orleauce. ca. xiii. How Ualentyne after that he had conquered Orson retorned vnto Orleaunce. ca. xiiii. How Haufray and Henry wolde haue slayne Ualentine in the chambre of the fayre Eglantyne. ca.  xv. Howe the duke Sauery sent towarde kynge Pepyn for succoure agaynst the grene knyght that wold haue hys doughter Fezonne by force. ca.  xvi. How dyuers knyghtes came into Acquitayne for to wynne the fayre lady Fezonne. ca.  xvii. How Haufray and Henry made Ualetyne to be watched and Orson on the way for to be slayne. ca.  xviii. How Orson & Grygar fought together before kynge Pepyn, & how Orson vanquysshed hym. ca.  xix.  ¶Howe Grygar after that he was vanquyshed and ouercomen by Orson cofessed the treaso that Haufrai and Henry had done agaynst the noble Ualentyne, and than was hanged and howe Ualentyne was delyuered out of prison and how Ualentyne and Orson departed for to go towarde Acquitayne. ca.  xx. ¶How Orso waged battayle against the grene knight And how Ualentyne fought with hym and myght not ouer come hym ca.  xxi. ¶How Ualetyne by the grace of god auised him for to send Orson vpo the morow for to fight with the grene knyght, & howe orson ouercame hym in batayl. ca. xxii. How after that Orson had conquered the great knyght, Ualentyne made hym to be christened, & sente him vnto kyng Pepyn And howe he had knowledge of hys fader & moder through the grene knyght. ca.  xxiii. How on the nyghte that Orson had handfeste Fezon an aungell appeard vnto Ualentyne & of the commaudemennt that he gaue hym, ca.  xxiiii. ¶How kyng Pipyn hadde knowledge that Ualentine and orson were his neuewes by Blandymayn and the grene knyght that came and yelded hym to the king as he had promysed Ualentyne before. ca.  xxv. How the good king Pepyn departed out of Fraunce for to go towarde the Emperoure of grece to bere hym tidinges of his sister bellissant. And how afore his retornyng he made warre to the Soudan that had besieged Constantynoble. ca.  xxvi. how the grene knyght Iusted agaynste two sarazyns and how he slew the one and the other fledde, and howe kynge Pepyn wyth his hoost was enclose wythin Constantynoble. ca.  xxvii.  How Ualentyne and orson arryued at the strong castel where as the fayre Clerymonde was. ca.  xxviii. Howe as Ualentyne was before the castell spekinge to the gardes Clerymonde made her complaynte all alone of Ualentyne, and how he Iusted for the entre of ye castell wyth the sene shall & slewe hym & whan it. ca.  xxix Howe Ualentyne shewed thei rynge vnto Clerymonde that her brother the grene knyghte had gyuen hym, and how he spake vnto the head of brasse, whiche tolde hym all hys generacyon. ca.  xxx. How by an enchauntour named Pacolet the giaunt Ferragus had tydynges of his syster and of Ualentine And of the aunswere that he gaue Pacolet. ca.  xxxi. Howe Pacolet retorned into Portyngale for to seke Bellyssant Ualentynes mother, and how he saw her in Ferragus castell. ca.  xxxii. How Ualentyne and Orson were betrayed by Ferragus, and how he put them in an obscure pryson whereas they made pyteous complantes. ca.  xxxiii. How Pacolet comforted the two ladyes. ca.  xxxiiii. How Pacolet by his art delyuered Ualentyne & Orson out of kyng Ferragus prison, & coduyted yem out of his coutre wt theyr mother & the fayre Clerymod. xxxv. How Ualentyne and Orson concluded for to departe out of the castell for fere of Farragus, and how the ad the ladyes sayled into Acquytayne. ca.  xxxvi. howe the kyng Ferragus for to haue vengeaunce on Ualentyne & on hys syster Clerymonde made assemble his hoost, & how he diceded in Acquytayne. ca. xxxvii. How the duke of Acquytayne was taken in ye batayl by Ferragus, and how Orsu delyuered hym bi the ayd of Pacolet. Ca.  xxxviii.  How Orson would assaye the will and the truthe of the fayre Fezonne or that he wedded her. cap.  xxxix. How the Gyaunt Ferragus for to haue succur sente for ye king Tropart & the enchautour Adramain. ca.  xl. Of the pyteou coplayntes that the Empresse Bellyssant made vnto her sonne Ualentine or he went vnto Constantinoble, and howe he spake vnto the Emperoure his father before his vncle kyng Pepyn. ca.  xli. Howe Ualentyne and the grene knyghte were taken prysoners in the battayl before Constantinoble by the Soudan Moradyn and his men. cap.  xlii. howe the enchautour Pacolet deliuered valetine & ye grene knight out of ye prison of ye souda Moradin.  xliii. howe Pacolet deceiued the soudan Moradin, & made hym mounte vppon his horse of wodde, and broughte hym in to the cytie of Constantinoble, wenyng to hym that he had brought hym into Portingale. cap.  xliiii. howe the soudane Moradyn was taken and bounde and after was hanged. cap.  xlv how the kyng Trompart came before Acquytayne for to succour the gyaunt Feragus, and brought with hym Adramyne the enchauntour, by whome Pacolet was deceyued and betrayed falsly. cap.  xlvi howe Adramayne and Pacolet playde before the barons, and how Adramaine stole away Pacolettes horse of wodde and the fayre Clerymonde. cap.  xlvii howe the kynge of ynde made kynge Trompartes head to be smyten of, because he had slaine his brother and howe he would haue had the fayre Clerymonde vnto his wyfe. cap.  xlviii. howe Pacolet in a maydens clothyng auenged hym on the false Adramayne. cap xlix.  Howe kyng Ferragus hoost was all discomfited, and put al to death, & how Ferragus was slaine afterward within Acquitayne. cap.  l. ¶How Orson and the Duke of Acquitaine went into Constantinoble with a great hoost for to succoure thei Emperoure. And how Orson ledde the Empresse Bellyssant with hym. cap.  li. ¶Howe the chrysten men for to haue vytayles yssued out of Constantinoble. And how Ualentine & the gren knyght were taken prysoners by the false Sarazyns & paynyms. cap.  lii. ¶Howe by the succoure of the duke of Acquytayne al the paynyms and sarasyns were slayne before the citie of Constantinoble. cap.  liii. ¶How the Emperour receyued his sonne Orson with great ioye, and his wyfe Bellyssant. cap.  liiii. ¶Howe the kyng Pepyn toke leue of the Emperoure of Grece for to retourne into Fraunce. cap.  lv. How Haufray and Henry ymagyned great treason against Orson by the aide and consenting of twaine of their neuewes. cap.  lvi Howe Garnyere entred into king Pepyns chambre for to accomplyshe his cursed enterpryse, and howe he left the knyfe within the kynges bedstrawe. cap. lvii. How Granyere accused Orson falsly of treason vnto kynge Pepyn, and howe the knyfe was founde in the kynges bedde. cap.  lviii How Orson when they would haue iudged hym put opposicion and demaunded batail against his accusers the which was vttred him by the twelue peres of Fraunce. cap.  lix. How Orson slewe Florent in the fyelde, & vanquysshed Garnyere, and how hawfray cut of his head as he would haue confessed the treason. cap.  lx.  How valentyne in sekynge the fayre Clerymonde aryued in Antyoche and howe he fought with a marueilous dragon. cap.  lxi. howe the serpent toke of valentynes helme, & howe Pacolet armed hym and brought hym another helm & of the complaintes yt the quene Rozemonde made for valentyne. cap.  lxii. howe valentyne slewe the dragon through the grace of God almighty. And howe the kynge of Antyoche receyued hym with great honoure. cap.  lxiii. howe valentyne after that he hade discomfyted the dragon made the kyng of Antioche to be baptyzed, and all they of his land, and of the quene Rozemonde that was enamoured on hym. cap.  lxiiii howe the kynge of Antioche was put vnto death for the renounsing of mahowne by Brandyffer his wyues father. And howe the Emperoure of Grece & the gren knyght were taken prisoners by Brandiffer before the cytie of Cretophe. cap.  lxv. howe the fayre Clerimond after that the yeare was complete did counterfet the seke woman to the ende yt the kyng of ynde should not wedde her. And of the king Lucar that would auenge the death of Trompart his father agaynst the kyng of ynde. cap.  lxvi. howe the kyng Lucar in the fayre and great cytye of Esclardye wedded and toke vnto wife the fayre ad gracyous Rozemonde. cap.  lxvii. howe the noble knyght valentine departed from Esclardy for to go into the mighty & pusaut cytie of ynde the gret for to bere ye defiauce of kyng Lucar. ca.  lxviii.  Howe Ualentyne didde his message to the kynge of ynde frome the kyng Lucar, and of the aunswere that was geuen hym. cap.  lxix. howe valentyne retourned in to the cytie of Esclardye. And of the aunswere that he hadde of the kynge of ynde to bere to kyng Lucar. cap.  lxx. how kyng Lucar with fyftene kynges wente and assyged the kyng of ynde. cap. lxxi. howe the kyng of ynde caryed a waye the fayre Rozemonde behynde hym, and howe valentyne rescowede her and brought her agayne. cap.  lxxii. howe Rozemonde founde the maner and the facyon to make her selfe be led vnto the kyng of ynde the more the whiche she loued perfytely and howe he ledde hir in to his cytie of ynde. cap.  lxxiii. howe kyng Lucar dyd so muche that kyng Brandiffer abode with him, and sent Ualentyne into Angorye agaynst kyng Pepyn. cap.  lxxiiii. howe Pocolet by his charme and crafte made all the sarazyns to be put vnto death. And howe kynge Murgalant was slayne. cap.  lxxv. howe the sarazyns were discomfyted and how kynge Pepyn toke the cytie of Angorye. cap.  lxxvi. howe Ualentyne retorned into ynde after the batail & bare with him ye body of king Murgalat, cap.  lxxvii. howe valentyne herde tydinges of his father & how Pacolet deliuered the king of ynde by his charme, and deliuered him Brandiffer at his own will. ca. lxxviii. howe kynge Lucar made all the hondred sarazins to be drawen at horses tayles. And how Ualentyne & Pacolet departed out of his hoost secretly for to goo vnto Angorye. cap.  lxxix.  Of thei vysion of kyng Pepyn. And howe he wente into the holy lande with the twelue yeres cap.  lxxx. How kynge Pepyn put hym vpon the waie in the habye of a pylgrym with they twelue peres of Fraunce, and howe the kinge Pepin spake vnto Haufray & Henry before all the lordes of hys courte. cap.  lxxxi. How Haufray and Henry betrayed the kynge Pepin ther father and the twelue yeres of Fraunce. ca.  lxxxii. How the Calyphe of Bendas aryued in the hooste of kynge. Brandiffer and howe he gate trewes for a moneth durynge the whiche trewes he made the peace betwene the kynge of ynde and kynge Lucar and Brandyffer. cap.  lxxxiii. Howe Haufray for to accomplysshe his treason aryued before Lucar and Brandiffer and how he himself was deceiued by treason. cap.  lxxxiiii. howe kynge Brandiffer wrote a letter vnto his doughter Galazy and gaue it haufray for to bere vnto the stroge castell. cap.  lxxxv. How the fayre Galazye after that she knewe the falsnes and treason of Haufray she made him to be put in a darke pryson muche streghtly. cap.  lxxxvi. Howe Ualentyne and Pacolet ariued before ye stroge castel and how Pacolet reised vp the deuil for to know if he might take it. cap.  lxxxvii. Howe kynge Brandyffer and kyng Lucar toke kyng Pepyn and the twelue yeres of Fraunce within the citie of Iherusalem. cap.  lxxxviii. Howe the kinge of Surie sent a messenger vnto thei Patriarke of Iherusalem byddynge hym brynge him king Pepin and the twelue yeres of Fraunce ye whiche he dyd. cap.  lxxxix.  ¶How the kyng of ynde the great ledde kynge Pepyn away for the parte of his prysoners, but he knewe not that he was kyng of Fraunce. ca.  lxxxx. ¶Howe kynge Pepyn beynge wyth the kynge of ynde had knowledge of the fayre Clerymonde. ca.  lxxxxi. How Brandyffer broughte vnto the stronge castell ye twelue yeres of Frauce, & put them in priso. ca.  lxxxxii. Howe Brandyffer after that he hadde assembled his hoost mounted on the see and wente and beseged ye cite of Angory. ca.  lxxxxiii. How Brandiffer knewe that Lucar was in Angorye And sent vnto Ualentyne for to make they appoyntement to bye hym agayne, ca.  lxxxxiiii. Howe Ualentyne demaunded the kynge of Fraunce for chaunge of kynge Lucar by the consente of the lordes and barons. ca  lxxxxv. How Myllon dangler that was named the kynge of Fraunce for to saue king Pepyn was deliuered out of the priso of brandiffer in chauge of kinge lucar. lxxxxvi. How Ualentyne and the duke Myllon yssued out of Angory vpon the sarazyns, and howe the sarazyns loste the batayll and were discomfited. ca.  lxxxxvii. How kyng Pepyn was deleuered in chaunge of thei kyng of yndes Marshal. lxxxxviii. Howe kynge Pepyn toke his leue of the fayre Clerymonde and howe he tolde Ualentyne tydynges where she was. ca.  lxxxxix. How kynge Pepyn departed from Angorye and retorned into Fraunce for to socoure hys wyfe, ca.  C. Howe Ualentyne wente into ynde the great, & counterfet the physycyon for to se the fayre Clerymonde, ad how he spake with her. ca.  Ci.  Howe Ualentyne rode away with Clerymonde and how the kynge of Brytayne was yelded vnto kyng Pepyn by treason. ca.  C.ii Howe Ualentyne toke the stronge castell, and deliuered his father the Emperoure of Grece, and all the prysoners that were with hym. ca.  C.iii How the Sene shal went vnto Ualentynes shyppes & how he was put vnto death with al his men. ca.  C.iiii How the emperoure Orson, and the Grene knyghte abode in garneson in the stronge castell. And how Hawfray and Henry made theyr fader to dye. ca.  C.v How after the deathe of kynge Pepyn the duke Millon Dangler would haue made thei lytle Charles to be crowned kynge of Fraunce. ca.  Cvi How the emperoure of Grece, Orson and the grene knight departed fro the strong castel for to go to socour Ualentyne in Angorye. ca.  C.vii How the christen men yssued out of the cyte of Angorye, and of the ordynaunce, and of theyre maruaylous bataeles. ca  cviii How Ualentyne slewe his fader pyteosly in the battayle without knowing hym. ca C.ix How myllon dangler retorned into Frauce. And how Ualentyne and Orson retorned into grece. ca.  Cx How Ualentyne toke leue of the fayr clerymond for to go vnto Rome for to be sheryuen of his synne, ca.  cxi How Ualentine in great dolour of his body perfourmed his penaunce for the sleyng of his fader, ca.  C.xii. Howe the kynge hugon made Clerymonde to be demaunded for wyfe, and how he betrayed Orson ad the grene knyght. ca.  Cxiii How Galeran dyd his message vnto Bellyssant and the fayre Clerymonde, & of the maruaylous complayntes that Clerymonde made. Ca.  Cxiiii.  How Bellyssant and clerymonde knew the treason and false enterpryse of kynge Hugon, and how the prouoste smote of the head of Galeran. Ca.  Cxv. How Orson and the Grene knyght were delyuered out of the pryson of the kynge of Surye, by the appointement of the warre that they made after to kinge Hugon of Hongrye. Ca.  Cxvi. How at the ende of seuen yere Ualentynge died with in his palays of Constantinoble, and howe he wrote a letre that he was knowen by. Ca.  Cxvii. Of the meruaylus vysyon of Orson, and howe he became an hermyte in a great wodde. Ca.  Cxviii. Here endeth the toble newly corecte, & truely set in order so that ye may fynde euery chapyter lyghtly as ye nombre sheweth. ¶Howe the kyng Pepyn wedded Berthe a lady of great renowne. Verytably we fynde in the auncient Cronicles, that the noble and valiaunte kynge Pepyn wedded and toke vnto wyfe Berthe of greate renowne, dyscrete and prudent, whiche had and suffred in here tyme greate trybulacyons and aduersites by enuy. For she was chaced and expulsed from they company and habytacyon of the foresayde kynge her husbande by a false and acoursed olde woman replete with malice. The whiche olde woman for the fyrste nyghte found maner and facion to put a doughter of hers in ye place of the good Quene Berthe. And she ledde and conduited this treason for to vphoulde her doughter with the kynge in the place of Berthe his spouce, for the resembled muche. The whiche kinge hadde twoo children by that mayden, that is to witte Haufray, and Henry, the whiche in that tyme of their reigne greued and wasted muche the countrey of Fraunce and were of fierse courage and full of maltalent, These twayne were cause to put the Quene Berthe in exile, wher as she suffred innumerable paynes and dolours. And the foresaid lady was full longe in exile leadyng her lyfe in teares and lamentacions. But afterwarde, God of his inestymablle grace, deliuered the good lady from aduersitie, for at the requeste and instaunce of dyuerse great lordes ye lady was accorded vnto her husbande king Pepin, the whiche in great pyte ad honour receiued her. And with in a lytell whyle after she was conceyued with a sone, whiche was the ryght puyssannt Charlemayne, and afterwarde he was chased out of the realme by ye forsaid Haufray and Henry, as it is shewed more playnely in this present booke, but now I wil specifie vnto you ye playne matter of this present booke, and specially of ye dedes and gouernyng of the valeaunt Ualentine, and of his brother Orson. It is truthe that the noble Kynge Pepyn had a syster named Bellyssant fayre pleasaut and ryght gracious: And in euery thyng well tought & endoctryned. And the kynge Pepyn her brother loued her with perfyte loue. And in so muche that it happened for the renowne that she had, and bycause that both great and small loued her for her beaute and humylitie, the kinge Alexader Emperour of Constantinoble was enbraced wyth her loue right ardantli. So it was not longe after that he came into Fraunce for the same cause in right great estate, accompaned with diuers erles and barons the whyche were all in greate pompes and rychesses. So shortly after his arryuayle he assebled all hys great lordes, and comaunded them to aray them in theyr best araye, and that they should go vnto the kyng Pepyn for to knowe yf he wolde geue hym his excellent sister Bellyssant in marriage. And so the wente forthe and spake vnto kyng Pypyn. Also assone as kig Pepin vnderstode theyr message, he graunted them theyr requeste righte Ioyously. wha this was knowen euidently, they made Ioy on euery syde for the good alyaunce of the Emperoure Alexander and of kyng Pepyn, and was receyued with all the tryumphe that myght be. The spousailles was made in greate bobaunce and honoure. It is not to be asked yf there was largesse on euerye syde of all maner of thynges. The feest endured lnge, and than the Emperoure and his men toke leue of kinge Pepin hys brother in lawe for to goe vnto Constantynoble wyth hys Emprisse Bellyssant. The kinge made for to araye his men for to accompanye the Emperour and hys noble syster Bellyssant. And so they mounted all on horsebacke with a great sorte of Ladyes for to conuaye Bellyssant. They the whiche abode behynde, wepte tenderlye for the departyng of the gracyous lady Bellyssant. The kynge conuayed them diuers Iorneys tyll that they arryuted of a porte of the sea where as the Emperour would mount vpo the sea. And ther he toke leue of kyng Pepyn in rendryng hym mo thankes than I can recounte for the noble chere that he had made hym. But amonge all other thynges he thanked hym for hys syster. Bellyssant the whiche he had giuen hym to wyfe withe so fre a wyll. At these wordes kynge Pepyn embraced hym saying thus. Fayre syr and right cordiall lorde and brother to the regard of my puyssauce I haue not receyued you in triumphe & magnificece as I ought to haue done. But so muche I know the graciousnes of you, that of my lytle power ye hold you contente. And to me appertaineth not the thankes and praysinges. but to you when that you haue wylled for to decore me so muche, and with your persone honour that ye haue taken my syster to wyfe. And knowe that from hence forwarde I haue stedfaste purpose that we shall be good frendes together. And as for me I am he that with my puysauce would put both body & goodes in auenture for to serue you and sucoour you in all places after my power. And after kynge Pepyn wente towarde his syster Bellyssant, and sayde vnto her. Fayre syster thynke vpon the place that ye be extraught of ad guyde you in suche maner that I and your frendes, ad all the bloude ryall may haue Ioye profyte and honour of you, you go into a straunge countrey fro your nacio wherfore gouerne you by wyse Ladyes, and kepe you from beleuynge of euyll cousayll, you are the creature in the worlde that I haue moost loued. Wherefore if I hearde any tydynges fro you but good, it woulde be ye cause to abredge my lyfe. The kynge gaue his syster Beliyssant full many notable ensygnementes. And after he embraced her and kissed her full sweteli with wepynge eyen, because of her departyng. And ye gracious lady whiche had a peteous harte aunswered hym litel for nought, for with the pleasaunt eyen she wepte. and with her swetehart syghed so sore, that it was vnpossyble for her for to speake. Then toke leue ladyes and damoselles, knyghtes and squiers, as well of Fraunce as of Constantynoble. There was wept full many a tere, and full many profound syghes was casten out for the Lady Bellyssant. The kyng Pepyn retourned into Fraunce. And the Emperoure mounted on the sea, ad had wynde at wyll. And had the tyme so muche at his pleasure, that within shorte tyme he and hys men arryued at Constantynoble, where as they were receyued with great tryumphe and honoure, the whiche should be to longe to recounte. But it befell not longe after Bellyssant was chaunged in to teeres and lamentacions for the gracious lady Bellyssant, that by treason and false accusacion was casten in exyle, as ye shal heare more playnly. ¶Howe the Emperoure was betrayed by the Archebysshop of Constantynoble, wherfore euyll came to hym as you shall heare. In the cytie of Constantinoble was ane Arche bysshope, the which the Emperour loued aboue all other. And gaue him mo gyftes and rychesses than any other, and moost trusted him. The Emperour made the said archebysshoppe gouernoure of his house and his pryncipall Confessoure and and aboue all other the moost secrete, wherefore he had a sorowfull heart afterwarde. For the false byshop not thynkyng vpon the great honoure and worshyp that ye Emperoure hadde done to hym, was inbraced wyth loue dysordynate, for the cleare beaute of ye excellet lady Bellyssant the whych was so amyable and vertuous He was so feruently take in her loue that it happened one day that he spyed her all alone in her chambre piepayred, and so he wente to her and sat downe, by her & began for to behold her all smylynge, wherof the Lady toke no kepe, for the disleoyall Arche bisshop was so preuy & familier in the house that none in the world wold haue thought that euer he had ben so full of trechery & namely towarde the Emperour that loued him so derelye. Now there is not a worse ennemy than he ye which is a famylyar in a house whan he casteth hym for to doo euyl, as well shewed this false ad cursed Archebysshop the whyche beynge sytting besyde the vertuous Lady opened his venymous mouthe so foule and abhominable, and spake vnto her in thys maner. My righte dere and souerayn lady I am your lytle seruaunt and chaplayne wherefore I beseche you that it wyll please you for to gyue audience vnto my wordes of a thynge the whyche I shall tell you, for the whyche thynge I haue suffered great aduersities and doloures by long contynuance, knowe mi redoughted Ladi that the beaute of your persone, and the pleasaunte fygure formed ad composed aboue natures operacyon, hathe rauysshed my spirites and enbraced me heart in suche wyse that nyghte and daye I thynke on none other thynge but on your highnes And that worse is leseth reste meate, and drynke, maners, and countenaunce whan that I thynke vpon youre fayre eyen and replendysshynge vysag so I requyre of God that he wyll geue you volence and courage for to receaue me for youre symple louer. And that I myght serue you and fulfill your delites and plesures. For if it be so that you refuse me for your louer there is nothinge more nerer me, then to inuo the dethe Alas lady you the whiche is renowmed in euery thing swete and amyable, curtayse benynge and debonayre be not cause to dimnisshe my lyfe, but geue me holly your loue, by suche a couenaunt that I shall be loyall i loue yea more than euer was any man. And that more is be not afrayde nor haue no drede of God for to committe this synne and ofence. For I am the vycayr of God in earth, wherefore I maye gyue you absolucio ad penaunce facile and lyght. At these deceuable wordes diabolique, full of treason and decepcious the lady prudent wyse and eloquent, answered demurely and softely. Ha false and disloyall irreguler Archebysshop, temted & ful of diabolique volence how darest thou proffer with thy mouthe yt ought to be sacred such vilainous wordes dishonest and abhominable, against ye maiesty Imperiall of hym that hathe nourysshed the so tenderly and eleuat in honoure more then to the appertayneth fro whence maye come to thee and moue this maladiccion to be cause of my dampnacion the whiche shoulde instruct me in the faith in maners and condicios euen so as the Emperoure thinketh and affieth hym in all. Neuer please it God that the bloud of Fraunce fro ye whiche I am extraught nor the maiestie of the puissat Emperoure, be shamed nor dysshonoured bi me in ani mane. O false & cursed man, behold what thou woulde do that will dispoyle and vnclothe me of myne honour and put my body in vytuperable shame for euer, & my soule in the waye of dampnacion eternall. Leue thy folyshe opinion, for to suche an end as to haue my loue, thou mayest not attayne nor come to. And if that thou speake any more to me therof, knowe for a certayntye that I shall shewe the Emperoure there of. And then maiest thou saye that of thy lyfe is nothing, go thy way hence and speake no more. Of this aunswere was the Archebysshop to angry, but he durst not procede no further forth on that matter, syth that he might not haue the loue of the lady. And all confused he retourned, for he could not spye nor se by no maner that the Lady shewed to hym any maner of signe of loue yt he myghte comfort him in. He repented him greatly of his foolye, when that he sawe that he was refused of the lady, but he found no remedy for to saue his honour saue by treson, for he thought well within himselfe that the Emperour knewe not be the Empresse the euyll wil of his courage. To sone begane the foly, and late he repented. It happeneth oftentymes that the thinge the which a foole thynketh remaneth vndone. ¶How the Archebysshop gaynsayed of Bellyssant, for to saue his honoure ymagined great treason. In minde and thought to profounde ad enuious was the Archebisshoppe doubtyng that the Emperoure would not make hym dye for the false treason that he had committed against the maiestie of his soueraigne. Wherfore he thought for to saue his honour in the best wyse that he myght. And he dyd so muche that for to couer his maladiction, and for to shew apparece of loyaltie and prudence, in dissimulynge that with all his power he desired the welth and honour of the Emperour, the daye of the Ascencio of our Lorde he came towarde the Emperoure and drewe him a parte, and sayde vnto him in this maner of wyse. Righte hie Emperoure it is true that I knowe the greate graces and benefites that ye haue done and geuen vnto me. And knowe well that by you I am mounted and eleuate in honoure more then vnto me apartayneth. And yet of youre grace ye haue made me, (indigne) mayster and gouornoure of all your house, in puttinge youre trust and confidence more in me, then in any other of youre courte, wherefore I oughte not to be in no place there as I shoulde heare youre maiestie vsurped and dyffamed, and your renowne adnychylled for euen soo god helpe me, if that I hadde not rather submitte my selfe vnto death than for to see or heare before my presence languages or wordes that were not lycyte vnto youre magnificence. Wherfore geuen intelligece vnto my woordes, and I shall declare vnto you a thynge the whiche toucheth greately your persone profyte, and honoure. Syr it is true and certayne, that Bellyssant your wyfe, syster vnto the kynge of Frauce, the which ye haue willed to prayse so muche and honoure, that you haue taken her to spouse (kepethe you not loyalte as she ought to do) for she loueth another than you for very certaynte, & yt she is desloyall vnto you. But it is soo that I will not declare the name nor the persone of hym that doeth his volente with your wyfe, for you knowe well that I am a prieste sacred, and may not desyre the death of no body. But neuer the lesse knew for a certaynte that the truthe of this matter came to ye in confession, wherfore I oughte not nor wyll recyte in no maner the name of hym that doeth you suche dishonoure purchase. But and you wyll beleue me, there is not a more vyler, nor dishonester womane in all youre courte then is your wyfe that you holde so dere, where by your body is in daunger and peryll, for she purchaseth nyght and daye the maner to put you to death, to the ende that she myght dao her wyll the better. And therfore I am bounde to wyll your profyte and keepe your honoure. I aduertyse you and let you know that you take hede, and correcte her also well as you maye. And the moste secretly yt you maye with your honoure Or elles I holde youre honoure loste, and youre pesone dishonoured. For it is to great shame among the prynces, that you thinke that you haue taken to wyfe ye syster of the kynge of fraunce for the floure of beaute, of prudence, and noblenesse, and you haue an harlote, the whiche is enuenymed with your lyfe, & desyreth youre death, in procurynge it frome daye to daye, whereof I am ryght displeasaunt. The whiche thynge loke that you remedy also well as you may for to saue youre honoure. When the Emperour vnderstode the wordes of the false traytoure Archebishoppe, aske not if he were ryghte sorowfull in his harte, and angrye, for he hadde loued her as his lyfe, The Emperoure beliued lyghtly ye wordes of a false Archebesshop, for he had his truste in hym more then in any man of the worlde. The sonne geuen credence made a greate inconuenience to sourde. There is no daunger so great to a prince as to geue credence lyghtly. The Emperour aunswered nothing for he was so espyred withe angre, and wounded at the harte so profoundly, that he lost maner and contenaunce. And wente throughe the palays imperiall, castynge out angusshyous syghes. Then he houed styll a whyle, but he myght not refraine his Ire, wherfore he entred into the chambre of Bellyssant without speaking any worde, or makynge any semblaunt (the which toke no kepe.) And without speakinge any worde to lady or damosell, cruelly, and withe a fyerse courage, came and toke the fayre lady by the head & pulled her by the heer so rudely, that he threwe her against the earth and made her excellent face runne al on bloude. Then begane the lady to wepe and crye ryghte pyteously, and sayde. Alas my ryght dere lorde, what thing moueth you for to smite mee so outragiously. For I didde neuer thing the dayes of my lyfe to you but all honour, & loyal seruyce with my body. Ha hore said the Emperoure I am to well enformed of thi life that cursed be the houre & the daye that euer I had knowledge of the fyrste. And then he smote her agayne so mightely that the good lady loste her speche, and all the ladies and damoyseles wende that she hadde bene dead, wherfore they made a crye so high that the barons and knightes of the court herde it, and ranne quickelye into the chambre. Some toke vp the Empresse Bellissant, and the other spake vnto the Emperoure after this maner of fourm. Alas syr howe haue you your courage so cruel for to destroi and vndo so noble a lady as she is & that is so wel beloued of euery body in whome was neuer sene vyllanye nor dyshonour For God syr be alytle more moderate, For with wronge & without cause, you vndertake this quarell againste the good lady Speake no more said ye Emperour I knowe I see and wotte howe the thynge goeth. And ye more is by god almyghty I am delyuered totally to put her vnto death. And if ther be ani of you that will saye the contrary. I shall make you dye an euyll death. At those wordes spake a wyse baron & said: Redoubted syr auyse you & consider well what ye wyll do you know well that ye lady that you haue spouced is syster vnto the kynge of Fraunce named Pepyn the whiche is puyssaunt fyerse and of greate courage. And you ought to beleue stedfastly that and ye do outrage vnto hys syster Bellyssant, he is a man for to auenge hym by suche a facion that he may do great dammage in his countrey also well vpon men ad chyldren, as on townes & cytyes. And put your selfe in exile, the which should be a great dammag and pitie. And on the other syde you se wel that ye lady is great with child, wherefore it is peryll vnto you for to smyte her or to touche so rudely. afer these wordes ye lady kneled vpo her kne before ye Emperour and spake thus vnto hym ryghte piteously weping ¶Alas mylordde haue pyte on me, for I neuer thought vyllany against your persone, and if that ye will not haue pyte on me at the least haue copassion on the chylde that I bere in my wombe, for I am great with chylde of your dede, of ye whiche god gyue me grace to be deliuered Ioyously. Alas syr I supplye you and requyre you that ye make me be put into a toure, & there to be kept streightly vnto my childing. And after that I am deliuered, do with my body what soeuer you wyll. Thus and in simblable maner, the good lady complayned her wepynge and syghynge full profoundly with a sorowfull harte, and they had theyr hartes ryght harde that could abstaine them from wepyng. But the Emperoure that was deceiued by the false Archebysshop, would haue no compassion on hys wyfe, but cruelly and fyersly answere vnto her. False strompet dishordynate of as muche as thou arte wyth chylde I ought lytle to reioyce me, for I am so muche enformed of thi gouernemet that I haue nothing, and that dysloyally thou hast habandoned thy selfe vnto other than me. wha they sawe that the Emperour wolde not refrayne him nor appese his Ire for nothynge, by a comyn accorde they toke her, and ledde her into a chambre. And the most amyably that they might helde her with wordes in shewinge vnto her, her greate faute, and the sorowfull lady wad disorned in her chambre that hadde her face disteyned with bloude. The ladyes that were next her persone brought her fayre water to wasshe her with all. And at that houre entred into her chambre her squyer named Blandymayn. And whan he sawe her in suche estate, he wepte for pyte, and sayde vnto her. Ha madame I se well that you are falsly betrayed. I beseche god that cursed be the person that hath purchased you this euyll. For god my ryght dere lady take a lytle comforte vnto you. And yf you wyll byleue me I shall lede you into Fraunce agayne toward the kyng Pepyn your brother, the whiche gaue me vnto you for to serue you in your necessities, the whyche thynge I wold do after my puyssauce. Beleue my cousayll and we shall retourne into Fraunce agayne. For you may besure that the Emperour shal make you die shortly with great shame and dyshonoure. Then answered the dolourous lady. Ha Blandymayn my frende it shoulde be to me to shamefull and dyshonest for to go in suche maner without other delyberacyon. And it might be beleued lightly that the Emperour had good cause, and that I were culpable of the dede. Wherfore I had leuer die a euill death, than forto recouer blame for a thynge that I am innocente of, and acoused with out cause. After these things thus said, the Emperour that was with the barons a lytell moderate and satisfied of his Ire, he sente for his wyfe Bellyssante, the whiche was broughte before hime quickely, whan he sawe her his harte trembled for sorowe for this that he durst not put her to deth, because of her brother kig Pepyn, and his puissaunce, withe rude wordes he sayd to her. False & cursed woman by the is myne honoure vyturped. Wherfore I sweare God that, and it were not for thy brothers sake, the valeaunt kyng Pepyn, I shoulde make the to be brent in a fyre, but for his sake thy lyfe shall be prolonged at this present time. Now I do the to wyt, that from this houre I banishe the, & expulse the frome my countree and Empire, in comaunding the expresly, that to morowe thou departe out of this cytie, for if I se the any more, thou shalt neuer haue respite till thou haue suffred death. And yet I commaunde all them of my countrey that there be none so hardy of them to accopany you, or conuey, saue allonely your squyer Blandymaine that you brought out of Fraunce with you. Go where as you wil go at your aduenture, for thou shalt neuer slepe bi mi side, nor in my bede. Sone after that commaundement of the Emperour that was shorte and sodaine, without soiourney or delacion, the Empresse Bellyssant, and her Squyer Blandymayn, mounted on horsebacke and came in to the Cytie, where as was shedde full many a tere bothe of lordes and ladies knightes, and squyers, with al the commune people, the which cried & sorowed out of mesure, for thei made suche lamentacions that there was neuer sene nor hearde so piteous a thinge. Euery body ran vnto the gate, for to comaunde the good lady vnto God, that by the false Archebisshope was so pyteously banyshed. And at the yssue of the gat they made the pitefullest crie that euer was hearde, Nowe goeth Blandymain that conduyeth the sorowefull lady Bellissat and hath taken the waye to go towarde the realme of Fraunce. when the lady was oute of the walles of the citie, and that she sawe her selfe in the fildes pyteousli aiourned, like a woman shamed and dishonowred, she wayled bytterly. For she considered the lygnage, & the bloud royall that she was yssued out of, the right hygh magnificence imperiall that she had bene put in. And after thought on the miserable and dolorous fortune yt was tourned vpon her so sodeynly, she saide. Alas alas wherfore tarieth death, that he will not come & abredge my life, and finisshe my doloures and anguysshes, alas I was borne in an vnhappy houre for to suffer suche payne, and for to fall from so hyghe estate vnto such pouerte, for to fall the vnhapines I am the moste vnhappiest. Nowe is all my ioyes transmued into distres my laughinges chaunged into wepynges, my songes conuerted into syghes. In the stede of the clothe of golde that I was wonte for to weare. I am as a woman publike full of iniuries and vituper committed & aiourned. And of precious stone of inestimable valour, on all sydes I must the remnaunte of my myserable lyfe arouse my vestur with bitter teares, & shal make my lyfe & my dayes to fyniche. O you pastorelles of ye fieldes cosider my greate dolours, and wepe myne exile. Nowe pleased it God and the vyrgin Mary that were desceded of as poore estate as the poorest of the worlde, at the leaste I should haue doloure to see me in suche pouerte. Alas wherefore lyghteth me the sonne, and wherfore doth the earth sustayn me, for I haue no nede that they daungerous fountayne of distresse oppresse me so sore. For it is not in mine humayne puyssaunce, to be wayle the profoude sorow that my poore harte endureth. O false enuye & treason, I ought well for to curse thee with my harte, for by thee to day I am the moste sorowfullest creature liuing vpon the earth & my brother the kynge Pepyn, what shall ye doo with this poore discomforted. It were better for you that I had neuer bene borne of my mother, or that frome the wombe of my mother I had bene put vnder the earth. In makyng this aspyre complaint, the lady abode in a swowne vpon the horse backe, and she was almoste fallen downe or that Blandimain mighte come vnto her then he dressed her vp and sayde vnto her. Alas madame take vnto you some comforte, and enter not so in dispayre, haue stedfast truste in God, for euen so as you are innocent he shal kepe you and defende you alwaies Then he espied a right fayre fountayne, towarde they whiche he ledde the lady. And also nere it as he mighte he set her downe for to repose her & refreshe her. Here I wyll leaue to speake of them, and will speake of the Archebishop that perseuered in his malice dampnable and dyabolyque. ¶Howe the Archebysshop put hym in the habyte of a knyght, and mounted on horsebacke for to folowe the Empresse Bellyssant that was banisshed. When the Archebysshop sawe that the lady was departed, he thought in him selfe that he wold go after her, and that with her he woulde do hys pleasure. He lefte rochet and other vesture, and as irreguler and appostate, gyrde his swerde about hym, and mounted vp on a swifte courser and folowed fast after for he had one of the beste coursers of all Constantynoble. He rode so faste that with in short tyme he had ryden a great waye. And of all them that he mette, he asked tydynges of the noble lady Bellyssant. And they shewed vnto him the waie that she helde. So longe rode ye false traytours Archebysshoppe that he enterd in to a myghty great forest and along, he toke the hyghe waye and enforced hym to ryde a pace. He had not ryden longe whan he apperceiued the lady wyth Blandymayn, the whiche were besyde the fountayne where at the lady was desended for to refresshe her, and rest her for she was wery and heuy ful of sorowe and doloure so that she myght not susteyne her. whyles that Blandymayn coforted the sorofull lady, the Archebysshop drew nere them, and knewe the fayre Bellyssant, but she knewe him not a ferre by cause that he was dysgysed, but whan he approched she knewe him well ynoughe. Alas sayd she Blanymayne, I se now come towarde vs the false. Archebysshop that is cause of mine exyle: Alas I am to sore a ferde that he do me not sume vyllany. Lady sayde Blandymayn, haue of him neythey fere nor doubte. For yf he come for to do you euyl or displeasure I shal put my body for to defende yours vnto the death. At these wordes was arriued the archebisshop that light of his hors, and salued the lady in the best maner that he myght and sayd. Ryght dere and honoured lady, if so be that the Emperour hath dechard you, if you will accepte me for to be your loufe, and accomplysshe my desyre, I shal do so muche towarde the Emperour that he shal put you in your fyrste estate, and be ezalted more hygher then euer you were, wherefore auyse you, for I do it for your great honour and proffyte. Ha sade the lady. dysloyall and cruel aduersery of all honoure imperiall, I ought well to haue cause to loue the, and holde the dere, wha that by thy false malyce thou haste made the Emperour vnderstande that I haue myserable borne me toward hys maiesty and made me be detect from all honoure and prosperyte. Thou hast put me in, the wai of extremite and miseri and is the causer that I shall finyshe my dayes in dolorous distresse, for there is not a more discomforted lady in the worlde then I am, Lady leue suche woordes, for bi me there ca nothing co to you but good. for I am puissaunt ynough for to chaunge your doloure ad discomforte in to Ioye & solace, more then euer you had, In saying these wordes he enclyned hym towarde the lady, and wende to haue kyssed her. But Blandimain sterte betwene them, and gaue the Archebysshoppe so great a stroke that he felled hym vnto the earthe, and brake twayne of his teeth. The Archebysshoppe gate him vp & drew hys sworde quicklye. And Blandimayn toke a glayue that he had brought with him, and assailed hym ryght asprely and the Archebysshoppe hym. They fought so long that they were booth sore wounded, and as they were thus fyghtyng, there arryued on them a notable marchaunt, that ascried vnto them al so ferre as he myghte se them saying. Lordes, lordes leue your debate, ad tell me from whence it procedeth and I shall tell you who hath ryght or wronge. Syr sayd Blandymayn, let vs fynysh our enterpryse. Alas sayd the ladi sucoure vs, for here is the false priest that wyl take myne honour from me by force. whiche is the cursed Archebisshop that hathe separed me by treason from my lord and husband the Emperour. when the marchaunt vnderstode her, he had great pity on her, & sayd to the archebysshop. Syr leue your enterpryse, & toucche not the lady, for and the Emperour knowe of this dede he woulde make you die an euil death before all the world. Also soone as the Archebysshop vnderstode the marchaunt speake, he left the battail quickli and began for to fle through the woode. He was ryght sorowfull that he was knowen, for he thought wel to haue had his pleasure of the lady. But he enterprysed suche a thyng, wherby his reason was knowne afterwarde and dysclosed as it shallbe recounted to you after warde, After the departtynge of the Archebishop ye ladi abode in the woode beside the fountayne tryst and sorowfull, with Blandimayn that was wounded. The marchaunt that was abiden sayd. Alas lady I se that by the Archebysshop ye are falsly betrayed, ad haue be expulsed fro the Emperoure. Now god giue me grace to lyue so longe as I may accuse hym of this misdede and to purchase his death. Lady to god I commaunde you the whiche gyue you pacyence and comforte Soo the marchaunte toke hys leue, ad Blandymayne thanked hym many tymes. Than Blandymaine mounted the Lady vpon her horse, and after mounned vpon hys owne, and wente vnto a lodginge that was there by side, where as they abode bi the space of eyght daies for to hele Blandymain. whan he had rested him, and than he might ride they put them vpon the waye towarde Fraunce, And the sorowfull ladye complayned her by the way and sayde. Alas Blandymain my frende what may my brother and all the lordes saye of my pyteous case, whan they shall knowe that for a vylaynous dede I am so shamefully deicte from the Emperour, and as a comen woman banisshed the Empyre of Constantynoble. Alas I am right certaine that my brother wyl beleue lightli that I am culpable of the dede, ad make me die shamefully for he is right fyerse of courage, lady sade Buladymain be of good chere, & put your trust in god. In spekyng this Blandymayde that the ladye conduyted rode so muche that after that they had passed dyuers countreis & regions, they ariued in Fraunce, & passed by Orleaunce for to go vnto Paris, where as the kyng was accustomed to soiourne moste. So they entred into a great forest that is syxe myle from Orlaunce in the whiche happened pyteous thynges vnto the Empresse Bellyssant, as I shall make mention hereafter. How Bellyssant was delyuered of two fayre sones whiche were named Ualentine and Orson and howe she loste them. Bellyssant was rydyng with in the forest, the whiche was with chylde as you haue heard recyted before. It happened that her bodye had determined and fulfilled her time, that constrayned her for to descende of her horse and complayne her tenderli. Blandimaine demauded her what she ayled that she complayned her soo. Alas Blandymain saide the lady, lyght downe of thy horse and helpe that I were layde vnder yonder great tree, and thynke dylygently for to seke me some wyfe. For the tyme is com that I must nedes be delyuered without any longer delaye. Blandimayne descended quickely and layd her vpon a fayre grene place vnder a tree, the which he did chose and marke for to knowe it the better. And the he helpt on horsebacke, & rode also fast as he might for to seke some wyfe to helpe and sucoure the lady. The noble lody Bellyssant abode there all alone wyth out ani compani saue God and the blessed virgen mary, that dyd helpe her and succoure her in suche maner that she was dlyuered of twoo fayre sonnes in the forest, But thei were not so soone come vpon the earthe, but that the good lady suffred muche payne and anguyshe as you shall heare. So as the lady was delyuered of the fruyte of her wombe, and that she laie vnder the tree, ther came vnto her a beer, the which was marveilously great and horrible & toke one of her children in his mouthe, and wente his way into the thycke of the forest also fast as he myght. Then was the gracious lady sorowfull ad not without a cause, for the perdiction of her chylde, and began for to crye wyth a feable voyce muche pyteously. And vpon bothe her fete & handes she wente after the beer in the forest, that was anon out of her syght. Alas to lytle auayled her the pursuite. For she shal neuer se her childe vnto the time that by myracle he be yelded vnto her againe. So long went the lady through the forest wepyng for her chyld, and trauaylled her so sore to goe after, that astronge sycknes toke her, in such wyse that she fyl in aswoune vpon the colde earth as it had ben a dead woman, I wyll leue here to speake of her, and wyll tell you of the other chylde that was left al alone. ¶It happened the same daye the kynge Pepyn was deperted out of Parys, accompanied wys diuers great lordes and barons, for to go vnto Constantinoble to se his sister bellyssant. And toke his way towarde Orleaunre, and he rode so faste that he entred in to the forest where as his syster Bellyssant was deliuered, but he knew nothyng therof at that tyme. Now it is true as it was the pleasure of god that as the kyng Pepyn passed throughe the forest, he espyed vnder the hye tree the other sonne of Bellyssant all alone that lay vpon the earthe, soo he rode that waye and sayd vnto his barons. Lordes by the god that created all thynges I haue founde here a muche fayre encountre, se what a fayre chyld I haue founde her. By Ihesus sayd the lordes syr kynge you say true. Nowe sayd the kyng Pepyn I wyll that it be nourysshed at myne expenses also longe as god shall giue it lyfe. And wyll that it be kept ryght tenderly, ad nobly as if it were mine owne propre chyld. For yf that god sent hym lyfe vntyll the tyme that he be a man I shal gyue hym great landes and tenementes for to liue vpon. Then the kynge Pepyn called vnto hym one of hys Squyers, and gaue hym the charge of the chyld. sainge to hym. Bere this child to Orleauce, & make it be baptyzed, and seke him a good Nouryce, ad make that he be nourished also well as is possible. Good ryght had kyng Pepyn to loue the chylde, for he was hys neuewe, but he knewe it not. The squyer toke the chylde asking Pepyn badde him and bare it vnto Orleauce And after made it to be baptysed ad gaue it hys name For he made it to be named Ualentyne, for suche was the name of the squyer. After he sought a nouryce and made the chylde to be well kept as he was comaunded, The kyng roode in the forest, all way holdynge his Iournaie, for he had great desire to be in the Cytie of constantinoble to se his syster Bellyssant that he loued so muche. And euen so as he passed through ye forest, he recountred Blandimayne that led a wife with hym Blandymayne knewe the kyng, and a non lyghte of hys horse and salwed hym. After the salute done the kyng sayde vnto hym. Blandymayne fayre syr, tell vs tidynges of Constantynoble. And amog other thynges tell vs howe oure syster Belyssant doth. Dere syr sayd Blandimayne as to the regarde of tidinges, with payne can I tell you any that is good. For your syster Bellyssant hath to much euyl by the treason and false language of the cursed Archebysshop, for she is banysshed from the Emperour, and chased out of the countrey. And the Archebysshop made hym beleue so many false wordes, that if the lordes of hys court had not bene, yt whyche fered your furoure, he wold haue made her be brente in fyre a fore all the worlde. Blandymayn sayd the kyng Pepyn the whiche was tryst and sorowfull, Of as muche holde I the Emperoure more folysher, be cause he made not my syster dye, for by the God almighti, if I had her here at this present time, I should neuer reste til that I hadde made her die an euil death Nowe forwarde lordes saide kynge Pepyn for oure vyage is done. Retorne we vnto Paris, for I wyll go no ferder. I knowe to muche tydynges of my syster, wt out demaundynge, or enqurynge any more. At these wordes he torned the bridle of hys horse for to retorne, makyng great sorowe in hys courage, and beganne to saie vnto himselfe. Ha veray God almyghty (saide he) how often is man deceyued by woman. Nowe am I come to the clene contrary of mine entencion, for I purpeused to haue had once of my syster Bellyssant in my lyfe Ioye and pleasure. And to haue had the Emperour Alexander for my frende, to succoure me in all my necessityes, And by her I am greatly diffamed, and put vnto a great dishonour. In that distresse and melancoly rode the kinge Pepin a great while, so longe he rode so yt he ariued at Orleauce. Then Blandymayne that sawe well, ad knewe well the courage of the kyng Pepyn, durste declare no more vnto hym of the lady Bellyssant. So he retorned toward the tre where as he had left her but he founde her not, wherfore he was angry and ryght sorofull. He discended, and fastened his horse, and began to serche her thorough the wodde, And he dydde so muche that he founde her lyeng vpon the earth, ye whyche had wepte so muche for her chylde that she might not speke but with great payne. Blandemayne embrased her and set her on her fete, ad then said vnto her. Alas how mai haue brought you hether Ha Blandymayne sayd she euer encreaseth mi dolour and dystresse. it is true that whan you were departed there came a beare to me & bare a waye one of my chyldren. And I put my selfe on the way after thinkyng to haue taken it from him, but I coude not retorne vnto ye tree where as I left mine other childe. Ladi sayd he I come from the fote of the tree, but I haue founde no chyld. yet haue I well loked on euery syde. Whan the lady hearde Blandymayne, she was more sorowfull than before, and yet agayne she fell in a swone, blandymayn toke her vp and weppe full hertely for the ladies sake. He ledde her towarde the tree where as she had left the chylde, but whan she founde it not, she discharged so greate sighes and so pyteous, that it semed that the hert in her bely wolde depart in sunder. Alas said she, there is not in the world a more discomforted lady than I am, for from syde to side I am euoyde of Ioye, of pleasure of myrthe, and am replete with doloure and mysery, and of intollerable dystresse, greued weth all trybulacyons, and amonge all desolates, the most desolate. Alas Emperour you are the cause to auaunce my death wrongfully, and without cause, & by euyl cousell haue depriued me from your compani, for on my soule neuer the dayes of my life dyde I faute with my body. I haue nowe loste by you your propre chyldren legityme yssued out of bloud ryall, by whome I trusted ones to be venged. Come death vnto me for to fynishe my dolour for the death shall be more a greable vnto me, then to lyue in thys martyre. whan Blandymaine sawe the lady so inwardly discomforted, the best wise that he might he comforted her, with the woman and lead her in to a lytle village where as she was bayned, kepte, and cherisshed, tyll that she was well healed, and in good poynt, and that of her great sorowes she was a lytle appeased for there is no dole but that it is forgotten by proffe, Tha blandymayne bega for to tell and recyte vnto the lady how he had encountred the kyng Pepyn her brother, the whyche had demaunded him tidinges, ad how he was angry against her. And sayd, by God madame I haue greate feare that ye shall not be welcome to the kinge your brother For also soone as he knewe that the Emproure had expulsed you from him, he shewed the semblaunt that he was muche angry against you, as he the which will beleue lightly that the faute is in you. Ha God sayde the lady. Now is com vnto me the thing that I moste doubted, this houre maye I well saye that I from all sydes haue aduersities. For I am expulsed fro my lord and husbande the Emperoure, without ryght or reason. Neuer shall I retourne vnto Paris, but will go in to a straunge countrey, so farre that neuer man nor woman shall haue knowledge of my faute, nor know where I am. If my brother the kyng Pepyn helde me, he would make me die. Now it is better for to eschewe his ire and furoure, theen for to abyde the death. And Blandymayne sayd vnto her. Lady wepe no more, for ye be sure that I shal neuer leue you vnto the death, & am delibered to liue and dye with you, and kepe to you compane whether soeuer you wyl go, Blandemayne sayd the lady let vs go at our aduenture and I thanke you hartely for your good wil, for my truste is hole on you. Thus is the lady Bellyssant & Blandymayn on their waye muche pensyfe and sorowfull, all charged with angoysshes. Here wil I leue for to speake of them & will tel you of the Beer that bare awaye the chylde throught the wodde. Of the beer that bare awaye one of the children of the Emprsse Bellyssant. The Beer that had taken one of the chyldren of Bellyssant, deuoured it not but bare it into his cauerne that was profounde and obscure. In the which was foure younge Beers stronge and puyssaunt. The Beer caste the chylde amonge his whelpes to be eaten, but god that neuer forgeteth his frendes shewed an euydent myracle. For the younge Beeres dydde it no harme, but with theyr roughe pawes strooked it softelye. when the Beer sawe that her lytle whelpes would not deuoure it, she was ryght amerous of the childe (so muche (that she kepte it and gaue it sucke a hole yearh. The chylde was all rought be cause of the nutrifactyon of ye beer, as a wilde beast So he began to go in to ye woode, and became great in a while and began for to smyte the other beastes of the forest, in suche wyse that they all douted hym, and fledde before him, For he fered nothyng in the worlde. In suche estate was the chylde ledyng a beastes lyfe ye space of .xv. yeare. He became so great and strong, that none durst passe through the forest for hym, for bothe men ad beastes he did put vnto dethe, & eate their flesh al rawe as ye other beastes did, and liued a beastual life and not humanye. He was called Orson, because of ye beere that had nouryshed him, and he was al so rough as a beere. He dyd so muche harme in the forest, and was so sore redouted, that there was none, where he neuer so valiaut and hardy, but that he had great fate to encountre the wylde man. The renowne sprange so of hym, that all they of the countrey aboute chaced and hunted hym with force and strength, but nothyng auaylled all their deade, for he fered neyther gyrnes nor wepons, but brake all in peces Now he is in the forest ledyng the life of a wilde beaste, without wering of any cloth, or any worde speaking. And the mother Bellyssant that thought that she had lost hym, goeth as a woman discomforted through the countrey at auenture, and Blandymayne conduyted her & comforteth her al so well as he maie. The lady be wailed euer her two children, for she hath loste them, and prayeth oftentymes vnto god with good harte, and to the vyrgyn Mary, yt thei woulde saue her two children. Blandymayn and the lady Bellyssant passed bi dyuers places, and so muche they went by se and by lande, that they aryued at a porte of portingale, vpon the whiche was a castell. And in that same castell dyd remayne a gyaunt that was so great and so puyssaunt that there was no horse that myght susteyne him, and he was called Ferragus. It happened that this Ferragus yssued out of the castell, and cam vnto the porte for to demaunde trybute of the passers, as he was accustomed to take of euery shyppe. He entred in to the shyppe where as Bellyssant was, that was replenysshed with dyuers marchaundyses. And also soone as he espied Belyssant he toke her by the hande and ledde her in to his castell toward his wyfe, for he was maryed vnto a lady ryght pleasaunt and fayre. And Blandymain went after the lady that the giaunt ledde in great honour, without doyng her vyllanye in any facyon, eyther in thought or dede, ad presented her vnto his wyfe, the whiche receiued her gladly, and had great ioye of her commyng for ye gracyous maynteine that she sawe in her. The gyaunt commaunded his wyfe that Bellyssant should be sumptuously kept as her persone, and Bilandymayn her squier in lyke wyse She was receyued wyth great ioye in the castell, for she was well endoctrined both in condicyons and in scyence, and coulde speake amyable, and gouerne her honestly a monge lytell and great. And when she had remembraunce of her children she wepte tenderly bothe with hart and mynde, but the wyfe of the Gyaunt recomforted her euer. And of all that was in the castell she was euer nexte her person. For she loued her wyth so perfite loue, that wt out her she might neither eate nor drinke, she was long tyme in the castell of Ferragus. Here I will leue you to speake of her, and wil tell you of the Emperour, and of the false Archebysshope ¶Howe by the cousail of the Archebysshop there was newe customes raysed in the cyete of Constantynoble and howe the treason was knowen. Alexander the Emperour after that he had expulsed shamefully hys wyfe Bellyssant kyng Pepyns syster of Fraunce, and chaced her from hys company he made dyuers complayntes, & repented hym in hys harte But the Archebyshop cursed of god kepte hym euer in his folysshe oppinion, and the Emperour beleued him And gaue him so muche puyssaunce and aucthority aboue the other, that that whych he commaunded was don. He gouerned so muche & had so muche domynacion, that he raised vp new customes and vsages in the cyte of Constantynoble, agaynst ryght and reason. It happened that there was a fayer in the cyte, the which was kept the .xv. day of Septembre. And from diuers countres cam the marchauntes to that fayer. whan the day was comen that it should be kept, the towne was full of marchauntes of eueri countree. The Emperour made ye fayer to be kept as it was accustomed And gaue the keping therof vnto the Archebisshoppe, the whych made arme two hundred men for to accompany him, and they departed from the cyte to kepe the fayer. In the same fayer was present ye marchaunt yt I haue made mencyon of to fore, that is to wyt he the whyche founde Blandymayn and the Archebishoppe fyghtynge, and the Archebysshoppe knewe hym well ynoughe, but he made nosymblaut. For he doubted to muche that his falshod were not knowe. He wold haue put hym to death gladly, but he had not the puyssauce without to grete sclauder. This day the said marchaut that was wel garnesshed with clothes of golde ad silke solde more the any other. Wherfore wha the fayer was fynysshed, the Archebysshop sent a sargeaunt to hym for to demaunde him ye trybute then was accustomed for the sellynge of his marchaundyse. The sergeaunt cam vnto him and sayd. syr marchaut you must pay x. pence for euery pounde that you haue solde, for soo it is ordeyned. Go sayd the marchaunt that euyl may happen to hym that hathe reysed vp suche a custome, that is the false and disloyal Archebysshoppe whome God curse for it is long a go, sythe he oughte to haue dyed a shamefull death. Then when the merchaunt had so reuayled the Archebysshop, the sargeant lyft vp his staffe and smote the merchaunt vpon the head that the bloud ranne downe. when the marchaunt felt him selfe smyten he drewe his sword and smote him so hard that he bette him downe dead, the arose a great noyse through the fayer and meuynge of people in suche maner that the other sergeantes toke the marchaunt and ledde hym towarde the Arche bysshop. The arche bysshop would haue made him dye without delay but the marchaunt that was wise and well aduised demaunded the lawe that is to say that he woulde be heard in his reasons and defences, and the iustise was fauourable, and vtered it to hym, Then ye Archebysshop made him be ledde before the Emperour for he hadde greate volente to make him be iudged to death, but in desirig the deathe of other, he purchaseth his owne as ye shall heare. The Archebysshop made to present ye merchaut in the palays, where as was the Emperoure that commaunded the Iudge to put hym in chayre. And the Archebisshop made an aduocate rigorousli prepose agaist the marchaunt. in accusing him of the murdre that he had done and of the great iniuries that he had sayde against the reuerence of the Archebisshop. Whan the purpose was made againste the merchaunte, he kneled downe before the Emperour and said vnto him. Right hyghe and excellente Prince if it plese you of your benygne grace to geue me audience before al your baros I shall tell you a thynge of great importance, whiche toucheth your persone. Marchaut said the Emperour speke on hardely, for I giue the licence. Syr sayde the marchaut make that the gates of your palays be shyt to the ende that none departe from this place. Themperoure beleued the marchaunte, and sayd before the all on hye, Lordes barons and knightes that desyrethe and ought to loue the honoure and the proufyte of the tryumphant empyre, entende to my wordes. The tyme is come that the treason of the cursed Arcebisshop that you see here, muste be knowen and declared openly before your reuerences. ¶Alas syr Emperoure it is the cursed the man by whom your wife hath be chased from you with wronge and shame. And you haue euyl spended the good nourysshynge of hym, for he oughte to kepe your honoure moost and he is the worste, for it happened one day that he requyred the fayre lady. Bellyssant of loue, the whiche is wise and prudent refused him. And whan this peruers traytre preest vnderstode and apperceiued that of the lady he should neuer haue thys pleasure, for fere that his sinne should not be knowen, he made you beleue fals wordes howe that she was not loyall to you, but habadoned her to other, the whiche thinge sawe your excellente reuerence and of ye lordes here presente, he lyethe as a fals infidele to you and if that for the more grettar approbacio ye demaud me howe I knowe it and that declared me the trouthe I tell you that I passed one daye on my waye sone aftaer that your wife was banysshed out of this countre and in ridinge through a wodde I founde thys preeste irreguler and apostate in armes, and in habyte dyssymulat Aagaynste god and the ordenaunce of hys vocaryon. And in that same wodde he had assaylled ryghte fyersly Blandymayne that kepte and conduyted in her doleful fortune, the ryghte noble, and franke lady Bellyssant your wife. And right so as I sawe theyre debate I began for to crye. Milordes leue your debate, and then the lady whiche wepte full piteously began for to saye vnto me. Marchaunt my frende come and socour me agaynste this treatour and false Archebysshop that with force and againste my courage, will beriue me of myne honoure. Alas sayde the lady it is he by whom I am put in exyle, and chased from the Emperoure and his countrey. So I smote my hose for to seperate them but this same Archebisshop toke ryght sodaynely the flyght through the wodde, for he was to displeasaunte when he sawe that he was knowen. Alas noble & puissaunt Emperour, I haue thought many tymes in my courage to declare this matter vnto you. But I durst not speake to you, nor informe you of the case, & yf you finde the cotrary make me die, ¶When the Emperour harde the marchaunt saye so, he began for to sighe and wepe full tenderly, and after sayde vnto the Archebysshop. Ha false seruaunt, I ought to prayse and honour the litle. I haue enforced me all my lyfe to doo the good and exalte the in honoure, and thou yeldeste me dyshonoure and treason for my loyaltye and good will. Now euen so God helpe me my harte tolde me euer that I should be deceyued and betrayed by the, Alas the thig that I most doubted is happened me. Thou hast made me of all Princes the mooste offamed and vnhappy. And of all the greateste the mooste lytle and wretched, Alas sayde the Emperoure. Alexander I ought wel for to hate and disprayse my wretched lyfe, whan that by treason I haue loste the thynge whiche I moste loued in an euill houre haue I beleued thy counsayll so lightly Ha sayde the Archebisshoppe be not angrye with me. for nothynge that the marchaut telleth you, for neuer of this deade I knewe nothynge nor am not culpable, but am Innocent, and so I will holde me, Thou lyeste fasly saide the marchaunt, for of thy treason thou cast not excuse the. And if thou wilt saye the contrary I wil fyght with the in a fielde to susteyne my quarell. And I offre here my body to suffre death, if that I reder the not before the darcke night false treatourse ither dead or vanquisshed, or thou shalt confesse thy case. nd to the ende that none thinke but that my courage accordeth withe my harte and sayinges. I deliuer the megage, and thynke to defende the well. whan the Emperour Alexander sawe that the wager was casten down he said to the Archebisshop, Nowe is it tyme after iustice and righte that you thynke for to fighte with thei marchaunt or els to knowledge the trouthe. Hay syre sayde the Archebishop you ought to wyte that to fight or doo dedes of armes I ought to be excused, for I am a prelate and a priest sacred, wherfore it appertayneth not in no wyse that I should fight, for in that doynge I shoulde false and repreue the dignitie of holy churche. By my faythe sayde the Emperoure, in this quarell is none excusacion, but behoueth you to fyghte with the marchaunt that acuse you of treason & if that ye wylle not do it. I holde you for culpable of ye dede. Of that wordes was they Archebisshop muche afrayde, for he sawe well that he must nedes fyghte, and sayd to ye Emperour, Redoubted syr whan you will that I proue with my body that I am innocent of this cause, I shall be ready, howe well that it is agaynst myne estate, in excusing him, but lite auayled his speche and hys excusacions, for the Emperoure commaunded that the Archebysshop should be kept in suche wyse, that he might haue him at his pleasure euery tyme that he shold aske for hym. And commaunded also that the marchaunt should be taken and honestly treated. Then the Emperoure assembled his counsayll, and the daye was determined, the fielde taken, & the tyltes made, for the marchaunt and the Archebisshop to fyght in. In the whiche battayll God that is ryghtfull Iudge, shewed before euery body that treason and falshode retourned euer to their maisters, as you shall here. ¶Howe the Emperoure Alexander by the counsayll of the moste wisest, sent for the king Pepyn to be at the daye of batayll, for to here the truthe. After that the daye was determined, & the filde comaunded to be prepared, the listes made, there came tydynges to the Emperoure that kynge Pepyn was come to Rome to ayde and comfort the pope agaynste the false infideles, enemies of our holy fayth. And tho it was aduised be the counsayll of the moste discret of his palais, that they should go fetche kynge Pepyn, to the end that he myght be present at the forsayd daye of batayle for the more honester excusation of the Emperoure. And that he myght se and knowe clerely that by euyll treason he had separed his wyfe out of his company, or that by good ryghte and good quarell he had expulsed her. To this counsayll he accorded, and sent wt all dylygence dyuers messengers to Rome, to whome he gaue letters to bere to kynge Pepyne, that was at ye tyme in Rome, defendynge our holy fayth agaynste the infydeles, as I haue tolde you before. The messengers bene departed from Constantinoble, and haue done so muche by water and by land that they are come to Rome towarde the kyng Pepyn, whome they salued as it apperteyneth vnto suche a kyng, and after sayde vnto hym. Ryght redoubted lorde and excellent king, we present you these letters from the puyssaunt Emperour of Constantinoble our lorde wherfore beholde the continue of the same and ther vpon please it your maiestie ryall to geue vs an aunswere. The kynge Pepyn toke the letters anone, and opened the, & beheld them. And after that he had ridde them, he spake on hyghe before all his barons and sayde. Lordes by god almighty here is tydynges of great admiracion. Themperoure Alexander sendeth me worde that my syster Bellissant that I had geuen him to wife, hathe bene put by him in exile wrongfully, through a false Archebisshop that hathe geuen him to vnderstande a lye, they whiche of his dede muche detestable is accused bi a marchaunt that in this quarell will lyue and dye, in fightyng with the Arche bisshop in a fielde before all the worlde. And that this maye be the more certayne the forsaid marchaute as a hardy man, and well assured of his deede, for to persue it with the ayde of God. With good and loyal equite in hauing stedfast confidence in god, hathe casten and deliuered his wager against ye false traytour ye Arche bisshop. Nowe it is so that the daye that they shall fyght together is determined where as I maye knowe for a certayne whether my syster Bellyssante is culpable of the cryme that is put vpo her or not. And if it be so that the Emperoure hath vniustly done her thys dyshonour, I sweare you by myne othe ryall that I shall take vengeaunce on him. For the great offence that he hath committed, can neuer be recompensed. Then comaunded the king Pepyn that all they of this court were ready for to accompany him vnto Constantynoble he wolde be ther at they daye of the enterprise made betwene the marchaunt and the Archebysshop so thei made all thinges ready as the kyng had commaunned Pepin departed from Rome with a muche fayre company, & so longe hath he ryden yt he is come to ye sea and mounted into the galees and haue done so muche that they are aryued at Constantinoble. And when the Emperour knew the coming of kyng Pepyn he commaunded to rynge al the belles of the citye & that they shuld make Ioye through the cytye Euery body was glad of the commyng of kyng Pepyn. Themperour lyghte on horsbacke right sumptuouslye accompanyed, & yssued out of the cyte to mete with him. But also soone as he sawe kynge Pepyn he remembred Bellyssant and began to wepe and to syghe so pyteously, that he coud speke neuer a word but wepe, and make greate lamentacions wyth heart and mouth to anguysshously. The kynge Pepyn that had the courage fyerse and proude, cared not for his wepinge. He made semblaunt that he had no pyte nor compassion on him for all his wepyng, but said vnto him in this maner. Emperour leue your wepynge, and discomforte you not soo muche ye that you haue lost my syster Bellyssat. For who that leseth a harlot ought not to be dismayed. And syth that my syster is suche one haue no fere of her, thought nor dyspleasaunce, Ha sayde the Emperoure for god say not suche wordes of your sister, for I beleue stedfastly that there is all honeste in her, & loyalte, And yt with wronge and agaynst ryght I haue expulsed her frome me. By my faythe sayde the kynge Pepyn. of as muche more ought you to be blamed and eueribody may know the greate sapience that remayneth in you. Whan that by one euyll exhortacyon you haue so diligently banisshed my syster from you as a comyne harlot. with so greate shame. And knowe that I am lytle beholden vnto hym that hath done suche shame & dishonoure vnto my persone, and to all the bloud ryall of Fraunce. whan the Emperour Alexander heard & vnderstode the wordes, and courage of kynge Pepyn, he was muche sorowful in his herte and aunswered symply vnto the kyng Pepyn agayne, and sayde. Alas syr kynge Pepyn doo not moue youre sefle in Ire, but molify a lytle youre courage, for by the pleasure of god almighty ye truth shalbe knowen Emperour sayd the kynge Pepyn to longe haue you taryed. For it is a comyn sayeng, that to late it is for to shyt the stable doore, whan the horse is loste. Nowe is my sister Bellyssant gone in exyle poorelye arayed I wote not whether, wherfore my harte ought well to be sory, whan yt for you I must lese her, for I am right certaine that I shal neuer se her. Alas one should be wel ware to giue so hastely Iugement, for one maye do an euil thinge, wherby he may repent him all at leyser, and you know wel that renowne is dere. For whan it is lost be it by righte or by wronge, it is late recoueringe of it. Lyttel haue you preysed the honoure of my persone. whan that without ony delyberacion, or consideration that dyuers suche thynges haue be fallen, and dothe by enuy (that ye haue exyled my syster) In saynge these wordes, the Emperoure and kynge Pepyn entred into Constantinoble with muche great honour And whan they were within the cytie the Emperoure wold haue made kinge Pepyn and his men lodge with it his palays muche honourably. But kynge Pepyn wolde not entre, but made lodge his men round about him in the cyte. And wolde not receyue of themperour neyther gyftes nor presentes at all, howe well that he presented him diuers thynges, as well vytayle as riche tapissery and iewelles. Muche was the kynge Pepyne, in greate thought for his syster Bellyssant, for all they of the Cyte affermed hym that she was the beste ladye that euer was founde, and that by treason and vniuste quarell she was accused and banisshed. ¶Howe the Marchaunte & the Archebysshop fought together for to clere the lady Bellyssant, and howe the Marchaunt ouercame hym. Also soone as the daye was comen that the marchaunt and the Archebysshop shoulde fight to gether in the field, the Emperour commauded that they should be brought afore him, & when they were before him he bad them make them redy to the fyelde, and fynysshe their enterprise. The knyghtes of the Archebysshops country, went and armed him sumptuously. And the Emperour commaunded that the marchaunt should be armed in his presence, euen as his propre persone. And before that he was armed themperour made him knyghte & promised hym cyties townes & castelles and great possessions if he might vanquishe the Archebysshop. And when thee two champions were armed, and their blasons hanged at their neckes, their horses were brought to them, and thei mounted on the to go to the field. Then the Emperour commauded thei knightes and sergeauntes that they should conuey the Archbisshop of the place, and that they shoulde take good kepe vnto hym and this he charged them on theyre lyues, to the ende that he mighte not flee, for he was subtill and cautelous. The marchaunte was mounted vpon his horse wel armed in all places, & a stronge sword girded about him, so he rode towarde the fielde, and entred ye firste therin. After him came so a great a multitude of folke out of Constantynoble, that thei could not be nobred. And it was not longe after but that the archebisshop entred into the fielde strongly accompanied. For he was muche ryche & of a noble nacion. There was ye kinge Pepin that behelde the marchaunte gladly, and with a good hart saying. My frend god Geue the grace to haue victory against the false man. For bi ye faith of my body, if that the archebisshop be vanquished to daye by they and that I maye knowe the truthe of my syster Bellyssant. I shall rewarde the so highly that in all my courte thou shalt be the greatest. Syr sayde the marchaunt I thanke you, and knowe you for certainte that or it be nyght I shal make hym confesse the treson by the leaue of God, so he geue the grace, to whom I commaunde they, and as he parted from they kynge there came a heraute and made theim sweare both as it is the custome and after they made to auoyd ye field cleane of all the people that stoode within, and lefte the two champions therin. Nowe be they vpon the renges and they that had the charge of the field brought them their speres, they whiche they tooke & smote their horses with ye sportes and came together also faste as they myght rynne, hyttyng ech other so maruaylously that they broke theyr speres to their hades, and passed forth to fetche their course. And when they were at the ende of the fielde, they retourned the one vpon they other incontynente with theyr swordes in theyr handes, & ioyned them together fyersly in geuynge eche other so peysaunt strokes that they smote into ye fielde great quarters of their sheldes. When the archebisshop sawe that the marchaunt assailed him so asurely he thought that he would beare of vnto nyght. For suche was the law in those dayes that if one man appeled another and defied hym in batayle, it was behouefull to hym for to vanquysshe him before the sone settynge, or he shulde be hanged wherfore the Archebosshop thought to kepe himselfe stedfast. And the marchaunt that knewe well the custome did enforse hym the more to do feates of armes a gaynste the Archebisshop, that folowed hym nere. And so muche the marchaunt appressed him with strokes, that with one storke that he gaue him he smote of one of his eares: and a gret pece of the haubergone that was of fine stele. And ye stroke was so imperious that the marchauntes sworde fell from him, when the false Archebysshop sawe that the machaut was with out weapon he smote his horse withe a foyne in suche wise, that he smote out one of his eyen. And the horse that felt hym self hurte, ranne and lepte so in the fielde that he cast the marchaunt downe and fortune was so peruers to him that his fote stack faste in the styrope. And the horse that woulde not reste trayled him so impetuously, that all they of the congregation were heuy and sorowfull, and saide to themselfe that they had no more trust in the marchaunt. And when the king sawe him in suche distresse, and perill, he began for to weppe muche piteously in saying to hemselfe. Alas alas marchaunt now se I well euidently that thy dayes bene fynyshed for this worlde. Alas nowe maye I knowe manifestly and for certaine that me sister is culpable of ye deade that she had ben charged with. And that God will shewe euydently to all that with good ryghte the Emperoure hath expulsed her frome hym. If she hadde bene buried also soone as she had ben christened, I had bene well happy, and borne in a good houre, for by here is the noble bloude of Fraunce put to a greate shame And euen so God helpe me if that I helde here nowe I shoulde make her die a vilanous death. Many profounde syghes made the good king Pepin. And the Archebisshop with all his puissauce might not make hys horse approche the marchaunt, the which semed wel to be a thing myraculous. Now ye marchaut was so trayled through the fyelde that his horse foundred and fell downe. And when ye horse was down ye marchaunt rose vp that was valyaunt and hardy. And when the Archebisshop perceiued the marchaunt that was risen, he came renning to him and gaue him two or thre strokes that the marchaunt was all astonyed therwith. So he withdrewe him bake a litle for to take his brethe, and after he auaunced him subtylly, and with a fyerse courage he smote the. Archebisshop in suche manner that his swerde fell out of his hand. And wounded hym soo through his harneis that the bloode ran vnto the erth The Archebysshop put his herte and his force for to be auenged, & broched his horse to renne on the marchaut But he was subtyll and drewe a great poynted knyfe and cast it agaynste the Archebysshoppes hors, & smote him in the bodi so rudeli that ye horse began for to lepe and flynge wherfore the Archebysshop was into great daunger to fall down. And with the lepinge of the hors he loste his shelde. And the marchaunte caste it oute of the felde, to the ende that he should not helpe himselfe no more withall. And whan he had done so, he wente and smote his hors in the bely with his swerde, so that the Archybysshop and the hors fell vnto the earth, the whiche rose vp in continent, but the marchaunte was diligence and gaue him so great a stroke that he smote him downe platte to the earth, and than he lepte vpon him & pulled of his helme to haue smytten of his heade Whan the Archebysshop sawe him in this daunger, he was full of treson, and sayde to the marchaunte Alas frende I beseche the that thou wylte haue pyte on me, and gyue me tyme and space for to confesse me, to the ende that my soule be not in daunger, for to thee I ylde me as vanquysshed and culpable. Whan the marchaut herde the Archebysshop speke so, he was curteys and debonayre, and trusted the fayre wordes of the Archebysshop and let hym ryse. Wha the fals preeste was vpon his fete, he hadde neyther wyll nor desyre to confesse hym, but toke the marchaunt anone in his armes and threwe hym downe, and lepee vpon hym suyenge by great Ire, Marchant thou shalte neuer escape my handes without vylaynous death, yf that thou accord not vnto a thyng that I shall comaunde the. Ha sayde the marchaut that sawe himselfe betrayad. Archebysshop I se and knowe well I am in your mercy and that with me ye may to your pleasur. Wherfore I pray you that ye wyll tell me what thynge it is that ye wil I doo And I shall accomplysshe it, so that it please you for to saue my lyfe. Marchaunte sayd the archebysshop this shalte thou do, ¶I wyll that before the Emperour, ad the kinge Pepin thou testify openly, that wyth wronge and agaynste ryght thou haste accused me faslye, and by enuy. And of this dede discharge me, and shalt take the charge by suche a couenaunt that yf thou wilte do it, I swere and promise the to saue the fro deathe, and make thy peas towarde the Emperoure, and the kyng Pepyn. And more ouer I swere vnto the by the faythe of gentylnesse, and bi the ordre of preestode, to giue the a nece of myne in maryage, the whiche is ryche fuyre & pleasant. Then mayst thou say that there was neuer done in thy lignage so happy, nor so riche . nd I therefore auyse the yf thou wylt lyue or dy, for thou mayst not es whether thou wylte lyue or dye, for thou mayst not escape by none other way with thy lyfe. Incontynent as the marchaunt herde the Archebishop speke so, he was much sorowful, & not wythoute a cause, he reclaymed bothe god and our lady mekely to kepe hym fro deathe and saue his righte. And than he answered in thys maner Syr Archebysshop your reason is good ad I am redy to accomplysshe it, and obey you, in affieng me that you wyl kepe your promyse, In me sayd the Archebysshop ye shal finde no faute. Now in goddes name saide the marchaute go we to to the Emperoure, and I shall dysaccuse you of the great iniury that I haue preposed agaynst you, it is well sayd now ryse vpe and you shall come with me. At these wordes the marchaut rose vp, and whan he was vpe he recorden the treason that the Archebysshoppe had done him, fayninge that he wolde haue confessed him, as I haue made mencion here before, wherfore he toke courage to him, and thought to serue him with the same mese, for it is sayd commenly the treason wil euer returne to his maister again. Tha he toke the Archbyshop in his armes withe so greate courage that anone he had throwen him vnder him, & than said to him. Archebyshoppe you haue taught me to play this pagent, wherfore thynke nowe to confesse you to me, for ye shall haue none other confessour but me. yet thought the fals. Archebysshope on dyuers cauillacions. & wyth swete wordes wolde haue deceyued the marchaunt againe. But ye marchaunt neuer trusted him more, nor gaue hyme noo more tyme nor space to rise vp, but anone with great diligece put out both his eyen and gaue hym so many strokes that he had no strengthe to defende hym. And whan the marchaunte sawe that he was domynatour, and had the ouer hand he rose vppe and let hym lye. And called the kepers of the felde, and sayd to them. Lordes here may you se yf that I haue done my deuoyre against the Archebisshop and yf he be vaynquysshed, you se that I put hyme in suche estate that whan it semeth me good I maye slee hym or kyll hym. Wherfore I praye you that it wyll please you to make the Emperour, and the kynge Pepyn to come hether with their lordes, for to heare ye cofession of the Archebysshop, & to here that with vniust quarell he hath take batayle agaynst me. Than wente they to fetche to the field the Emperoure alexander, & the kyng Pepyn, the whiche came accompanyed with many notable barons to the place where as the archebysshop was sorowful and confounded. and the Emperour demaundeth him the truthe of the matter, and the false archebisshop knowledged before them al they dede, and tolde them all the maner, ad howe that with wronge he had spoke againste the lady Bellyssant, and without any cause had made her be put in exile by treson and falshode, alas thynke howe many pyteous teres there was shedde on all sydes, and specially of they Emperoure, for his cries and lamentacions were soo pyteous, that all they that were about hym wept bytterly, and made great sorowe, and if the Emperour demeaned great dole, demaunde not if that the kyng Pepyn at that tyme was tryste and sorowful, alas it was not without a cause that they demeaned suche sorow when the sawe and knewe that by to lighte beleuinge, and false treason they had loste the excellet lady Bellyssant kyng Pepins sysser and wife vnto the Emperour and there was betwene the Emperoure alexandre ad the kynge Pepyn Ioye in destresse by two parties conioyned. Ioy to the kynge Pepyn that of his sister knew the loyalte. Doloure and displeasaunce to they Emperoure that of the deade founde himselfe culpable. Because that then he knewe that with wronge he had chaced her from hym. And after all the lamentacions, and the confession and treason of thei Archebysshop harde The Emperour assembled his counsayll for to Iudge what death the Archebysshop shoulde di of and it was established that he should be boyled in oyle all quicke & so it was done. After the which iudgement euery body withdrewe them vnto theyre demayne and dwellynge place. And when the kynge Pepyn hadde withdrawen him into his lodgyng, the Emperour dolete and sorowfull, syghyng profoundly came towarde hym, and kneled downe before hym and sayde all wepynge. alas syr I haue comitted against you a cryme to destable, ad dishonest. Nowe se I clearely my myserable faulte, and knoweth that by my folyshnes and lighte creaunce I am and haue ben cause to put your syster in exyle, and to perdiccion, of the whiche thinge I require you of pardon, and before you I presente me as culpable abydyng your grace. and in knowledgynge of my false villanye, and for satisfaccyon and a mendes I yelde and put into your hades the Empyre of Grece, that Iustly and of good ryghte appertayneth to me. For I requyre to haue no more the name of an Emperoure, nor of a kynge as longe as I shall lyue vpon the earth, but wyl as a seruaunt in all thynges obeye you for I haue wel deserued it. ¶When the kynge Pepyn vnderstoode the good will, and the greate humilite of the Emperore he toke him vp and pardoned him before all his lordes and after that their peace was made by a common accorde they delybered betwene them for to sende messegers into euery countrey to serche the noble lady Bellyssant after the whiche thinges, the kyng Pepyn toke leue of the Emperoure for to retourne into Fraunce. ¶Howe the kynge Pepyn toke leue of the Emperour and departed from Costantynoble for to go into Frauce. and howe he went afterwerde to Rome agaynste the Sarasyns that had taken the cytie. Hoowe kyng Pepyn departed from Constantynoble after the thinges aforesayd. And so muche he wente by water and lande that he arriued in Fraunce, and went vnto Orleauce for to refreshe hym. For gladly he was there because of the great forestes that were about it, wherfore he commaunded that for his welcome home they shoulde holde table rounde, and so it was done. And when it came to the houre of the full dyner, the squyer that had nourysshed Ualentyne tooke hyme by the hande and presented hym before the kynge, in saying to hym. Syr lo here the poore orphelyn that youre maiestye founde in the forest of Orleaunce, the whiche you gaue me for to nouryshe and kepe nowe haue I nourysshed him vnto this present tyme, not at mine expeces but at yours wherfore I beseche your excellent maieste that ye wyll haue remembraunce of him, for he will become greate within a while, and therfore it is time to thinke theron And when he had heard the squier speake he called thei chylde Ualentyne and tooke him by they hande and he sawe him so wise and well thought in maners and condicions, that at they same houre he gaue hym all they cuppes pottes and goblettes, and they other vessels yt at that tyme was made ready for to serue ye court. And then sayd the kyng before them all in the court, I wyll that valentyne be derely kept. and for the great beautie and honour of his persone, the kyng would that the yong chylde Ualentyne, whiche was at that tyme but twelue yeare olde shuld be nourisshed with his doughter Eglantine, whiche was so fayre, so wyse, and so well endoctrined, that all the world spake good and honour of her. The two children were nourisshed together, and loued well eche other with loue Iust and ryall, in suche wise that the one could not be mery without the other and principally Eglantine the kinges doughter, seinge and consideringe they prudence of Ualentyne she was so esprysed with his loue in all honoure, that withoute hym she might neyther haue solace nor recreacion. Ualentyne became great and of faire stature, in all thigs well endoctrined. He loued muche horse & harness, and founde hymselfe gladly at Iustyng. and ther as he went he bare awaye the pryce and the honoure. Than the kynge seynge his valyauntnesse and good wyll, he gaue him horses and harneis landes, rentes ad greate possessions. and it was not longe after but that there was greate brute of hym in the courte, whereat many had great enuy diuers tymes and often tymes sayd to hym in reproche that he was but a fundelenge, and a poore chylde wythout knowing ani of his frendes that mighte ayde hym. For the whiche wordes Ualentyne wepte full ofte, and whan they fayre Eglantyne sawe hym angred she wolde wepe full tenderly, and withall her might comfort hym. Ualentyne bare hym so meke and so gentill in kinge Pepyns courte, that he was beloued of lorddes, ladyes knyghtes, and squyers, and euery body sayd good & honoure by hym. and hys brother Orson is within the forest, roughe & couered with heer as a bere, ledynge a wylde bestes life as it is made mencion of before, and as in this chapytre it shalbe declared vnto you. For know that soone after that the kinge was at Orleaunce ther came a messenger vnto him that was sent fro the pope. The whiche demaunded helpe and socoure agaynste the paynyms enemyes of our holy fayth that had take the cyte of Rome. wha kinge Pepyn vnderstode that the Sarasins was with in Rome, he made all diligence to prepayre hys hooste Of the whych the chylde Ualentyne was made chefe and pryncypall gouernour. Whan Eglantyne knewe that Ualentyne dyd goo, she was muche sorowful, as she that loued him beste of any creature. The fayre. Eglantyne sent for him secretely to come and speke with her. And whan he was come she sayd vnto him sighyng full tenderly. Alas Ualentyne my loue, nowe se I well that I shall haue no more ioye and consolacion, whan that ye wyll depart for to go vnto batayle Alas ye are myne onely loue, my comforte, & the refuge of my pleasaunce. Nowe wold to God that I had neyther kynge nor frende in the worlde, that wold lette me to do my wyll For ryght so God helpe me I wolde neuer haue other in marryage but you, and than shulde ye be kynge of Fraunce, and I Quene. A madame sayd valenty Leue youre ymaginacion, and haue not your herte soo ardaunte on me, you knowe that I am a poore foundlyng that your father hath nourysshed for goddes sake and am in no maner a man for to haue you, nor the poorest damoysell that is with you, thinke els where and do so that ye maye shewe of what bloude ye be comen of. And to god I commaund you the whiche haue you alwayes in his kepynge At these wordes departed Ualentyne and lefte thei fayre Eglantyne dolente and sorowfull for his departinge. The kinge and his hooste were redy for to mount on horseback, & departed from Orleaunce to go to Rome. Than the kynge Pepyn called his lordes and barons of his courte, & saide to them Lordes you knowe that al the worlde maketh mencyon of a wylde man the whiche is in this forest, wherfore I haue a great will and affeccion to see him taken or I go any farther. To these wordes conseted the lordes and barons of his courte. The chace was ordeyned ad they entred into the wodde. They toke dyuers wylde beestes, but for to fynde Orson euery body was a ferd saue Ualentyne that was his brother, but he wiste no thinge, the whiche desired to fight with him. So longe they wente throughe they woode. that they Kinge Pepin arriued before the pit obscure & tenebrous, where as Orson healde him. And whan he sawe the Kynge he issued out sodenly and ranne agaynste hym, so he toke him in his nayles thei whyche were righte greate and cast him to the erth ryghte pyteously, And the kinge that wed to haue dyed cried right high for to socour so there came to him a valyaunt knight, whan he sawe the wylde man that woulde haue straungled the kinge he drewe his swerde for to haue ronne vpon hym. But whan Orson sawe the naked swerde flambinge he left the kynge and ranne to thei knyghte and tooke hym in hys armes and helde hym so hard that he threw downe both hors and man. Than the hors gate vp that was sore afrayd and ranne thorow the forest. And Orson helde the knight the which with his sharpe nailes strangled hym, and pyteously pulled him in pieces. whan the kynge came to his men that wer therby, he recounted to them the greate daunger that he had ben in and the piteous deth of the knighte, of the whiche tidinges they were much abashed. Than the put them togider and went towarde the caue of Orson for to take hym and sle him. The founde the knight but they sawe not Orson, for it pleased not god that he shulde be conquered, saue of his brother Ualentine the which coquered him as you shal here afterwarde. And whan the kinge sawe that he myghte not haue the wylde man, he lefte him and went on his vyage to Rome. The bataylles were renged, and thei Oryflambe of Fraunce war gyuen to bere a valiaunte prynce that was named Myllon Dangler, wyse and of right good conduyte. There was Geruays and Sampson his brother that wer valyaunt knightes and diuers other dukes erles and barons Nowe the haue ryden so muche that they are comen vnto Rome and haue demaunded batail, and the maner of the sarasins & it was tolde them howe an admyrall had taken Rome, & put many men to death and destroyed. And hadde vndone the churches and made temples for ydolles. And there constrayned the Pope, cardynalles, archebysshoppes, and bisshoppes to serue them after the gyse of their lawe cursed and dampnable and when kyng Pepyn vnderstode these tydynges, he was muche sorowfull for the distresse that the chrysten men were in. He approched nere the citie of Rome and made to assemble his hoste, and put his men of armes in arraye, and ordeyned his battayles. For his harte was entyerly sete for to maynteyne the chrysten fayth the whiche I shall recyte vnto you here after folowyng. ¶Howe kynge Pepyne besiged Rome. And howe Ualentyne Iusted withe the Admyrall and slewe hyme, by whose prudence the cytie was gotten agayne. After that the kynge Pepyn had assyeged the cytee of Rome he called his barans and knyghtes and said to them in this wyse. Lordes you knowe euydentle that thys mastyfe Admyrall, and enemye of oure holy faythe hath put many valyaunte chrsten men vnto dethe, and vyllanyed the chyrche Romayne, where as our lorde Iesu chryst was serued so deuoutly and honoured, the which ought for to styre vs vnto compassyon and moderly pete. And therefore I am purposed by the helpe of Ihesu chryste me creatoure, in whome is my truste, for to fyghte and expell the paynymes and sarazyns oute of the cytye of Rome and of al the countre about it, wherfore aduise you whiche of you wyll bere a letter, of dyffienge vnto the forsayd Admyrall in my name. For I wyll delyuer and gyue vnto hym a Iourneye of batayll. And wyll fyght with hym in exaltinge and susteynyng our fayth vnto the dethe. Whan kynge Pepyn had spoken thus, there was none that wolde persente the for to answer saue Ualentyne that stepte forth before the kynge and spake afore them all sayenge. Syr yf it please you to gyue me lycence I shall vnder take the message & shal speke afore all the panyms. and theyr fyerse Admyrall in suche maner that wyth the helpe of god, and of hys swete mother, ye shall knowe that I haue done youre message to your profyte & myne honoure. Of the good wyll, and valyaunte courage of Ualentyne the kynge was ryght Ioyous, and all they of the courte meruaylled therat. Than the kynge made a secretary to come whiche he made to wryte a letter of dyffyaunce, and after gaue it to Ualentyne for to bere vnto the Admyral panym. ¶And Ualentyne mounted on horsbacke and toke leue of the kynge and of them of the courte. And than he put hym selfe on the waye, in puttynge hym in the garde and kepynge of our lorde Iesu chryste and came vnto Rome. And it is not to be demaunded yf yt he was well loked on, for he behaued hym so well one horsbacke & in armes, that there was none that sawe hym but that they toke grete pleasure. He wente towarde the palays where as ye Admyrall was in his halles tryumphauntly in grete pompes. Ualentyne entred in ad came before the Admyrall and salued hym in thys maner. Ihesus that was borne of the vyrgyne Mary, and that for vs all suffered dethe and passyo saue from euil encombrauce the noble and puyssaunte kynge Pepyn, And mahommet saue ye and socoure the redoubted Admyrall euen as I wolde. whan Ualetyne had spoken thus the Admyrall rose vp, and as feerse & proude sayd vnto hym. Messenger Ualentyne retorne the, to the ende that I see thee no more. And tell vnto kynge Pepine that of Ihesus holdeth the lawe, that he byleue on mahommet, and that he renounce his bileue for euermore or know for a certaynte that I am purposed for to put hym vnto dethe, and to dystroye all his londes. Nowe go thy waye messenger, and make before mee no more abydynge, For to here thy worde my herte con not suffre. Grete foly hast thou enterprysed, wha that so fyersly thou arte entred into my palays, for te declare suche a thynge before my hyghe maieste. Nowe knowe for a certayne that yf I knowe that thou dyde it by pryde or presumpcione, and that thou haste enterprysed this thynge by mockery, yu sholde neuer retourne vnto kynge Pepyn whan Ualentyne herde the fyerse wordes of the Admyrall, he was moche ferefull, and not wythe out a cause, For he was full nere the death, yf that our Lord had not preserued hym he was so inspyred of gode that he gaue hym an answere solytarye, as well for the lyfe of the body, as for the lyfe of the soule. And as wyse and well endoctrined to giue an answer spake in this maner wyse. Alas ryght myghtye and hye Emperoure do not thyncke in your ymaginacyon that by pryde, or presumpcyon I ame comen before your magnificence For syr whan you shall knowe the maner, and the dede howe I am comen, you wyl be a meruaylled. ¶Tel vs howe thou art comen and all the dede, for euen so mahommet helpe me but I shall take pleasure and consolacyon to here the recite thine enterpryse, and multepli thy courage in al goodnes. Than spake Ualentine and sayd. Syr Admyrall it is true and certyne that be fals, and dysloyall enuye I haue ben accused to the kynge Pepyne they haue tolde hyme that for the greate fere and drede that I hade to go to warre I would haue retorned into Fraunce. For the which cause the king Pepyn hath me in greate indignacion. And one morowe he made me to be taken for to smyte of my heed. Whan I sawe my selfe in thys daunger, for to lengthe my lyfe I dyde auaunt me before them al of a great folye. For I swore before them of the court that I shoulde come towarde you, for to defye you and all your barons one kynge Pepyns behalfe. And more ouer I dyd vaunte me that at my departyng I shulde demaunde you thre strokes with a spere vpon your body that is so valiaut and so well renowmed, for to wyne pryse and honoure wherfore I requyre youe that ye accorde me this thynge, for otherwyse I dare not retourne before the kynge Pepyn, lest he make me dye. Sone sayde the Admyrall by mahommet the ryght puyssaut, you shall not be refused but at this same houre I vttre to you ye Iustes. And to the ende that ye frensshmen that hathe assyged this cyte may se your hardynes, I shall make thei Iustynge place to be made redy and ordeyned without the cyte. Gramercy than sayde Ualentyne, that fell downe for to kysse the fete of the Admyrall, in token of humylyte and obeysaunce. But it is sayd in a comin prouerbe, that they do the shoo often of, whom of they wolde cut of the foote, Ualentine was renowmed in the courte of the Admyrall, & euer he requyred god that he wolde do hym soo moche that he myght knowe and wytte from whens he was comen, and who was hys fader & his moder. And as he was in that grete thoughte, ye admerall saed vnto hym, Fayre sone me thynke you are ryght heuy and thoughtfull. It is true syr sayd Ualentyne, and not without a cause. For I haue to greate fere that I shall be slayne by you in the Iustes. Wherfore I praye you humbly that it wyll please you to make me haue a preest that maye gyue me absolucyon of mi synnes. Than the Admyrall comaunded that the sholde fetche hym a preeste, ¶And whan he was comen, he gaue hym vnto Ualentyne in sayinge to him. Now haue & confesse you of all your confessyons, I woulde not gyue you a burden. Ualentyne toke ye preeste and drew hym a syde, And whan they were togyder Ualentyne sayd vnto hym. Alas syr you are a chrysten preest, and ought amongest all other to haue wyll and courage to kepe and defende our holy fayth, Wherfore herken and vnderstande that I shall tell you I praye you with all my herte, for it is a thinge the whiche is ryght chargeable. It is true that I must fyghte to day with the false Admyrall that is so grete an enmye to our fayth. Now knowe I well that sarasyns and Paynyms wyll yssue out of the cyte for to se ye Iustynge that is determyned without the walles of the cyte. Wherfore I shall tel you what I shall doo, you shall aduertyse the Chrysten me that is in the cyte that none of them yssue out: but kepe them in harneys without any noyse. And whan ye paynyms shal be without the cyte they shal take ye gardes of the gates, in suche maner that whan ye sarazins wolde enter into the cytie, that you shytte the gates agaynste them. And bydde the chrysten men sende kynge Pepyn worde of this fayte, and that he kepe hys mene in armes, to the ende that whan it shal be tyme that he come rennynge vpon the sarazyns, and they of the cyte shall assayll them on the other syde. And by this meane they shall be slayne and vaynqusshed todaye. And whan Ualentyne had tolde this to the preest he confessed hym, and after his confessyon the preest departed, and went his waye, and comaunded him to god. Than the Admyral made Ualentyne to be ledde in to his chabre for to dyne and take his refeccion. And comaunded that he shold be also honourably seruyd as his persone Ualentyne was set at the table with dyuers other barons. Moche coude he behaue him honestly before the all. whan the dyner was done, the Admyrall called to hym a neuewe of his, that was called Salatass and comaunded hym for to arme Ualentyne also well as his propre persone. And dyd charge his sayd neuewe that he sholde delyuer vnto Ualentyne ye best horse yt myght be founde in all his courte. And whan ye Admyrall had spoken so to his neuew, he entred in to the halle prepared, and there he was armed by paynyms experte in armes. And Salatas toke valentyne and ledde hym in to a fayre halle and than he made to be brought before him muche harneis, and with the best that hee coulde fynde he made valentyne bee armed as the Admyrall his vncle had commaunded him. And whan he was armed he lepte vpon a myghty steade, and the Admyrall yssued out of his place mounted, and in armes ryghte triumphantly. Than they rode bothe two towarde ye chefe gate of Rome. For on that side Kinge Pepyn had layd the siege. And whan they were in the fielde valentyne toke his shielde and hanged it a bout his necke, in the whiche was a harte angled and dented wyth sable in a felde of syluer, and beside that hart was a tree, the whiche armes did signifye that he was founde in they forest. And Kinge Pepin hadde geuen him those same armes. Then came the Frenshmenne vpon the renges wherof valentine was righte Ioyous. The cri was so greate throughe the cite of Rome that al the Painnes issued out for to se the Iustes. And the christen me that were within the city armed them also secretely as thei might, and toke al the gardes of the gates in such wise that none might entre in. And kynge Pepyn aduertised of this case, kept all hys menne in armes for to socoure the noble valentyne at his neade. So they hour was comen that the Iustes shoulde begynne, and than they fetched theyr cours and couched theyr speres and ranne the one a gaynst the other so impetuously yt ther speres all to sheuered. Than they retorned for the secode spere. And Ualentyne firste and hardy can agaynste the Admyrall, and smote him bi such a maner that the spere perced hys body throughout and than the admyrall fell downe deed in the felde makynge a greate crye whan the paynyms sawe theyr Admyrall deed, and dyscomfyte, they ranne vpon Ualentyne for to haue pute hym to dethe. But Ualentyne with a hardy courage, smote his hors with the sporres, and withe his swerde of armes he dyd so grete dedys of armes that he passed the paynyms, and slewe and wounded manye. Than came kynge Pepyn and his hooste and entred in to the batayll, the whiche was so asprely assayled of the sarasyns, that he was smyten downe to the grounde. But Ualentine came theder the which socoured him so that he horsed hym agayne. And whan he was mounted he sayd vnto Ualentyne. Chylde you haue saued my lyfe, but and it please god it shall be rewarded thee. At that tyme rose a grete crye on bothe partyes, and ye batayll was so fyerse and stronge that the paynyms were constrayned to recule abacke. The christen men that were in the cyte yssued out vpon them the whiche had planted the standardes and baners of kynge Pepyn vppon the walles, wherof the paynyms were sore abasshed, & meruaylled. They were assayled also well of ye kynges hoost, as of them of ye cytie, so that shamefully and myserably they fynysshed theyr dayes. In that batayll remayned deed vpon the felde ten thousande paynymes and all throughe ye enterpryse and valyauntnes of Ualentyn, the whiche bare him so rigorously that day that he slewe foure horses vnder hym. And thus throughe his prowesse ye cyte was wonne agayn. For the whiche there was made great Ioye & myrth throughe all christendom & pryncypally in ye cyte of rome, & in those partyes nere it, euery body cryed mountioye to the kynge Pepyn of Fraunce. He was praysed so of euery body, yt be the cosente of the people he was sacred by the pope Emperoure crowned. Moche well he gouerned & augmented the chyrche in his tyme. He dyde egall Iustyce vnto euery body, soo that all folkes sayd good of hym. ¶In this tyme was pope Clement the fourth of that name, that consacred kynge Pepyn Emperoure. ¶Howe Haufray and Henry had enuye at Ualentyne bycause that the kynge loued him so well. After that they kynge Pepyn by they grace of god, and by they strengthe of armes had chaced the infideles and enemyes of oure faythe out of they partyes Romayns, he came vnto Orleaunce, and there he founde the quene Berthe hys wyfe that receyued hym with all the Ioye and tryumphe that mighte be made, wyth her lytell sone Charlemayne, and her excellent doughter Eglantyne. The whiche was ryghte gladde and Ioyous, bicause that Ualentene was comene agayne safe and sounde, So she soiourned not longe but that shee sente for hym ad he came with a good will. Than whan they lady sawe hym, she salued hym amyably sayenge. Ualentyne my loue ye be herteli welcome well ought you to be derely kepte and honoured, for it is sayd that aboue all other ye haue wonne vyctorye and triumphe vpon thei paynyms that held Rome in theyre subiection. A madame sayd Ualentyne to god be the laudes and praisinges, euery body sayethe what they lyste. And as for me I haue done nothynge that is worthy praise. And moreouer the kynge your fader hathe done me soo muche good and honoure, that in my lyfe I can not deserue it what seruyce someuer I do hym. And in sayenge these wordes Haufray and henry esprysed withe enuye dyde entre into the chambre of Eglantyne, And whan Haufray and Henry were entred they sayde vnto hym. Ualetyne what come you here to do in the chambre of our syster that appertayneth not to you to moche ye shewe your selfe folysshe and hardi for to entre into her chambre ryall, for you are but a begyler, and none can know what you are, nor from whens ye be comen. Wherfore beware that ye be not founden no more with her leste that euyll come to you. Ualentyne sayd vnto Haufray of your syster haue no doubte, for syth that I was borne I neuer thought towarde her thynge, saue all good and honoure. yf that I be poore, and that they knowe not what I am yet wolde I not do nor thynke ye thyng, that sholde be agaynste the maieste ryall. And to the ende that you haue no doubte that your syster Eglatyne shall haue by me onye blame at this same houre I promyse you that I shall neuer enter into her chambre a agayne. At these wordes departed Ualetyne out of the chambre, and Eglantyne abode wepynge all alone moche tenderly. Ualentyne mouted into the palays for to serue the kinge whiche was set all redi, Ther was haufraie and Henri, and the duke Millon dangler that serued the kinge at ye table with Ualentine. And whan he was risen he called valenteyne, and sayde heryng them all. Lordes here is Ualentyne that hathe wel. and truly serued me, and socoured in my necessities, to they ende that eche of you may knowe it and for thei good seruices that he hathe done me, in abydynge tyl better come I gyue hym the Erldom of Clemonte in Ouergne Syr sayd Ualentine god yelde it you, for ye do me more honoure and goodnes than I haue deserued. To heare suche wordes were Haufraye and Henrye to sorofull wherefore eche sayde to other. Thys same foundelinge which god course is in the grace of the kynge, so that yf we fynde not remedy, he shall be ones cause of our gret dommage. For the kynge hath no chyldren but vs, and the lytell Charlemoyne, of whome we may do our wyll, after ye death of our father, but it is of certayntie that Ualentyne wyll supporte hym and holde hym agaynste vs. Wherfore we muste fynd the manner to put him in the indignacion of the kyng, and to purchase his death for other wyse we can not auenge vs. And than maye we at our owne pleasure gouerne the realme wythout contradiction. Than spake Haufray and sayd. Broder Henry I haue found the maner wherby the false boye shall be deceyued and betrayed. I shal tel you howe, we shall make the kynge our father to vnderstand that he hathe vyoled our syster, and that we haue founde hym in naked bedde with her. And whan the kynge shall knowe this I am certayne that he wyll make hym dye shamefully, It is wel sayde answered Henry, let it be done as you haue sayd, and so shall we be auenged. In this wyse abode they thynkynge and ymagynynge alwaye treason agaynste Ualentyne for thei coueyted his deth ryght sore. And valentin serueth the kyng so debonayrly, that the kynge aboue all other desyre hym in his copany. For euery daye he maynteyned him frome wel to better, in prayenge god that he wolde geue hym knoweledg of the place that he was extraught of, And Orson his brother is in the forest whiche is so moche fered and redoubted that none durst approche nere the wood for hym. The complayntes came vnto the kyng euery day from one all partes. So it, happened that daye a poore man came vnto the kynge all wounded and blody, and sayd to hym. Syr I complayne me to you of the wylde man. For euen so as I and my wyfe passed throughe ye forest berynge breed, wyne, and other vytaylles, ye wylde man came and toke all frome vs and ete it, and moreouer he toke my wyfe and dyde twyes hys wyll with her. Now tell me sayd the kynge, whether arte thou soryer for thy vytaylles, or for thy wyfe. By my fayth syr sayde the good man, of my wyfe. I am moche more dyspleasaunt. Thou hast ryght sayd the kynge. Now go to my treasurer and sette pryse on thy losse, for it shall be rendred thee. After the kynge called his barons to take aduyce on Orson. So they aduised amonge them that the kynge sholde make crye all about, that who myght take the wyld man quycke or dead. he sholde haue a .M marke of fyne golde. So the counsayl was holden and the cree publysshed. And thte her came many knightes of all estates for to take Orson and thei pryse conquere. Than they kynge Pepyn beynge in his palays with dyuers great lordes and noble barons that of this mater spake and made great admeracions among themselfe Amonge the whiche lordes and barons Haufraie that was mortall enemye of Ualentine begane for to saye thus. Syr here is Ualentine that you haue nourysshed and put in great honoure, the which hath required our syster Eglantine of loue dysordinate and of greate dyshonoure. And because that I am well informed of thys case, for to se what he can do, and for to shewe his valyauntnes, let him go seke the wilde man that is so dread and you shall gyue hym Eglantyne, so shall hys wyll be accomplysshed on all sydes. Haufray sayde the kynge thy speche is not gracious but, is full of enuy, For if so be that Ualentyne be poore and of lowe byrthe, and that I haue founde hym in the foreste, I fynde him so good humble and debonaire that he seameth more gentiller, and of nobler courage than thou arte. Leaue thy spekinge of him for they good maners and condicions that is in him proueth and sheweth that he is extracte out of a good place, and of a noble lignage. And for they goodnes that I haue founde in hym I wyll and it pleaseth me that he goo whan it pleaseth him to my doughter for from a noble herte can not procede but honoure And so muche I affye me in hym that he will not think agaynste my worshippe nothinge but that is honeste and lycite. And whan Haufray hard they kynge, that so strongly repreued hym in supportynge Ualentyne, hee was displeasaunt in his hert but he made no semblaut Than spake valentyne that hade well vnderstode they wordes of Haufray and sayd. Haufray with wronge ad with out cause ye haue spoken of me, and yet I neuer dydde you amysse. you wyll that I go for to fight with the wylde man, to ye ende that I dye, and that ye maye be venged on me but I make auow to god that I shal neuer reste in no place till that I haue founde the wilde man. And whan yt I shall haue founde hym I shal fyght with him in suche maner that quicke or deed I shall brynge hym hyther before you all, or I shall fynisshe my daies. And yf it happen that god gyue me the strengthe for to conquere him, there shall neuer none se me in thys countre till that I haue founde the father that engendred me, to the ende that I maye knowe yf I am bastarde or legitime, and where fore I was lefte in the wodde. whan the kynge vnderstode the enterpryse of Ualentyne he was moche dyspleasant, for he fered more to lese him than eny of the other of his courte And curseth Haufray and Henry that made him enterpryse that thynge. And after called Ualentyne and said. My child auyse you what you wyll do, for to fyghte with the wylde man, it semeth me a thinge vnpossyble to you, yow knowe well ynoughe that by hym is deed many valyaunt men, and that some noble champyons hath left this enterpryse. And therfore be not so dismaide that for the speche of them twayne you lese your lyfe, for it is to cruell a thinge to a bide suche a beest that is without nature all vnderstandig. For god my chylde suffre and endure the workes of ye enuyous for it is a fayre vertue to the that can endure false togues to speke. Asyr sayd valentine for god pardone me for I shall neuer chaunge my purpose. They call me in reproche foundelynge, for ye whiche I am ryght sorowfull whan yt I can not knowe what I am, nor of what place. I take leue of you ad commaunde, you to good, For to morowe in the mornyng I thynke to take my waye for to achue myn enterpryse. At these wordes departed the valentyne knyght Ualentyne, and toke his leue of kyng Pepyn Upon the morowe he herde masse ad after mounted on horsbacke for to go seke the wylde man. ¶Nowe it is not to be demaunded yf ye fayre Eglantine made great sorowe and lamentacions all ye nyght. And when that it was daye she called to her a damoysell that was secrete & saide vnto her. My frende goo toward valentyne and tell hym that I sende hym worde that he come & speke with me or ye departe, and that ye haue no doubte of non lyuinge to entre into my chambre. For aboue all thynges I desyre to se hym, and it is my singuler will that he take leue of me or he departe. Than wente the damoisell towarde Ualentyne that was on horsbacke, and dyde vnto him her message as Eglantyne had charged her. whan Ualentyne vnderstode the messyge he sayde vnto her. My damoysell I knowe that the loue that is bytwene my lady Eglantyne and me, is layal and of good equite, and yet I knowe so moche by her yt she woulde not thynke the thinge that myght torne here to dishonour. And so god helpe me as for me I woulde her no harme, but all honour ad worshpe. But enuye is of suche nature yt it hath neuer reste. And sooner ben the enuyous of theyr nature enclyned to saie euyl of good folkes than good, And euer ymagyneth false inuencyons a gaynst them that wolde wynne honour. Now it happeneth me in this maner, for I knowe for certayne that Haufray, and Henry ye brederne of my lady Eglantyne haue grete wyll to purchase my dethe, wherfore damoysell you shal go towarde her if it please you and bydde her that she take no displeasure yf I haue taken no leue of her and than he badde her farewell & rode his waye. ¶How Ualentyne conquered his broder Orson in the forest of Orleaunce. Now rydeth valentyn vpon his Iourney all alone saue a squyer yt he hadde wyth hym And so long he rode that he came to the wodde where as the wylde man was And than he put on his helm and toke leue of his squyer. So he entred & sought the wylde man all ye daye, but he founde him not, & whan it was night he dyscended of his hors and tyed hym vnto a tree, and than he toke brede and wyne that he had brought with hym, and a litell refreshed hym. ¶And whan that he had eten and that the nyght was comen. and the day all faylled, than Ualentyne for fere of the night mounted vpon a tree, and there abode. And whan it was daye he loked aboute him, and sawe his broder Orso that ranne throughe the forest as a wylde beest, the whyche auysed the hors of Ualentine, and drewe towarde hym And whan he sawe hym so fayre and so pleasaunt, he combed hym a paas weth hys roughe handes, in makynge hym chere. For he had neuer sene so fayre a beest whan Ualentines hors felte and apperceyued the wylde man that scratched hym on all sydes, he began for to stryke and flynge incontinent myghtely. And Ualentine that was vpon the tree behelde the maners of the wylde man, that was ryght horryble for to beholde, & moche to doubte. Than he reclaymed our lord and the gloryous virgin Mary ryght deuoutly, in praieng and requiringe him wyth herte and mynde that he wolde preserue hym from the wylde man, and gyue hym victorie against hym. Orson torned so moche aboute the hors of Ualentine, that the hors that was fyerge bega for to smyte and byte hym. And whan Orson apperceiued that he enbraced the hors for to caste hym downe, and fyght wyth hym. Whan the noble Ualentyne sawe that the wylde man wolde sle hys hors, he cryed on hye and said. Wylde man leue my hors and a byde, for with me thou shalte haue batayll. Than Orson the wylde man lefte the hors of Ualentyne, and lyfte vp his eyen and loked vp in to the tree. And whan he sawe valentine he made him signes with his handes and heed that he would pull him in peces. And then valentine made the sygne of the crosse in recomaunding him vnto god and after drwe out his sworde and lepte downe besyde Orson, when Orson sawe ye sworde that valentyne woulde haue smytten him with, he drewe tym backe and kept him from the stroke. And then he came to valentine and with cleane strengthe threwe hym to the earthe vnder hi, where of valentyne was sore abashed and discomforted for he wente well to haue dyed and fynyshed his dayes in that place. For he felte Orson the sauage so strog that he had neuer hope for escape fro hym. Ha very God sayde he haue pytie on me, and suffre not that I fynyshe here my dayes thus pyteuosly by this wylde man. Dyuers times valetyne wende for to haue turned Orson vnder hym but he ne might when valentyne sawe that by strength of bodye he myght not wynne hym, he drewe out sharpe poynted knyfe and smote Orson in to the ryght syde, in suche wise that the bloud yssued out by great haboundauce Than Orson steret vp when he felte himselfe wouded And for the dolour that he felte, as all in arage he gaue suche a crie that all the wodde sowned therof After he ranne agayne vnto the nole valentyne, and so fiersly he assayled hym with his sharpe nayles that he caste him yet downe a gaine. And there they fought so longe together that it were to muche for to recount al ye maner. As they fought thus wt out cesyng. Orson tooke hys shelde fro about hys necke. And when that he had taken it from hym, he behelde it right strongly, because of the beautye of the colours that he was not accustomed for to se, and then he cast it strongly agaynst the earth, and incontinent retourned vnto valentine, and with his nayles and his teeth pressed hym so harde the he broke both harneys and haubergon. And smote him so rudely with his nailes that he made the bloud sprig out on all sydes. And when Ualentyne felte hymselfe so sore wounded, he was ryght sorowfull and pensife & began for to reclayne our lord with both his harte and courage. Alas sayd he veray god almighty in ye is mine only hope and truste, mine onely refuge and comforte, wherfore I praye the humbly that thou wilt haue pytie on me. And euen so as by thy worthy grace thou kepte and saued Danyel among the lyons, so kepe me from thys wylde man. And when Ualentine had made his prayer vnto god, he went towarde Orson with hys sworde for to haue smiten him, but Orson lepte a back and went to a lyttell tre, the which tree he bowed and bracke it, and made therof an horrible staffe, and after came vnto Ualentine and gaue hym suche a strooke yt he made hym for to fall vpon one knee. Ualentyne as hardy rose vp quickely, and so began betwene them a ryght fyerse batayll. And the two brethren had ardaut desyres for to destroye eche other, but they knew not yt they were brethren, nor the cause of their fortune. Orson was so cruel & so strong yt he would haue slaine Ualentine dyuers tymes if it had not bene for his sworde that he doubted aboue all thinges, because of ye knyfe that he had smyten hym with. So muche and so long they fought together by diuers maners that they wer both wery and strongly trauayled. Then Ualentine behelde Orson and began for to saye vnto hym. Alas wilde man, wherfore doest thou not yelde the vnto me thou lyuest here in this wodde lyke a beaste, and hathe no knowledge of God, nor of his blyssed mother saynt Mary, nor of his holy fayth, for the whiche thy soule is in great daunger. Come on thy wai with me ad then shalt thou do wyseli. I shall make the be baptized, and shall teache the, the holy fayth. And shall geue the flesh and fysshe, bread and wyne ynough for to eate, and clothes, ad all maner of thynges that appertayneth vnto a mannes body, and shalt vse thy lyfe honestly as euery naturall body shoulde doo. when Orson vnderstode Ualentyne speke, he apperceyued well by his sygnes yt he would hym good. And Ualentyne spake vnto hym of God and of our ladi, and then after the course of nature that can not lye, Orson fell downe vpon both his knees, & stretcheth forth his handes towardes hys brother valentyne, in makyng hym sygne that he woulde for geue him, and that he would obeye vnto him in al maner of thynges for the time to come. And he shewed vnto hym by sygnes that neuer the dayes of his lyfe he should fayle hym, neyther with body nor goodes. It is not for to be demaunded yf that valentyne was glad when he sawe that the wylde man was conquered by hym and put in subiyctyon, and made great ioye and not without a cause. For he had coquerd more honour by hys prowysse then any knyght that was in his time for there was none that durst vndertake it were he neuer so bolde nor hardy, He toke Orson by the hande, & shewed him bi signes thate he shouled go afore him tyl they were out of the wodde, and so he dyd, and a none thy were out of the wodde. Then valentyne toke one of hys gyrthes, ad for doubte that he shoulde doo hym no harme nor none other, he bounde hys handes fast vnto his body. And when that he had bounde hym fast he mounted on horse backe and ledde him with hym as a beast tyed, with out that euer this same Orso didde hym any harme, or made hym an euyl semblaunt, that was a thyng myraculous. ¶Howe Ualentyne after that he had conquered Orson departed from ye forest for to returne to Orleauce, towarde the kyng Pepyn that was there. Ualentine hath done so muche with goddes helpe, that he hath ouercom and conquered the wylde Orson. He mounted on horse backe for to go eo Orleaunce and he dyd so muche that he entred in to a great vyllage, but also sone as the men of the vyllage sawe the wylde man, they ranne in to their houses, and for great fere shytte theyr dores so that none myght entre. Ualentyne cryed vnto them, byddynge them haue no dreade, and that they shoulde open their gates, for he woulde haue lodgyng but for any thyng that he coulde say the woulde not open their dores. Then he escryed them sayinge, by god almighty if you giue me no lodgyng for to passe the nighte and take my rest, knowe that I shall vnbynde thee wylde man and let him goo, and than I am certaine he will fynde me loudgynge to my plesure Often required Ualentyne that he myghte haue some lodginge, but euery body had so great feare of the wild man that they durst not open their doores. And when Ualentyne sawe that none wold lodge him, he vnboud Orson, and after made hym sygne that he should smyte againste the gate of a great place in the which was holden hostry, and Orson toke a great pece of wodde, and smote at thei gate with so great strengthe, that at they thyrde stroke he smote it to the earthe, and then they entred, and shytte the gate after them. When they that were within sawe that the wilde man was entred they ran all out at the backe dore. Ualentine wente toward the stable, and dressed his horse. After that Orson and he went to the kechin where as they founde capons ad diuers other meate vpon a great spytte before the fire Then Ualentine made signe vnto Orson that he shold torne the spytte, for the meat was not ynoughe, but also soone as Orson spied they meate, he set handes on a great parte of it, and pulled it of. He asked not if it was roste ynough, but eate as a wolfe dothe hys praye, and after he espyed a caudron ful of water, in the whiche he put in his head and dronke as a horse doth at the ryuer Ualentyne made hym sygne that he shoulde leue drynkynge an that he would geue hym wyne. And than he toke a pot & ledde Orson into the seller that was open And when he had drawen thei pot full of wyne, he gaue it him, and Orson lyft vp the pot and tasted it & found it good. And he dronke so myghetely that he dronke all oute, and after he cast the pot vnto the earth and made sygne vnto Ualentien that he sholde drawe more wyne And valentyne toke vp the pot & filled it wt good wyne Orson take it and espied a grett bolle & put thei wene therin, and then he bare it vnto Ualentynes horse, for to drynke. And when valantyne sawe that, he made hym sygne that he dronke but water, and Orson shewed hym by syghnes that they wyne was better, then the water. Dyuers other thynges dyd Orson in thee house the whiche shulde be to longe to recounte. Thei nyghte was come, and it was tyme to goo to bedde. So valentyne souped and made Orson soupe with hym the whiche spared not the wyne, for he toke so muche yt he was dronke, Than he layde hym downe by thei fyre and began for to snore and slepe marueylously. And valentyne behelde him sayinge. Ueray. God what is a lytell thynge of a man on slepe, and of the man that by to muche drinking leseth his memorye. Nowe se I this wylde man, in whome now, neyther force nor strengthe and myghte be slayne or euer he a waked And when he had sayde this, for to proue more they hardynes of Orson, he put hym so harde with his fote that he awaked hym, and then he made hym sygne that there was folkes aboute the house. Then Orson arose as all a frayd and toke a great lodge that stoode in they chymnei, and ranne agaynst the gate so myghtely that he made al to shake. And volentyne began for to laugh ryght strongely, wherby Orson knewe that he did it for to assaye him So he made hym sygne that he should take his reste, ad that he shoulde haue no feare of nothinge, for he would kepe him well. Than Orson layde hym downe by they fyre and hys lodge in his armes. And Ualentyne was all thei nyght besyde him, they whiche dyd watche hym with out slepinge for fere that he should be assailed, for the noyse was so greate that euery body left his house, and with drewe them into the chirch. And all the night withoute any reste ronge the belles for to assemble the people that in a great nombre al armed made the watche for fere of the wilde ma. And thus passed the nighte tyll that it was lyght daye. And whan it was daye lgihte Ualentyne mounted on horsebacke, and bounde Orson and put hym on the waye towarde Orlyaunce And he dyd so muche that vpon a thursday he arryued within the towne. And whan he was apperceyued ledynge Orson the sauage they made so great a cry that within the towne of Orleaunce was neuer none suche herd euery body ranne into theyre houses and shyt thei gates, and than mounted into the wyndowes for to see hym. Thei tydynges came vnto kynge Pepyn that valentyne was arryued and that he had conquered Orson the sauage, and broughte him with him, of thei whiche tydynges kynge Pepyn was greatly abasshed. And in makynge the sygne of the crosse sayde in this manere: Alas valentyne my childe in a good houre was thou borne blessed be the father that engendred the, and the moder that deliuered the, in the wodde, for I se & know that thou art byloued of god and that by thee he sheweth vs an euydente myracle. And the people that were in the wyndowes cryed. Lyue amongeste the other thei hardy valentyne, for he is well worthy greate honoure whan that by his prowesse he hathe conquered this ma that neuer none durst assayle euerye body is bound to do him honoure and reuerence for by him we are delyuered and assured of the thynge that we mooste dredde Ualentye rode thorowe they towne of Orleaunce tyll yt he came before the palays gate. And wha the porters, sawe hym, they shyt the gates for fere of Orson. Than Ualentyne sayd vnto them, be nothynge afrayde, but go vnto kynge Pepyne and tel hym that vpone my lyfe I warrante hym frome the wylde man, and all them of his courte. For I knowe him so well that he wyll do none erthly creature harme in no maner. The porter dyd go vp into the palays and tolde the kynge the tidynges how Ualentyne toke the wylde man vpon his charge. Than the kynge commaunded that they shoulde lette hym in. So Ualentyne entred in and toke Orson bi the hande. Whan the quene Berthe and the fayre Eglantyne knewe that they were in the palays they went in to theyr chambres for greate fere. Ualentyne mounted vppe and entred into the hall where as kynge Pepyne was wyth all the barons and knyghtes of hys court ad Haufray & Henry that with cemblaunt shewed greate sygnes of loue to Ualentyne. And him semed that they were ryght Ioyous of his vyctory and prowesse. But they were neuer soo sorowfull in theyr hertes, for they wende neuer that he should haue retorned on lyue and cursed Orson because he had not slayne hi. The kynge Pepyne and all they of hys courte behelde Orson gladly. And the kynge sayd, Lordes by god almighty it is a meruayllous thynge to se this wylde man, he is ryght well made and of a fayre stature. And how well that he is roughe, yf he were clothed as we bee, he wolde seme a right fayre knight. Than spake Ualentyne vnto kynge Pepyn and sayde. Syr I requyre you that he may be baptyzed, and than he shall be taught the lawe of Ihesu chryste, for that is my desyre, and soo I haue promysed hym. It pleaseth me wel sayd the kynge, and I wyll that it be done so. Than he comaunded a preest that he sholde baptyzed him. And these were his god faders, the noble kynge Pepyn, ye duke Myllon dangler and the puyssaut knyght Ualentyne, and vpon they other syde was ye duchesse of Burbon, and diuers other ladies of gret renowne And other name they gaue him not saue that whyche he had taken in to ye forest. whan Orson was babtyzed. kynge Pepyn sat him downe to dyner, and Ualentyne serued him of the cupe, for that was hys offyce. And whan euery man was set, he comemaunded for to let Orson into the halle, for to se hys maners and contenaunce. Orson entred in to the hall & came before kynge Pepyn that behelde him right voluntaryly. Orson aduysed yt meet that was in the platter and toke as moche as he myght catche and bare it awaye, and ete it quyckely. And whan he hadde eten it he loked on the other syde and espyed a seruaut that bare a pecoke in a platter for to serue the kynge. Than Orson ranne towarde him agreat pace and toke it fro him, and than he satte him downe vpon they erthe in ye myddes of the halle, and began for to ete it as a famisshed wolfe. Ualentyne apperceyued it and shewed him desygnes that he gouered hym not well, where of Orson was ashamed, for aboue all thynges he feared and redouted naturally Ualentyne, & kinge Pepin badde that they sholde let him alone, for he toke pleasure at hym. whan he hade eten well he toke a pot of wyne & of he drooke it, ad afteer kest the potte agaynste the erthe and began for to shake his heed, wherat the kinge and all the barons that were there laughed moche strongly And whan the nyghte was comen, there was gyuen a right fayre chambre vnto Ualentine, in the which was ordeyned a bedde for Orson, but for nothinge was the bedde apparaylled, for also sonne as he entred into the chambre he layde hym downe vpon the erthe, and anone he fell a slepe for he was not accustomed for to slepe otherwyse. ¶Howe Haufray and Henry toke counsayll for to slee Ualentyne in the chambre of Eglantyne. Ryght gladde and Ioyous was the excellente ladi Eglantine that Ualentine had conquered the the wylde man. So she sente hym worde that he sholde brynge they wylde man vnto her. Than Ualentyne called Orson & toke hym by thei hande and ledde hym into the chambre of Eglantyne, in the whyche was dyuers ladyes that gladly behelde Orson. And Orson in laughynge lepte vpon the bedde, & sate, there makynge dyuers sygnes that was right pleasaunte vnto the ladies. But that the whiche dyd they vnderstode not of the whyche thei were much displeaunt, So they called Ualentyne and demauded hym what it was that the wylde man shewed them by sygnes. Ande Ualentyne saide to them. My ladies knowe for a trouthe that ye wilde man sheweth you by his sygnes that he wold gladly kysse and colle they damoyselles that be here, wherat the began for to laughe and to beholde eche other. And thus as they deuysed togyder, and that thay played in the chambre of Eglantyne for the comynge of the wylde man, Haufray came towarde Henry and sayd to him Fayre broder to euyl gothe our feate, for you se that thys wretched foudelinge Ualentyne mounteth and encreaseth euery daye more and more in honoure amounge the Prynces ad ladyes and amonge the other thinges the kynge is more louinge vnto hi than vnto eyther of hus two, ye whiche maie ad uychyl gretely ouer honoure. Haufrai saide Henri ye saye trouthe and speaketh wysely. And as for me I fere not but that we shall haue once and euil reproche bi hym yf he endure longe. Broder sayd haufray herken what I shall tell you. Ualentyne is now in ye chambre of our syster Eglantyne, the whiche thynge we haue defended hym so longe ago, wherfore we haue good occasyon for to take hym and moue stryfe & debate agaynst hym. And therfore yf you wyll byleue me we shal go in to the chambre, & by vs shall be put to dethe. and than we shall make the kynge byleue that we dyd finde him with oure syster doyng hys wyll wyth her. Thus spake the two traytours false and disloyall. and euen so as ye Iewes by theyre enuye crucifyed & ymagyned ye dethe of our lorde with wronge and without cause. Euen so dyde Haufre and Hery to Ualentyne that was so swete and so amyable, obeying vnto euerybody, and out of his mouth neuer yssued a vylainous worde. and after that they had accorded theyr vnhappye enterpryse they went into the chambre of the faire and pleasaut Eglantyne, and also soone as Haufray was entrede, he sayd vnto Ualentyn. Euill and disloyall man nowe knowe we that yf thy folye and outragyous volente yu wylte not refrayne nor absteine the, but in perseuerynge in thy malyce and folysshe oppynion, purchasynge from daye to day the dyshonoure of our father ye kyng Pepyn by the meane and accorde of our fals and disloyall syster Eglantin, of ye whyche you do your pleasure and wyll, euen so as of a woman vnhappy and habandoned, wherfore it is well ryght and reason that euyll come to you. and syth yt the kynge setteth noughte therby, it force that we take vengeaunce one you, and in sayinge these wordes the traytour Haufray lyft vp his hande he smote Ualentyne vpon they vysage in suche maner, that he made the clere bloude yssue out of his mouthe haboundauntly. and then Henry they other traytoure approched nere hym, and with a glayue that was bothe sharpe & longe he wende to haue smite Ualentyne muche outragiously. And whan Orson sawe that they wolde outrage valentyne he lepte forthe & gaue Haufraye so great a stroke with his rough hande that he felled hym vnto the earthe. and after he ran towarde Henrye, and streyned hym so bytwene his armes that yf the ladyes had not ben that appeased him he had dystroyed hym at that tyme. Than arose the cry in the chambre so great that the moost parte of the barons came into the chambre. And whan they appercayued that Orson dealt so euyl with the kings sons they wold haue smyten hym wyth glayues and swerdes. ad put them all in defence agaynste hym, for to haue put hym to death. ¶Than Ualentine for to socour Orson drewe hys swerde. And swore by god almeghty if, ony of them touched Orson with swerde or knyfe, he shuld be his preest what someuer myghte happen therfore. And than he made syghne vnto Orson that he shoulde be styll withoute doynge any outrage. And Haufray & henry went towarde theyr father kinge Pepin sorowfull & heuy, and haufray said vnto him. Ha sir an euill houre was euer Ualatin borne the whiche you hold so dere. For he hath broughte the wilde man hether, that hathe almoste dystroyed vs. Syr you shal do righte euyll of you let hym lyue any lenger, for domage ad dishonour he wyl bere you shortly. For god make that he be drowned or hanged, for the regard of him is nought nor his company. Whan the kynge Pepyn vnderstode this tidinges, he was muche sorowfull. And sayd that he wolde make Orson the sauage to be put in a toure where as he shoulde neuer come out but bi licence. So kinge Pepin sente for Ualentyne for to demaude hym the case And Ualentine recounted vnto him the enterpryse it had bene done by Haufray and Henrye sayinge Syr I was in the chambre of my ladye your doughter Eglantine, in the company of dyuers ladyes and gentyll women, that desyred strongly for to se Orson and pryncypally I had broughte hym vnto my lady Eglantyne. So I cannot tel you wherfore nor by what title my lordes your two sones Haufray and Henry dyd entre into thei chambre in sayinge vnto me that I dydde my pleasure with your doughter, and that they knewe it not longe agone. And in spekig vnto me fyerse & proude wordes, Haufraye by an outragious volente smote me vpon my vysage with his hande, and Henrye with his sweard wende for to haue slayne me Orson seynge that my body was in daunger, wente towarde theym and smote theym bothe downe, so that the bruyte ad ye noyse arose therfore as you may here. ¶And it is true sayd the kynge Pepyn so as you tel me. It syr sayde valentyne vpon the payne of my lyfe, other thynge nor other cause knowe I not. Nowe by god sayde thei kynge Pepyn Orson hathe done his deuoyr and that whyche he ought to do. And you Haufray ad Henry ful of euie and cursed malyce ye be to blame. I se and knowe clerelye that wythall your puyssaunce ye seke frem daye to daye to noye Ualentyne, ye be wel of an euil nature to purchase his euyll whan you se that I loue hym and that he serueth me truelye. I defende you to wyl hym ony hurt, wherfore let hym alone. For I wyll not see goo hym for none other. And I am wel certayne that he wolde neuer thynke nor serch my dyshonoure. Euen so departed Haufray and Henry that were muche sorowful ad dyspleasaunt. And Ualentine abode at that houre in the hal with all the other lordes and barens of the courte. And Orson wente thorowe the palays here and there At the laste he entred into the kechyn and sawe the meet that the coke made redy for souper, soo he approched nere hym and toke two capons all rawe and ete them as a dogge. Whan the coke sawe that, he toke a pestell and gaue Orson soo grete a stroke that he made hym for to bowe. Than Orson stouped downe and toke the coke and threwe hym downe in thei place, and gaue him so many strokes that he had almooste slayne hym. The tydynges came vnto kynge Pepyn that orson slewe the coke, and that none durste approche, nere hym. Wherat the kynge was angry, and made Orson to be brought before hym, and made hym syghnes that he wolde make hym be hanged. But Orson wente anone and fetched the pestell, and shewed the kynge howe the coke had smyten hem. and whan the kynge vnderstode they case, he pardoned orson entyerly. & comaunded that none sholde touche hym ony more. and valentyne shewed hym the guyse and manere howe he sholde behaue hym in the palays for the tyme to come, and toke totally ye charge of hym and he taughte hym so well that he dyde neuer after euyll nor dysplesure, but yf yt they began fyrste. and in this maner they abode longe with the noble kynge Pepin that was bothe theyr vncles. But they knewe it not ¶Howe the duke Sauary sente towarde the kyng Pepyn for to haue socoure agaynst the grene knight, that by force wold haue hadde his doughter Fezonne vnto wyfe and spouse. Valentyne and Orson were at that same tyme in the kynges Courte whane that frome the duke Sauary there came a knyght vnto the kynge Pepyne, the whiche after all due reuerence spake vnto hym in this maner. Free kynge, and of al most redoubted, the good duke Sauary to whom I am seruaunt hathe sent me hether to you, requiring you for to socoure hym agaynste a fals and acursed painym that hathe assyeged hym, and he nameth hym self the grene knyghte, the whiche wyll haue his doughter by force of armes agaynste his wyll, the whiche is as fayre as can be founde, and she hathe thre hardy brederne, that is to wyte. Garyn. Anselme. and Garyn thei yongest. My lordes sayd the kynge, we wyll socoure the good duke Sauary wyth a good wyll at his nede with all your puyssaunce. Syr sayde the messenger god yeld it you, for you shall do a grete almesse, and I thake you thanke you a hondrede tymes on my maysters behalfe In sayenge these wordes there entred another messenger in to the palays, ye whyche after that he had salued the kynge as he ought for to do, he sayd vnto hym thus Ryght excellent kynge, and aboue al other redoubted, assemble your hoost and men of warre in all the haste yt you maye, and sende them vnto the cyte of Lyon. For there is comen and yssued out of Almayne moo than a hondreth thousand fyghtynge men, that wyll destroye your realme and put it in subgectyon whan kynge Pepyn had vnderstonden these tydynges he was muche abasshed, ad made to come before hym the Archebyshop of Reyns, and the duke Myllon dangler, Greuais, and Sampson. And after he tolde them the wordes of the messenger, and demaunded them counsayll yf that he sholde go towarde Acquytayne for to socoure the good duke Sauary, or towarde Lyon to defende hys coutre To the which thynge answered Myllon dangler. Syr, vpo this mater you must be counsylled, for your shyrte is more nerer your bodi than your gowne, you oughte not for to defende the countre of another, and lette your owne be dystroyed. Wherfore without takynge ony more counsayl you shall go towarde Lyon for to kepe and defend your countrye. And whan you haue chaced your enemyes, and caste them out of your countre than maye ye do surely and socoure the good duke Sauari that demaudeth helpe of you. He bileueth his cousayll and accepted it and after sayd vnto ye messenger of the good duke Sauary, that at that tyme he myght not socoure his mayster, for it behoued hym to lede his hoost toward Lyon. But tell your lorde that he kepe hym well tyll that I haue done here, & that than I shall socoure hym with so grete a nombre of folke yt he shall be contente. Syr sayd the messenger to euyll it happeeneth hym that you maye not come nowe, for he hathe grete nede, But sith that it can not be none otherwise I thanke you for your good wyll. And with the leue of your hyghe maieste I wyll departe from you. At these wordes the messenger of the duke Sauary retorned in to Acquytayne and tolde the tydynges and the letting of the kynge Pepyne. And whan the duke Sauary vnderstode that he might haue no socoure of ye kynge Pepyn, he was moche sorowfull. For ye grene knyght made hym grete warre, & had assyeged hym to nere. And you ought for to knowe that this same grene knyghte was broder vnto Ferragus the gyaunte, that kepte ye lady Bellyssante in his castell, the whiche was Ualentynes moder, and the wylde Orsons, as you haue herd declared before. ¶Now is ye duke Sauary within Acquytayne ryght pensyfe and sorowfull for ye grene knyghte that made hym suche warre for his doughter. He made to be cryed and commaunded that al they of his hooste sholde be in harneys as vnto suche a case apperteyned. And that on the morowe in the morning he wolde yssue out vpo ye grene knyght for to fyght with hym Euery body put himselfe in poynt and dyde theyr dylygence for to arme them. And whan the daye was clere the trompettes and clarones dyde sowne, and than the men of armes on euerey syde as well one horsbacke as on fote put hem vpon the waye to yssue oute of the cyte Grete haste had the duke Sauary to assayll the grene knyght. But suche weneth to auaunce hym selfe yt oftentymes dothe his owne dommage. And so it happened vnto the duke as you shal here. The duke Sauary yssued out of Acquytayne with a great company. And whan he was vpon the felde he made to sown his trompettes and clarons as a valyaunt champyon for to assayll his enemies, and smote in amongeste theym. The sarazyns and painims that were in grete nombre, dyd rynne vnto armes, and than began a meruayllous ad a fyerse batayll. And the grene knyght smote wyth his axe of armes myghtye strokes, for at his fyrste entre he slewe two knyghtes. Than the Duke Sauary drewe toward hym and they assaylled ech other righte fiersely for the good duke was much valiaunt. But not for that he did to grete a foly when he enterprised to fight with they grene knighte for thei predestinacion of hym was suche that he shuld neuer be conquered, nor vainquyshed but of a man that shoulde be a kinges sonne and that had neuer ben nourysshed of a womanne, nor souked theyr brestes. So he thought that suche a man myght neuer be foundden. But such a chyld is vpon ye earth that shall fyght wyth hym and vanquyshe hyme that is Orson the sauage as you shall here afterward The duke Sauary and the grene knyght fought long togyder. But the good duke Sauary entred to ferre & for whan he wend to haue withdrawen him to his host he was enclosed wyth paynyms and sarazins. that toke hym prysoner and led hym vnto they grene knighte, the whiche was so ryghte gladde of hym, that he wolde not haue let him go for no treasure. And the good duke Sauery reclaymed God, and the virgin Marye in his hert. Whan the christen men knew that they duke was taken. they retorned into Acquitayne heuy and sorowfull. Than began the people for to make great dole & sorowe in the cytie of Acquitayne wepynge bytterlye for theyr good Duke that they loued so muche. There was his thre sones. Garyn. Anselme, and Garin the yogest, that made grete dole for ther fader. But aboue al other the sorowe and lamentacions of Fezonne passed the whiche teared her here that was shining as the golde, and wepte full bytterly with her pleasaunt eyen ad sayde. Alas in an euil houre was I borne, whan that so many noble knightes and vassalles muste suffer so hydeous deathes, and pyteous lamentacyons for me, ad yet there is a thynge in my hert that greueth me much more, that is for the good Duke my father, that is in the handes of hys mortall ennemies for my sake wher as it behoueth hym for to fynysshe his dayes in sorowe and dystresse. Alas my ryght dere fader to muche haue you loued me, whan that my loue is sold you so derelie that you must sufre death therfore. Thus complained Fezonne full soore wepynge, the whiche had the wil ad courage to haue slayne her self, but ye ladies letted her And the grene knyght in hys pauyllyon that made the good duke to be brought before him, & sayde vnto him ryght fyersly. Now seest thou that thou art in my subgeccyon at this tyme and that I haue puyssauce for to saue the or still the I shall tell the what thou shalte do gyue me thy doughter Fezonne vnto wife, and in thys doynge thy lyfe shall be saued, and I shal leade her into the greane mountayne where as I shal make her to be rechely crowned. Sarazin saide the Duke I shall tel ye my wyl know that thou shaly neuer haue my Doughter if that thou make the not be baptyzed, and byleue in Ihesu Christ Sauare sayd the greane knight neuer speke vnto me of suche a thynge for neuer the dayes of my life wyl I beleue in thy god. And yet I tel the more that and thou wil not beleue my cousayll I shall make the dye and fynysshe thy dayes vyllaynously. And yet I tel the that I shal make Acquitaine to be brent and to be putte to execucion. And al menne and womenne and chyldren lytle and great I shall make suffer death Paynym sayd the duke Sauary god of hys inestymable grace kepe me from thy fourour ad great cruelnes for in him is all my truste, and in hym is onely my conforte. For longe were they speakyng of this matter, bothe the grene knyght and the Duke Sauary, that in reclaymynge god syghed ful tenderlye. And the greane knyght beheld hym. And when he sawe the great lametacyons that he made, and ye pyteous teares that he wept he sayd vnto hym. Free duke lette thi wepig, for I am so esprysed wyth the loue of thy doughter, and so ardautely enbraced, that for the loue of her I haue no talent nor courage for to put the vnto deth, but am totally delybered for to let the go vnder this condicion yt thou shalt fynde me a knyghte within this syxe monethes that by strengthe of armes maye wine thy doughter agaynste me, and thou do I shall retorne home into my countrey agayne with al my hoste, wythoute wastynge or destroyinge of the lande. And yf it happen soo that I be not conquerde & ouer comen wyth in ye sayd tearme I shal haue thy Doughter vnto wife and lead her into my countre with out making ani other ware And the Duke accorded therto. And than the terwes was cryed for the space of syxe monthes. ¶after that the crye was made the grene knyght gaue the duke sauary lycence for to go, and made him for to swere that he shuld holde the said couenaunt truely. Thus ye appoyntment was made bytwene them twayne for euer And after came into Acquitayne ad made it to be knowen and published al aboute the forme of the appointemen. And whan he had made ye trewes for syxe monethes to be cryed. He sente for his counsayll & declared. vnto them the maner how he had done with ye grene knyght. So they aduised and concluded amongeste them the duke sholde sende messenger in euery countree there aboute, for to serche and enquyre yf ther were ony knyght that wold fyghte with the grene knyght for the fayre lady Fezonne. ¶And after they sente out messengers vnto all the christen realmes, and gaue vnto them letters, wherin was conteyned the beaute of hys doughter, and the entarprese of the grene knyght ¶And the duke sayd in hys letters that he the whyche myght conquere the grene knyght, sholde haue his doughter in maryage. The letters were giue vnto twelue messengers that had the charge for to bere them vnto twelue chrysten realmes, and there to publyshe ad manyfeste the forsayd tydynges. ¶Howe dyuers knyghtes came into Acquytayne, for to wynne the fayre ladi Fezonne. In that same tyme durynge the trewes kynge Pepin was gone agaynste his enemies towarde Lion, acompanyed wyth threscore thousade men. He dyde so muche that he chaced and put to flyght a kynge named Lampatris they whyche kynge had greate hooste. This Lampatris was kynge of the Daynes, of Hollade, and Fryse. And wyth thys he helde the countree of Monemarche, in whyche was a stronge cyte, where as they with drewe hym for fere the kynge Pepyn. And whan they were all entred in to the sayd cyte, kynge Pepyn assyeged theym in suche maner that he famysshed them. And he oppressed them so that they yelded them vnto hys grace whan he hade taken the cyte, he made the painims to be christened, & beleue in Ihesu chryste. And gaue the cyte vnto ye Marshall of Fraunce that was called Guy. ¶After al these thinges kynge Pepyn retorned in to Fraunce withe al his hooste, and aryued at Paryes and hadde tydynges anone of the duke Sauary howe he had taken trewes with the grene knyght, And whan he knewe the mener how they wer appoynted. He said before al hys barons laughynge. Who that wolde haue a fayre loue, it is tyme that he shewe hymselfe valyaunt, for he that maye conquere the grene knyght by dedes of armes, he shall haue in mariage the faire Fezonne, doughter vnto the duke Sauary. And yet he shal haue with her halfe hys londes and possion, and that it is true lo here they lettres, holde and rede ye contenuei of the same. Eueribody behelde these letters gadly, but ther was none so hardi nor so valliaunte that durst vndertake the enterpryse sawe Ualentyne that sayd before them al vnto ye kynge Pepyn Ryght dere syr yf it please youre mayeste for to geue me leue and lycence for to proue my strengthe in acquitayne agaynste the grene knyght. I shal go gladely. Syr geue me leue, to go out of Fraunce, for I haue great desyre for to leue the countrey. And I shall ryde so moche that I shall neuer reste vnto the tyme yt I haue found my moder that bare me. For it greueth me full sore that I haue ben so long without konwynge what I am, Ualentyne sayd the kynge care you not what youe be. For I am puyssant ynough for to gyue the goodes largely, and mounte the in honoure, and all them of my courte. And I shal holde you also deare as yf you were of mine owne blood. Syr sayde Ualatine for god pardon me. for it hath bene my wyll longe. Whan kynge Pepyn sawe that Ualentyne was totally delybered for to go into Acquitame he gaue hym leue by thys couenaunt that he sholde retorne vnto him a gayne also soone as he hadde foughten with the gren knyght, yf god gaue hym lyfe and hele. And valentyne promysed hym. In departynge he toke leue for to go in to Acquytayne. Than Eglantine was more sorowfuller than euer she was before a more replete with bitter teres. She sent for valentyne that came vnto her a none. And than she sayde vnto hym wepynge ful tenderely I se well that of you I shall neuer haue ioye nor consolacion and that you haue entencion for to leue ye countrey of Fraunce. Alas now pleased it God that it were myne honoure for to goo with you, for euen soo God help me if euer I wold haue other husband but you. But sith that it is so that I cannot be maister after my wyll, and that my lyberall arbytre is kept by othere puyssauce and that it force that they body abyde behynde, my harte and my wil shal be with you for euer without any other intencion saue of tru loue ad iust without villanye I shall loue you. And to the end that at your necessityes ye mai sucore your indigece when tyme is, lo here they keye of my treasure that I presete vnto you take golde and syluer at your owne pleasure, for there is ynough. My lady sayde valentyne, of gold ad syluer I haue no kepe, but it greueth me full sore that I cannot wyte what I am. And knowe that of one thynge I am muche abasshed, that is that I bere a crosse vpon my shoulder, the whiche is also yelowe as the fine golde. I cannot tell from whence cometh to me suche a sygne wherfore I am purposed neuer for to reste vnto the tyme that I haue knowledge of my natiuitie. I bydde you fare well mi lady and wepe no more for me. For by the fayth of my body if God will that I be of a place come that is any thing worth or of valoure of extraccion for to haue you. I shall neuer haue spouce nor wyfe other than you. And also my ryght deare Lady if I fynde that I am not worthy for to haue you vnto wife by lacke of hyghnes of lynnage, I woulde not be your husbande in no maner of wyse, for in the time to come the cursed and malicious men woulde saye. where is all the brethren and sistren and cosynes of this vnhappye renegate, that hathe abused the kyng Pepin so muche that he hath geue him his doughter vnto wyfe and spouce. And therfore I desyre aboue all thinges to witte of what estate I am of And at these wordes departed Ualentyne and left Eglantyn in her chambre wepynge full tenderle and then he began to consider that the loue of a woma is a great thyng and maruaylous. For he sawe well that and if it pleased him Eglantine king Pepins doughter wold go with hym whether someuer he wold, but they witte and they reason that was in him, domined so, at euery ceason that he woulde doo no vyllaenous thynge that myghte tourne him to reproche and dyshonoure afterwarde. And so he lefte Eglantyne and put hym on they waye. And when it came to thei departynge he was couayed of diuers great lordes of thei courte, wherfore Haufray and Henry were righte gladde and ioyous of their departyng because of their great enuyes that of long tyme had remayned in them, yet they ymagyned and aduised that they should make Ualentyne to be taken by they waye and orson that he ledde with him and make them dye and fynysshe theyre dayes shamefully to the ende that he myght be auenged of the thing that they desyred moste in the worlde. ¶Howe Haufray and Henry made to watche Ualentyne and orson vpon the waye, for to make them dye. As Ualentine & Orso were departed from the courte of kynge Pepyn for too go in to Acquitayne, enuy deceiuable, and cursed treason entred more then before into ye hartes and courages of the two false and acursed traytours they kynges sonnes Haufray & Henry, in suche wise that for to come vnto their false enterpryse they spake vnto a cosyn germayn of theirs, & so muche abused him that it was aduised amongesse them that xxx. men puyssaunt and strong shoulde watche theym, and take good kepe vnto thei chylde Ualentine ad also Orson, so that where someuer they founde them, that the should be destroyed and put vnto death. After this counsaill he made to assemble thyrty men of the moste redoubted that he might finde, And after he sent them armed and made them go into a forest that was bothe great and large, by the whiche Ualentyne and Orson shoulde passe. Soo it was not longe after that valentyne and Orson that ranne on foote before hym more faster then a horse etred into the forest. Tha they were apperceyued of Grygar and hys felowes that were in an enbushement, when Grygar sawe valentyne, he yssued out againste him with his drawen sworde in his hande for to haue slayne valentyne and suche a strooke he gaue vnto the noble knyght valentyne, that he cut his fleshe through his harneis and made the bloude to yssu out and after said vnto him Ualentine here must you dye for to longe haue you lyued. When Ualentine sawe that he was wounded and assayled on euery syde with enemies, he recommaunded him vnto God and vnto they glorious virgin Mary, and after saide vnto them. My lordes you haue sworen my death and I see well nowe that with wronge and withoute cause here must I fynyshe my dayes, but and it please god to day I shall sell you my deathe so dere that you shall not retourne all togethet in hele agayne. And then he drewe out his sworde and gaue the first so great a stroke vpo the head that he cloue him to the teeth, and so he dyed. After he wente towarde the other by so gret feersnes yt or euer he stynte he slew foure or fiue. And Orso sterte forthe as a halfe a frayde with his roughe handes, and tore and rente all them that he founde in his waye, soo that with his sharpe nayles he pulled them in pieces, & bote and strangled them with his teth, He threw them to the ground one vpo a nother ad after he passed ouer them in smytinge them with his fete muche vylaynosli Ualentine was on the other syde that held his bloudy sworde in his hande, defendyng hym so valiautly that none durste approch nere they two noble brethren. And when Grygar sawe that none durste approche nere them he was muche sorowfull and cryed vnto valentyne saying. Ualentine yeld you to me for here it behoueth you to dye. Then the chylde valentine recommended hym vnto God, besechyng him that he would kepe him from euill and socour him at hys nede. And after he wente toward Gregar and begann batail with him againe muche fiersly. Of Grygar and his men it is a pyteous thynge to recounte, for they had long sperres wherwith the kepte Orson of: and anone they had enclosed valentyne rounde aboute thei whiche defended hym so valyautly that the harddyeste of them all durst not come wythin hys reache, for them that he hitte the throue neuer after. But for all that in valentene and Orson were great prowesses and valiautes corporall not for that bi the great nombre of the other the which were thyrty stronge and puyssaunt, valentyne mighte not resiste, for they preased vpon him soo sore that he myghte not welde his sworde, and then they toke hym and bounde hym strayghtly and rode awaye with hym also fast as they myght. When Orson sawe yt the which had newely slayne one of them he rane after them howlyng right hideously, but nothing auailed his pursuite for they rode awaye so faste that Orson hadde loste the syght of them anone, and wyste not whether to goo. Then Grygar commaunded them for to pursue Orso and that they should take hym quycke or dead, but for nothynge go thei after, for he ranne so impetuousli thorowe the forest that they moste hardiest of theim durste not come in his his syght, & so Orson escaped fro ye traitours. And they led valentyne to a castell that was in the forest, whiche a thefe kepte yt was cosyn to Grygar And the false traytours bare al theyr butins together But ye king Pepin knew nothynge therof, for he wend verely that ther had bene no better men in al Frauce when Ualentyne was entred into the castell thei toke him rudely, & led him into a tower obscure and darke, and after put hym in a profounde dongeon. when Ualentyne was closed in the sayde dongeon, he began for to wepe right piteously, in prayinge and reclayminge god and the virgin Mary that they woulde geue him grace for to escape from that place. Alas sayde Ualentyne nowe am I come to the thynge that I most doubted. That is for to wete into the handes of mine enemies and of them that desired my deathe from daye to daye longe agone. Wherfore I beseche God deuoutli yt he will socoure me in this greate daunger. Alas good kinge Pepin neuer ye dayes of my life shal I se you nor of my death you shal knowe nothynge. For in this pyt obsqure and foule behoueth me to fynysshe my daies Fare well Orson, for thou hast suffreth death for my loue. And if thou loued me with perfite loue, so did I ye as muche, and more than if thou had bene my propre brother. Alas my swete mother that I haue so muche desyred for to se, I shall neuer haue knowledge of you wherfore my poore hart sygheth, & myne eyen melteth in teeres, aboue all the moste sorowfulnest, when it behoueth me to die without knowig what I am, but sith that it pleasethe God that I muste dye thus I thanke hym, and committe my soule in hys garde. In this maner complayneth Ualentyne in the obsqure pyt, and his enemies is in the castell that amongeste them holdeth plete what they shoulde do with him. Than some of them sayde. Lordes the moste expedient that is is to make Ualentene dye withoute ony other deliberacion Lordes sayde Grygar to that thynge I am not consentinge but am of the oppynyon that we shall kepe valentine in prison they whiche cannot escape vs, and that we go towarde Haufray and Henry, for to dell and recount vnto them this dede, and they shal geue vs cousayll vpon this matter. To this counsayl they accorded al, & were delyuered for to goo vnto Parys, whereas kinge Pepin oidarned at that present time. Grigar after this counsayl toke his waye towarde Paris. And Orson was within the wode pyteously be wepte that al that nyght had rested him at ye fote of a tree. And as the day was lighte he put him on the waye & thoughte within him selfe that he wolde neuer reast tyll that he had done they kynge to wyte of that treason and howe Ualentyne was taken and led awaye. He toke thei hye waye and ranne faster to Parris than a hors, but grygar they traytour was soner there. And as he was entred into the palays he wente towarde haufray & Henry & recounted vnto hym how Ualentyne was taken and enprysoned, wherof he was ryght glad, but it dyspleased hym muche whan it was told hym that Orso was escaped. Not withstondinge he recomforted hem in that, that Orso could not retorn vnto Paris agaie and moreouer of this that he coulde not speke, ad yt he could not recout the maner of the enterprise. but ther entencion was wel torned backwarde for Orso abod not longe whan he arryued at Paris. And at thei same daye that he arriued the two traytours hadde taken counsael betwene them that Grygar shold retorn vppon the morowe vnto the castell for to put Ualentine to death wythout eny remyssion. In a good hour aryued Orson at that time, the whiche also sone as he was in the palays he entred into the great hall wher as the good kynge Pepyn was, they whiche at that same tyme was set at the table for to dyne accompanyed with dyuers noble knyghtes and barons, Whan kynge Pepyn sawe Orson he wende verely that valentyne had ben retorned. Orson went thorowe the hall pyteouslye cryinge and betinge his breast, for the whiche thinge ye kynge and al the other beheld him sore. And Whan Orson sawe the knightes set at the table hee beheld them much horryble in makynge hydeous sighnes. Than he aduised and knew Grigar amogest the other that held his head inclined downe towarde they tabell, for feare that he shoulde be espyed. Whan Orson sawe him he ran thetherwarde and gaue him soo gret a stroke that he smote on of hys eres away. And after he smote hym agayne vpon the vysage so mightely that he broke hys teth and put out one of his eyen, wherfore Grygar began for to crye so hye that all they in the hall appercayued the noyse and debate. And Orson retorned agayn and gaue hym so soore a strooke that he feiled hym and caste downe the table and al that was vpon it, wherat all the company maruayled, and were muche stronglye troubled. And Grigar had ben slayne ther by orson thei sauage yf a valyaunte prince had not taken hym from hym, and sayde al on hye. Alas syr kynge se and consyder the pyteous case in whiche orson thei sauage hathe put this good knight, for god syr make that his life be taken from him, for it is to peryllous a thinge to kepe suche a man, Lordes sayd the king we must take auysemente on thys matter. Make him come hether ad we shal know what is his entencyon, & wherfore he dyd it and ye cause of his debate Orson was broughte before the kynge. Than thei kinge demaunded him wherfore he had done so great outrage before his maiestie. And Orson made him sygne that he had slayne ad murdred Ualentyne in the forest. And after he wente she wynge meruaylous sygnes that he would fyght with Grigar for that thynge by the lawe of champion, ad make him confesse his cursed enterpryse and dampnable treason After he toke his hode and keste it by great fersnes vnto Grigar in maner of wage ad dyffyaunce. And whan kinge Pepin sawe that he called his lordes and thei other barons of the courte and sayd to them all on hye Lordes now haue you sene howe this wilde man hathe casten his gage of batayll before vs al vnto Grigar ad how he wyl fighte with him. Wherfore tell me all your oppinions vpo this matter, and what is for to be done in this case, for muche I maruayle me in my hearte of this that Orson the sauage amongeste al the knightes elles of my courte hathe smyten Grigar so fureouslye Lordes saye on your oppinions, for I doubte me to muche of some falshede, what part someuer it cometh on. And as for my parte wythout your counsayll or deleberacyon I shall be of ye other oppinio that ye bataill were iudged betwene them bothe. Whan the kyng had spoken in this maner they barons were of one accorde and oppynyon that Grygar and Orsone should fyght for thys quarel. Than the batayle was ordeyned. And kynge Pepyn made Grygar to be brought before him and sayde to hym that behoueth him to fight with Orson whan Grygar knewe and vnderstode that it behoued hym to fyghte with Orson he was ryght sorowful and not without a cause, for the time is come that the treason that hathe ben hydde so longe, shalbe knowene manifestly before euery body. Grigar beheld Haufrai with an vnstedfast semblaunce & a frayde hearte than Henry called him and sayd. Grygar haue no fere of nothynge, for I promyse you and let you wytte that wee shall make your peas toward the kinge oure father, in suche wyse that your persone shal haue no domage nor vyllany in no maner of the worlde, by this condycyone that you shall sweare neuer to confesse this dede what someuer come vnto you. Alas sayde Grygar to euyll goth my cause, for I se wel that I must suffre dethe for your sakes. And wha he had sayd this he wete towarde the kinge sayinge. Syr I requyre you of a gift that is ye of your grace I fyght not with the wilde man. For syr you know well ynough that it is not man against man that a knyght may wynne honoure of, and also he is no natural man, but is vnreasonable and without oni wyce of mercye. Grygar sayde the kynge there is none excusacyon, for the battayll is iuged by the counsail of all the court, treason condampneth you, and ryght wyl that it be so. Of this answer was Grygar right pensyf & dysconforted. Than Haufray sayd vnto hym, haue no doubte, for yf you haue good ryght god shall healpe you and be your shelde and defence in this quarel. And as for my parte I shall make you to be armed well and sufficiently as it apperteyneth vnto suche a case. And whan Orsone vnderstode that he shulde fyght he made grete Ioye. Many grete signes made Orsone vnto the kynge that Ualentine was deed and destroyed. Of the whiche signes kyng Pepin maruayled sore. Euer was Orson redy to smyte Grygar the false treaytour, but the kynge Pepin made hym to be taken, and to be kept in his presence in makinge him signes that he shoulde smit hym no more vntyl they tyme that he wer in they felde. After he sayd vnto Grygar, go and arme you ad thynke for to defend your quarel wel. Ha syr sayd Grygar I haue serued you longe tyme, & withall my puyssaunce haue enforced me for to obey you in al thinges is well in batayle as withoute, but euyll rewarde you yelde me whan that you wyll make me fyghte agaynst thys wylde man that hathe neyther wytte nor reason, Grygar sayde kyng Pepin if thou haue good right you ought not to be dysmayed of nothynge, for I promse you that you shall be wel armed, and Orson shalbe put into the felde al naked and withoute armour. you shall be on horseback, and he shal be on fote without beryng ony wepen, whereby you shall haue no cause for recule abacke frome defendyng of your ryghte. I can not tell howe it shall befal you, but you shew wel the seblaunt that there is somewhat to say in you, do youre deuoyre and defende your ryghte, for you shall haue none other thynge of me, the cause is consumed, and the conclusyon made and taken of my counsayll. ¶How Orson and Grigar fought togyder before kenge Pepyne and how Orson vaynquyshed hym, & made him confesse the treasone openli and after was hanged And how Ualentine was delyuered. After that Grigar had made diuers excusacyons and apposycyons that he sholde not fyght wyth Orson and that it was delybered by the counsayl to fyght, the kyng commauded to make the feld afore hys palais. whan he was ready Orson that was abydinge entred in for to abide Grigar that was armed bi haufrai & Henry the whiche armed him also well as they could And when he was armed he toke his leue of them, in sayinge lordes I go dye for you. Euill was the daye for me when I enterprysed suche a thyng. Holde youre peace sayd Henry and take no thought, for I haue promysed you to make your peace towarde my father the whiche I will holde, so that and you be vanquyshed bi Orson your body shall haue no harme, and if that he would domage you in ani maner there should rather dye an hundred thousand men then we should faile on our syde, be euer secrete and knowledge neuer nothing of the deede that is done, nor of the enterpryse. Grygar was armed and mounted on horsebacke, and so he rode towarde the fielde that was ordeined before the palais And when the houre was come that they should fight, the king came to the wyndowes for to beholde the bataile. when al the court was assembled and the iudges ordayned for to iudge the bataill, it was commaunded to both the parties that they shoulde do their deuoyre Than Grygar entred into the fielde with muche pride mounted at auauntage, wherfore it befell hym euil at the ende. He sporred his horse and drewe towarde Orson saying. Rybaude thou hast done me to great outrage wha thou put out one of min eien through thi cruelnes, but I shall shewe the that with wronge and wythout cause thou haste assayled me. ¶And whan Orson sawe him come, he vnderstode hym well, and stratchede forthe his armes, and shewed his nayles and his teeth, grennyng full hugely. Then Grygar couched his spere and ranne towarde Orsone, when Orsone sawe the spere come he gaue a lepe backward. And Grygar that hade fayled of hys stroke fixed his speere in thei fielde. whan Orson sawe that he retourned to him and tooke the spere. and when that Orson hadde thei spere in hys hande, he gaue hym so great a stroke that he loste witte and vnderstanding in such wyse that he wist not where he was. When Grygar was smyten he sporred horse and fleede about the fielde. and Orson ranne after makyng a gryanly countenaunce, and shewynge the kyng that he woulde yelde him matte anone. And when Grigar apperceyued the great daunger that he was in, he sayd within hymselfe. I Haufray I muste dye for you I had well sayde it euyll is they thinge begon and euill shal it finisshe. In this maner Grigar could not woude Orson in no wyse. And when Orson sawe this he kaste the spere downe and after came agaynste Grygar ad so straite he kept him that he caught his horse by the neck and he made him turne so ofte about that he made him fall, but when he felte his horse fal he would haue lepte out of the sadle, and at the lepe he lost his shelde, for it fell downe and Orson ranne to it and anone put it vpo hym, and wente towarde the horse and mounted vpon hym, and in makynge maruaylous sygnes he roode after Grygar that fled about in the fielde. To se the countenaunce of Orson euery body was abasshed. And thei kynge Pepyn amongest the other was muche pensyfe for this case, and sayde before them all. By God almighty lordes I maruayle me muche of this feate, and I can tell what to thynke, nor to what ende it wyll come but whatsoeuer it be, or what maye happen it is mine opinion that there is treason ryghte greate somwhere. The kynge was pensyue vpon this enterpryse. And Orson that was mounted on horseback for to pursue Grygar descended of the horse and wente vnto him on fote, and he gaue such a stroke that he smote him down to the grounde, and after he lepte vpon him and tooke his sworde and his dagger from him, after he gaue him so mighty a stroke that he smote of his arme and hys shoulder, And then he gaue hym another maruaylous stroke in the body so that he cut his reynes of his backe in two. And Grygar escryed so hye that euerye body herde it in demaundinge a prieste for to be confessed of his synnes and to haue absolucion of them. And when the gardes of the fielde vnderstode hym a muche notable knight that had the charge went towarde him and demaunded hym what he woulde, and then Grygar sayd vnto hym. Syr make the kynge Pepyn descende, for I wyll before all the worlde tel and confesse the falsnes and treason of my case, ¶Then this thinge was signified to they kynge Pepyn all clearely what he had sayde. ¶How Grygar after that he was ouer come ad vanquyshed by Orson confessed before the kinge Pepin ye treason that Haufray and Henry had done against the noble Ualentyne. When Grygar sawe they kynge he cryed hym mercye. And recounted vnto him howe that by they commaundemente of Haufray and Henry he had taken Ualentyne & put hym in pryson tyll he be iudged to deathe Whan kynge Pepyn knew the trouth of the mater, he commaunded to hang Grygar. Sith he mouted on horsbacke for to go vnto the pryson that valentyne was in. Whan Orson vnderstode that the kynge wold goo, he ranne before hym makynge grete chere to hym shewynge hym the waye. And the kynge sayde often. Lordes it is a great thynge of thy wylde man that loueth Ualentine thus, & know that his manners styreth me muche for to do hym some good. The kynge loued hym moche and well he oughte to do so, for he was his propre neuew but he knew it not. Nor yet he shall not knowe it tyll that by Clerymonde syster vnto the gyaunte Ferragus it be shewed. For that same Clerymonde had a castell wherein was a heed of brasse composed by Nygromancye that tolde her all the thynges that shuld happen her in the time to come, and also the whyche was passed. And yet this same heed was composed of suche arte that it shuld neuer finishe tyll that the moost hardyest knyght of the world entred into the castell, for than it shold lease the speche and all the vertue. Now there shall come one that shall make it finish And that shall be Ualentyne, that the fayre ladye Cleremonde shall take, for the whyche he shall endure and suffre great peryles & daungers, as you shal here more playnly afterwarde, So I wyll leaue to speake of thys mater and wyll retorne vnto kynge Pepyne that goth towarde the forest for to saue Ualentyne and preserue him from death. He hath done so muche that he is entred in to the foreste and gothe folowynge Orson that ledde hym vnto the castell. But whan they were come vnto the castell the porters that knewe the kyng shitte the gates incontynent, for so they were comaunded of them within the castell vpon payne of their liue. Then when the kyng sawe that he might not enter into thei castell but by force. He commaunded his men that ye place should be assayled. So it was not log after that the dytches were fylled with wodde. And after the approched nere the walles and entred in to the castell by force of armes. when they were within the castell they toke all the traytours and bound them straightly. And after they went into the depe prysons where as Ualentyne was and toke him out and brought him vnto the kynge Pepyn. when Ualentyne sawe the kyng he sette him on hys knees and thanked hym for his payne that he had taken for to delyuer hym oute of his aduersitie. Then the barons toke hym makyng hym great ioye & gladnes. And tolde him the case how it went, and howe Orson hadde fought with Grygar for hym to they vttraunce. And when Ualentyne herde these tidinges he embraced Orson muche swetely, & he hym. So ye nede not demaunde if they Ioye was greate betwene them twayne. After that this was done the kynge commauded that the traytours should be lead into the wodde, and therere to be hanged and strangled on one tre with out any remyssion. Then kyng Pepyn spake vnto valentyne and sayde. Ualentyne my frend sythe that god hath geuen you the grace to be thus Ioyously escaped from the handes of your enemies: I counsail you that you retourne agayne with me. Syr sayde valentyne, for goddes sake pardon me, for I shall neuer retourne vnto the tyme that I knowe what I am, and of what place extraught. wherfore I take here leue of you as he that woulde serue you to my power. At these woordes they departed. Here leue I to speake of thei kynge and wil speake of Ualentine and Orson that is goynge into Acquitayne for to fyghte with the grene knyghte that feareth no man, for as I haue tolde you before he shall neuer be vanquysshed but of a kynges sonne that neuer had souked womans breastes. Thus goeth Ualentine and Orson together toward the countre of Acquitayne. All the worlde ran for to se Orson that was all naked and rough as a beer. Euery body dyd laughe at him but he set not therby, Then Ualetine made for to make him a iacera of fyne stele, whiche was of suche a fasion that it had a hode that was fastened to it. And when Orson had it on him he thought him much wild and woulde haue put it of gladly but he feared Ualentyne much for all that he comaunded him he did with out contradiction. When Orson was clothed in thei iaceran of stele he behelde hym selfe strongly, and kepte a proude countenaunce. Now it happened that as they passed vpon their waye Ualentine espied a right fayre squyer that passed therby, the which wepte full tenderly. when Ualentyne sawe that he sayd vnto him friend what ayled you for to wepe haue you founde any euyl men, or haue you feare of the wylde beastes, tell me for I shall helpe you after my power. Alas sade the squyer of all this I haue no doubt, but knowe that the thing yt causethe to me for to wepe, is mi maister that I haue lost, the whiche was the moste courteous they moste amiable, and the moste valiaut that was vpo the earth Ualentine sayde howe haue you loste him. ¶Syr sayde the squyer he went into Acquitayne for to fyghte with the grene knight, for to haue one of thei fayrest ladyes. in the worlde, that is thei pleasaunt lady Fezonne that hathe her harte so gracious and noble, but there shall neuer none haue her if the grene knyght be not ouercome in cleane batayle. Nowe there is diuers valiaunte knyghtes dead. And when he hath conquered them he maketh them to be hanged on a tre that is in the place on the whiche tree is hanged dyuers knyghtes to they nombre of two and thyrty. He taketh no merci of none he is so cruell a felon. Holy vyrgyn Mary sayde Ualentyne I thynke he is some deuell when he doeth suche thynges but and it please Ihesus I shall goo into Acquitayne, and shall proue my body againste him, for I haue hearde so muche speakynge of the fayre lady Fezonne that yf I dye shortly I shall knowe they truthe. Ha syr sayde the squyer for. God goo not thether for yf you fyght with him you shall lese your payne, and you are so fayre a knyght that I neuer saw none such. Lese not your lyfe for to fyghte with that deuyll, for I haue sene hym put so many noble men vnto death that I haue great doubte of you if you fight, with him. Squier sayde Ualentyne into Acquitayne will I goo. and of the grene knyght I shall know the truthe ad if he haue euil cause agaynste hym wyll I fyghte, but if I may I wyll speake fyrste with the fayre lady Fezonne, and doo after hyr counsayle. and when Orson vnderstode him he made sighnes vnto valentyne that he longed for to fyght with the grene knight, and that he wold loue the fayre Fezonne. When Ualentine vnderstode hym for great ioye he laughed. Thus go the two brethren walkyng throughe the countrey for to go vnto acquytaine So they haue ryden so mache that they are aryued besyde the cytie. Ualentine sawe it from farre for it stode on hye. Then he called an olde man that passed be and demaunded him what citie it was that he sawe before hym. Syr sayde the goodman it is Acquitayne. Nowe tell me sayde valentyne where doth the grene knighte holde hym. Syr sayde he besyde the cytye, I thynk you go for to fyghte with hym. yea truly saide Ualentine. A sir you vndertake a great foly, for you shal neuer haue victory on him. Mounte vpon his litle hyl and behold where as hangethe vpon a tree moo then forty that he hath put to death. There is no more then fiftene daies of respyte that the duke of Acquitaine shalbe constrained for to geue vnto him hys doughter they fayreste of the worlde, the whiche shall be great dommage. Frend sayd Ualentyne God shal helpe her. Thus as valetine spake vnto this man an aunciente man came towarde hym in the habyte of a pylgrym euill clothed the which had a great whyte bearde, and was of the aege of four score yeare. This man was Blandymoyn they squyre of Bellyssant that ledde her into they castell where as the gyaunte Farragus was as it is made mencion of before. Ualentine salued the pylgrym and demaunded hym frome whence he came. And he aunswered hym: Syr I come frome Constantinoble, but I myghte not entre in to the Cytie for a paynim Soudan that hathe assyeged it. I might not do there my message, wherfore I retourne me. Pylgrym sayd Ualentyne tel me yf the grene knyght haue none ende. No sayd the pilgryme I warraunt you and I counsayl you that ye coueyt note to fyght with hym. For and you were a houndred he would make you all dye. To God I commaunde you, for I muste departe. Tho sayd Ualentyne tell vs whether you go. Syr sayde Blandimayne I goo streyght to Parys, for I muste doo a message to kynge Pepyne of Fraunce from a sister of his namen Bellyssant that of long tyme was banyshed out of Constantynoble, with wronge, and without hauyng deserued it. Nowe is the good lady in the house of a giaunt that kept her ful swetely, the whiche wyll goo into Fraunce for to wyte if kyng Pepyn be consentynge. For so well he knoweth the ladye of good maners and condycyons that he wyll fyght in a fyelde of batayle agaenst the Emperoure of Grece that he hath falsly & euilly expulsed her: Frende sayde Ualentyne to hym. I praye the in the name of God almighti that thou retourne againe with vs into Acquytayne. And when I shall haue foughten wyth the grene knyght, yf God my creature geue me victori against hym I shall retourne in to Fraunce with you. And for the loue of kyng Pepyn I vndertake thys battayle for I am more beholden vnto hym then vnto any man lyuing. It is he that hath ben my father, and hath nourysshed me so well, that I oughte well to haue the courage and well for to doo hys commaundement and pleasure. Syr sayde Blandimain I will neuer consent vnto this. For I wyll goo and do my message for the noble lady Bellyssant, for she hath geuen me the charg and I wyll serue her truely. God be with you both the whiche kepe you from all euyl. So Blandymayne departed and toke hys waye towarde Paris. And Ualentyne behelde hym right strongly. Als it was not with out a cause. He had good right if hys harte drew to him for it was he that of long tyme had saued and kept hys mother, but he knewe it not. They tooke their waye. And went so longe that they aryued besyde the cytie of Acquitayne. Ualentyne beheld the cytie sore that was ryght pleasaunt to se. After Ualentyne espyed a fountayne and went theyther and alight of his horse, & after he layde hym downe vnder a tre that was besyde it for to refresshe hym for he had greate heate he reposed him a lytell and slepte and Orson kept hym. And whan he had reposed hym and was a wakened he rose vp vppon his feete for to mounte on horsback, but ther came and arryued ther a knighte that was faelse and proud, and that for his grete pryde was called the proude knyghte For he was so fyerse that neuer the dayes of hys life he had saluad no man. And yet he was of such a condicion that he that salued hym not should haue batail against hym, wher throughe he had made dyuers dye. He came toward the fountayne and set fote on ground, and Ualentyne behelde hym and saide neuer a worde, and than he aduysed Orson that behelde hym fyersly, The proud knighte had dyspyte in his hearte and approchyd neare Orson and gaue hym suche a stroke that he made thei blode yssue out of his mouth. And whan Orson felt hymself smiten he toke the knight betwene his armes so rudely that he threwe hym downe vnder him, & sithe he toke a knife that hanged at thei knightes girdle and smote hym in to the body so that the bloode yssued out by grete habundaunce. And thei knyghte that feld him selfe wounded cryed right hye. Than Ualentine approched and toke the knight out of Orsons handes, & said to him. Fayre syr you haue wrog for to smite this poore man that can not speake a word. Than sayd thei proud knyght vnto Ualentyne. Proude rybaude wherefore doest thou not salue me. Tho he drewe out a gleyue for to haue smiten hym and Ualentyne drew out a glaiue and gaue hym so grete a strake that he smot him down deed to the erthe. And syth sayd to hym. I shall learne you to salue the folkes. Whan the proude knyghte was deed his men began for to flee towarde they cyte of Acqurtayn, and entred in ryghte sorowfull, and tolde the tydynges that theyr maister was deede. Of the whiche tydynges was moche angrye and dyspleasaunt the duke Sauary, for he was his cosin. Ualentyne herde they sorow that that the proud knightes me made, that had ben put to dethe besyde the fountayne. So he mouted on horseback, & entred into the cite. And whan he was within he lodged him in the house of a muche rych burgeys, but whan they were lodged it was not long after but that the tidinges came vnto the duke sauari that they that had slayne hys cosyn were lodged in thei cyte he commaunded that they shuld be brought vnto him whan he had commaunded it the messengers departed in contynent for to go fetch Ualentyne and Orson the whiche came toward hym anone. Than spake the duke Sauary in this maner. Frendes tell me what ye bee and yf you be knightes or noe, of what countre you be & what prynce you serue. Syr sayde Ualetyne a knight I am, and am seruaunte vnto thei good kynge Pepyn that holdeth Fraunce. Knyght sayd the duke you haue slayne my cosyn and put hym vnto deathe. It is trewe sayde the noble knyghte Ualentyne, I saye not the contrary, and yf that he hadde bene of my propre lygnage I woulde haue done as muche, for he was proude and fyerse of courage he dayned not speke to grete nor litle by his pryde he hathe smiten my felowe soo that he felled hym and whan I sawe that I drewe my swearde and slewe hym. I am a straunger that are comen into this cyte for to fyght with the grene knyght, & for to se the pleasaunt Lady Fezonne that is so muche renown you haue made the waies that eueri kyight shal come So it semeth me ryghte and iuste equitie that through all your lande one ought to go in surte in the hye waye And whan the duke Sauary herd Ualentyne speke so he sayde vnto hym knyght well haste thou answered, yf my cosin be deed it is by his Pryde and fyerse courage of his deathe I am sorowfull. but there is no remedye. wherfore I pardon they that deede, and I wyll be pardoned. But for the surples of youre enterpryse of they grene knyght, you shall come into my palays, and shall se the lady for whom you are come into these quarters And with her you shal finde .xiiii. knightes of straunge countrees newly comen, that for thei loue of her wyll fighte agaynste the grene kyght. Go theder & salue my doughteer as the custom is. For so it is ordened that al knightes that cometh hether for thei loue of her before that they do ony batayll with the grene knight the present them to her. And in signe of loue they take a ringe of goulde of her. Sir sayde Ualentine I am redye to do as the ordinaunce biddeth. And of they other syde I am your litle seruaunt, as he that wolde obey vnto all youre good commaundementes after my puyssaunce Than the duke Sauarye mounted into the castel, and Ualentine and orson accompanyed him muche honourably. They entred into the halle wheras the knightes wer that wer accompanied the fayre Fezonne ad whan valentine sawe her, he went toward her in great reuerence, and salued her sayinge before them al. Ladye of whome the bruyte and renowne of beautie corporel is spredde so ferre aboute God saue you and defende you from all vyllanye and euyl reproche, and preserue you from the grene knyght that is not worthy for to touch your excellent body. My right dere & honourable lady please it you for to wyte that Pepin the right puissaut kyng of Fraunce hath sent vs toward you, and here I make you a presente of the moste valyaunte and hardi man that is vpon the earthe. Lady beholde hym for he douteth no man, & yet he hath no feare of no glayue be it neuer so sharpe. If he coulde speake well in all they worlde myghte not be founde his make. Wherfore you mai be sure and beleue stedfastli that the grene knight may not resyst agaynst him for he shall yelde him matte and ouercome also soone as he shall fyghte wyth hym Syr sayd the pucell vnto the puyssaunt kyng of Frauce I yelde an hundreth thousande thankes and to you that hathe taken so muche payn for me. But tell me I praye you wherefore ye clothe not this valyaunte man no better that you haue brought to me. For he is merueylously well made of his membres, ad well fourmed streight and hardy of countenaunce, & I beleue that & he were bayned in a hoote house his flesshe woulde be whyte and softe, Ladye sayd Ualetyne, he neuer ware no gowne tyll the other daye that I made him thys lateran that is vpon hym for to se hys countenauce for it is the fyrst gowne that euer he ware. And know that also naked as he was borne he came vnto paris where he was borne, and his flesshe is so harde that he feareth nother wynde nor coulde. Alwayes in speakynge these wordes the excellente Fezonne behelde strogly orson and so it was Goddes pleasure she was enamoured on Orson, and stryken at the herte more ardauntly then euer she was before of anye other howe well that he was not prycked not gorgiouslye clothed as dyuers other were for all that it is sayde commonly that ther is no foule loues whan the hartes geueth them therto: Then when Ualentyne hade spoken so to the mayden, he sayde yet agayne vnto her. Lady as touchyng me I shall tell you my case, knowe that for the loue of you I am come into this countrey for to conquere you valyauntly bi force of armes. And yet I haue made an othe that I shal neuer retourne into Fraunce vnto the tym that I haue foughte and proued my body agaynste the grene knyght. ¶For knowe that for the loue of you I wyll suffre death, or yelde you the grene knyghte ouercome in to your handes. Alas syr sayde the fayre Fezonne for me haue not the courage to put youre lyfe in suche aueture. For who yt loueth another better then hymselfe in a thynge that his lyfe hanged on, such loue is me thynke is not iuste but dysordynate. Alas to many noble and valyaunte knyghtes haue bene slayne for me, wherfore it is a great dammage that I haue lyued thus longe. Lady sayd valentyne of this you shall pardon me, for thus I haue promysed it. Knyght sayde Fezonne well maye it take you. Than drewe she out two rynges of golde, and gaue valentyne one ad Orson the other, after they sat them downe at the table wyth the other fortene knyghtes, where as right nobly the duke Sauary made them to be serued. But amongest al the that were at the table, Fezenne had her regarde moste vpon Orson. And Orson beheld her by a desyre of loue embraced and inspyred with an ardaunt and gracious appetyte. Nowe it happened that as ye knyghtes were syttyng at the table, the grene knyght came smytynge at the gate for to se the fayre Fezonne that he loued soo muche. For the duke Sauarey and he had made such a contracte together that he might come once a day and se her at his pleasure. And then when he was entred he cryed all on hygh sayinge. Ualiaunt duke of Acquitain haue you a champyon yt wyll fyghte wyth my body for the fayre lady Fezonne. ye sayde thei Duke, yet haue I syxtene within my halle, that for to shewe theyre prowesse agaynste euery body and you bene comen from dyuers realmes into this countrey. Now said the grene knyghte make that I maie se them, and that I entre in to the hal for to se the fayre lady Fezonne Enter in said the duke for you haue lycence. The grene knighte entred into the halle and behealde all thei knyghtes that were there. And whan he had beholden them he sayd to them thus Lordes ete and drynke and made good chere for to morowe shall be youre laste daye. And knowe that you shall make you all to be hanged on the hyghest of all my tree. Then Ualentyne that herde hym was euyl contente and answered hym. Knyghte of that same vaunt you might haue hold your togue. Or two days comen a knyght that shall fighte with you more asprely than euer dyd onye heare before, you haue deliuered many vnto death, but he is commen that shall vaynequysshe you in a felde by force of armes. ¶Now Orso vnderstode that they spake of him, and knewe that thei grene knyght was he bi whome so mani noble knights had suffred dethe. So he behelde hym fyersly, and after lept from the table, and in whettinge his tethe he toke the grene knight by the midle ad charged him vppo his necke, as a lytell chylde. And whan he hadde him vpon hys necke he espyed a wall and caste the grenne knyght agaynste it so rudely, that all they that were in ye place wende that he hadde broken his necke. For he remeued not. and whan he had done so he sat him downe agayne amongeste his felowes, and in laughinge made theym signes that he would bere vpon his necke such thre as the grene knyght, Then began all the knightes of the halle for to laughe strongly. & sayde the on to the other Nowe is he com that sholl discomfyte and ouercome, the grene knyght. And Fezonne shall haue to greate a losse whan he can not speake, For he is well worthy to haue honour a mongest the valiaunte men. when Fezonne had well beholden the maners and coutenauce of Orson she was smiten to the harte with the dart of loue by the pleasure of God ad of the virgin Mary, yt yllumined both ther two hartes in such a facion that she gaue vnto him al her courage and wyl and she had euer her regarde fixed vppon Orson and began for to loue him so ardauntly that she forgate all ye other for to haue him to her loue. And it was not without a cause if she were so taken with his loue. For he had taken the gren knight vp so valyauntly that at ye same hour he might haue slayne hym if he had woulde, but howe well that he had puyssauce ouer hym yet he would do him no harme. For it is commonly sayde that a noble courage cannot lye. Notwithstading the grene knyght reputed this dede for a great outrage. And sayd al on hyghe before all the copany. ¶Lordes this same wild man hathe deceyued & betrayed me for he came to me withoute sayinge any worde I promise & let you wite that to morowe in the mornynge I shall be a man for hym. and to the ende that all other take ensample by hym in dyspyte I shall make agybette to be reysed vp aboue al the other that hathe be vanquysshed by me there shall I make him to be hanged and strangled. ¶How Orson waged batail against the grene knyght and howe Ualentyne foughte wythe hym and myghte not ouer come hym. Orson aperceyued well yt the grene knyghte was not well content wyth hym, and that he manaced him. So he begane for to momble apace and makyng sygnes that vppone the morowe he woulde fyght wyth hyme. and in token of wager he cast the grene knight hys hod Then spake Ualentine vnto the grene knyght ad said. Syr beholde the gage that the wylde mane castethe to you, yf you haue any power against hym thynke for to take it vp. Than was the grene knyght so taken wyth prede & dispyte that he aunswered neuer a worde. And the duke Sauary that was ther present said vnto hym Free knight there wyll be a strong batayll betwene the wylde man and you, and I feare me sore that you shall haue muche ado with hym. And if that you may do so much as to haue victori ouer him, you may wel vaunt you that of all knightes you are the moste doughty ad valiaunte & that of none you ought to haue feare nor dread. And that it be true he hath shewed you before al that he is hardy of harte & of courage. By my god sayde the grene knyght to morowe shall you all se and knowe what his puissaunce is, for neuer in this lyfe shall he retourne frome the field till I make hym to be hanged aboue al the other. At these words he yssued out of the castell and went vnto his rest in his pauilion. And the other lordes and knyghtes remaened with the fayre lady Fezonne, the whiche made great ioye and solace, ad sayde the one to the other that the daye was come that the grene knyght should fynde his maister. Great noyse was thorough the cytie of Orsone the sauage, euery body desyred for to se hym, ye in suche maner yt so great nombre of folke came into the palais, that for the prese that was there the duke commaunded that the gates should be shytte. ¶Whan Orson hard the noyse he lept vp vpon a baye windowe for to behold the people that were without. Than the folkes apperceyued hym and shewed hyme one to a nother in speakynge and deuysing of him in diuers maners & facions. The nyght was come so that it was time to go to souper, tho was euery body set and serued. So when the duke was rysen frome the table anone after came in playes, and after euery body went into their chambres. When Ualentyne was in bedde he made sygnes to Orsone that he should lye downe by him, but Orson set not therbi, for he layde hym downe platte to the earthe as he was accustomed to do in the forest, and so he passed the nyght, when the daye was come Ualentyne and Orson went into the hall where as they founde the fayre ladye Fezonne with the other knyghtes. There they held counsayll to gether for to fyght with the grene knight. For yt same daye the duke had promysed hym to delyuer him a champion to fyght with him. So there spake among them a ryght noble knyght that was extraught out of a getle bloud and saide in this maner. Lordes if it please you all I am purposed for to fyght first with the grene knyght. This requeste was accorded to him by they assistens of all chyualry, and they knyghte wente for to arme hym, they whiche was called Galeram, and was come out of the realme of Fraunce. And when he was armed he came before the pleasaunt ladi Fezonne, and toke his leaue of her ioyously with great reuerence, ad she that was garnyshed with all honoure and good condicions vttred hym leue in faithe. Fre knyght I praye to god of paradyse. and to the blyssed and glorious virgyne Mary that they condute you, and kepe you and preserue you from damage, insuche maner and facio that with ioye and honoure ye maie retourne vnto me agayne. And he thanked here with all his harte, and the he toke leue of his felowes. When he hadde taken leue of the fayre Fezonne he mounted on horsbacke & went towarde the tente of the grene knyght. Of as ferre as he sawe him he smote hys horse with the spores & wyth a fyerse courage ranne to the knyghte Galeran, and so greate at stroke he gaue hym that he smote him downe to the grounde than he descended of his horse and toke his helm of his head. Wherfore Galeran that fered the death yelded him vnto the mercy of the grene knyghte but it profyted hym lytell. For without any pyte he dispoyled him of his harneis & hanged hime on the hyghte of the tree soe as he had done the other before. For the death of the same Galeran was greate bruyte through the cite of Acquitaine for he was a muche fayre knight and gretely praysed amonge his felowes, Now Orson knew wel that the grene knighte had put to deathe galeram. He made signes with his handes that he wholde go fight with him at the same houre withoute any more delaye, but Ualentine made him signe that he shuld wyth drawe him, for he wolde go fyrste. As than Orson helde him, styll, for he fered Ualentyne alwayes Than the noble and hardy Ualentyne armed him and after wente toward the fayre Fezonne for to take leue of her. Soo it is not to be demanded yf she bewayled hym muche and if she caste many couered syghes wyth in her ryght noble herte, Alas sayde the fayre and pleasaunt lady Fezonne. My God please it the to defende & preserue this noble, fayre, and gracyous knyghte, that for the loue of me wyll put hys lyfe in daunger. Much bewayled. Fezonne the amyable knyghte Ualetyne, but aboue all other her mynde was vpone Orson, and she had a good cause for god had put hym on the earthe for to be her husband. After the leue taken of the Lady and of all the knyghts Ualentyne mouted on horsback for to go fyght with the grene knyght. But euen so as he put hym on the way came to him a knight that was enbraced with the loue of the fayre Ladi Fezonne. and sayde to hym. Syr haue a lytel pacyence and let me go the fyrste. Frende sayd Ualentyne I gyue the leaue, go in the name of Iesus whyche gyue the pussaunce and vyctorye for to conquere him. That same knyght hade to name Tyrys, and was borne in the countre of Sauoye, but so muche greate pyte was in his case, that for to put hym in that auenture he had spended all hys so that he had no more lefte. He toke leaue of the Lordes and syth mounted on horsbacke, & wythout eny soiournynge he rode to the pauilion of the grene knight. And whan he sawe Tyrys approche he lept out of hys tente muche fyersly and proudlye. And Tyrys escryed hym, sayinge. Syr grene knyght nowe mount on horsbacke and thynke to defend you. For on goddes behalue I defy you that hath made all the world, and for vs suffred deathe and passyon. The greene knyght that Tyrys vnderstode called for to haue hys hors, & one of hys seruauntes brought him anone, than he set his fote in the stirope and lept vpon his backe. He toke his grene sheld and his speare, and after they wythdrewe theem for to fetche theyr course, & they encountred so impetuously that the grene knyght smote hym throughe the bodye with his spere and so he fell downe deade. And incontynent the grene knyght dyscended and toke a corde and put it about his neck and hanged him vp with ye other wherfore yt Painims and Sarasins made greate Ioye And whan Ualentyne sawe that Tyrys was deed and hanged on the tre, he was sorye for his deathe and dyspleasaunte. He made the sygne of the crosse before hym and recommaunded hym vnto god, in desiringe aboue all thynges that he wolde do so much that of his fader & moder he might haue perfyte knowledge vnto. & whe he had made his prayer vnto god he smote his hors wt the sporres and rode to the tente of the grene knyghte, that for the semblaunte of Orson knewe hym wel, and of him he hade more doubte than euer he had of oni before. He called Ualentyne and sayd to him. Knyghte vnderstande that I shall tell the, seeste thou yonder vppon that tree a grene shelde, go and fetche it me and I shall deserue it. Syr sayd Ualentyne you haue seruauntes ynoughe mo than me, wherfore make that they serue you, for by me you shall not haue ye shelde. By my lawe sayd the grene knyght you shall fetche me the shelde, or I let you knowe that neuer agaynste my body shal you haue batayll, Whan valentyne sawe that the grene knighte wolde take excusacion for fetchynge of the shelde as a hardy and vaylaunte knyght he rode toward they tre where as they shelde hanged but he loste his payne for he myght not haue it wherfore he was righte sorowful. Than he came vnto the grene knyght and sayde to hym fyersly. Go fetche thy shelde. For I canot haue it Cursed be he of god that fastened it so. and hanged may he be that sent me theder. Frende sayde they grene knyghte I shall tel the wherfore I sente the theder. Knowe for certayne that this same shelde came whylom out of ye faree, & by a fare it was gyuen me. Nowe it hathe suche vertu that neuer none be he neuer so valiaunt nor stronge may take it out of the place where as it is fastened, saue he a lonely by whome I ought to be conquered and vanquysshed. Therfore I haue sent the thederwarde, for of thei I hadde doubte, but nowe I am sure whan that the shelde thou mayst not brynge. Wherfore retorne the to the place that thou came, fro ad so thou shalte saue thy lyfe. For I se the so fayre a knyghte that I haue none enuye of thy dethe, from the whiche thou can not escape yf thou take batayll against me. And to the ende that thou thynke not that I tell the these wordes by fayntyse or folysshe abusyon, knowe that of none I shall be vanquysshed, be he neuer soo vyctoryous saue but of a man that shall be a kynges sone and that shal haue be nourysshed wt out womans mylke, where by thou mayst knowe yf thou be suche or not. Of these tydynges, Ualentyne was sorowfull and dyspleaunte at his herte and sayd. Alas good lorde god almyghty is euyll gothe my feate yf that of youre benygne grace I haue no socoure and comforte for I knowe well that I am not suche one as the paynim sayeth. But sith that I haue done soo moche that, I am comen heder for to encheue this enterpryse, I shall neuer retorne vnto the tyme that I haue assayed my body agaynste hym that hathe done so many noble knyghtes vnto dethe. Than Ualentyne called the grene knyght and sayd to hym in this maner. Fayre grene knyghte I se and knowe that I am not he by whome you ought to be coquered, but not for that what someuer I am I shall neuer departe from hens tyll that I haue foughten againste you. By Mahonne sayd the paynyms grete folye ledeth the, ad semeth that thou wyll conquere me by treason, but I shal shewe the anone that thyne ouer wenynge shal torne the vnto grete domage and shame. Than he lepte on his hors & badde his seruaunte. Bobert bring his box with baume of our lorde Ihesu christ, the which baume as we finde by wrytinge is of so greate vertue and meryte yt there is no mortall wounde, nor so daungerous that whan it shall be enoynted with they same baume but that it shall be hole anone. This same oyntemente had thei paynym with hym of longe tyme surely kepte, the whiche had saued him in dyuers places. After that he had done this, he sporred his hors with they spere on his thye and are comen the one agaynste the other, and so fyerslye they recountred the one the other with their speres that thei peces flewe on euery syde, ye horses passed forthe, And whan they had fetched theyr cours they drewe out theyr bryghte swerdes for to assayll the one the other. Ualentyne was dyligente ad hardy in armes so moche that with his swerde he gaue ye grene knyght so greate a stroke that he cut his harneys and broke it so that he made they bloude renne oute of his body by grete haboundaunce. And whan the grene knyght felt hym selfe smyten and wounded, he lyfte vpp his arme on heyght, and withe the swerde that he bare he smote Ualentyne vpon ye thyghe so grete a stroke, that of hys flesshe he smote awaye a grete pece, syth he sayd to him you may knowe yf that I cane playe with the swerde, I haue tolde you ynoughe before that & you wolde vndertake the felde agaynst me that throughe my handes it sholde behoue you to fynysshe your dayes, In to soone tyme came you towarde mee, and to late youe shall retorne, for I haue hope that anone I shall take youe, and hange you on the hygheste braunche of my tree for to repayre the place, & to kepe company with the other vnhappy that by theyr pryde & foly haue suffred deathe Paynym sayd Ualentyn of this thou mayste not auaute the to moche, for yet thou hast me not, thynke for to defed the And valentyn smote so great a stroke yt of his shelde he smote downe a grete quarter. And the grene knyghte smote vpon Ualenten with so gret strength yt he broke his swerde vpon his helme & of the great stroke that he had geuen hym he was al astonyed and felle downe of his hors to the grounde, but hy was so valyaunte of courage that he rose vp anone. And whan the paenym sawe that he rose vp he drewe out a gret pointed knyfe and keste it agaynste hym. But Ualentyne sawe the knyfe comynge and stert a syde, Than the grene knyght that founde hym selfe wythoute wepen torned his hors for to haue recouered a wepen, but Ualetene was nere him that with his swerde cut one of hys hors fete of, so that paynym and hors fell vnto the erth And than whan he was downe he arose vp quyckely, & came vnto Ualentyn, and wyth strengthe of armes the held the one the other. So it is not to be demaunded yf eyther of them enployed his strengthe and puyssauce. And to make shorte speche thei warre bytwene then the two knightes was so fyerse ad so maruaylous that the one and the other were sore wounded. But for all ye Ualentyne by his force of armes gaue the paynym diuers grete woundes it profyted hym nothyng. For wt the balme that he bare he was heled also sounde as he was before. In this wise they were fyghtyng so longe that the daye fayled them and they felte them selfe right wery, and not without a cause. Sorowful & right dyspleasaut was the grene knyght bycause he mighte not ouercome valentyne, And for all that he was wery yet he shewed not the semblaut, but sayd vnto valentine. knight from hensforth it behoueth for to cease the batayll, for I se that you are muche trauailed & wery. And on the other side the sone declineth, & ye night approcheth, so it shulde be lytell honour to me yf thus I conquered thee wherefore retourne into Acquytayn and reste the this night. For thou mayste well auaunte the before euery body that there Iusted neuer against me a more valyaunter knyght than thou arte. But to morowe in the mornynge retorne into the fyeld agayne and thou mayste well bydde al thy frendes fare wel, for thou shalte neuer escape withouten deathe. Ualetyne was reghte gladde for to leaue thee grene knyghte, for he was wery and sore wounded. So he wente towarde hys hors that was entred into a greane fielde, he tooke hym by thei brydell and mounted vppon hym for to retorne into Acquitaine. And whan they of the city sawe that he was retorned. Thei made great Ioy. The duke sauary and the other barons issued out of the gate and receiued Ualentine with grete honour, among the whiche was Orson that tooke him in his armes and made hym great cheare. And whan he was in the palays they Duke sauarye demaunded him tidinges of thei Grene knyght. Syr sayde Ualentyne he is in his repaire with in his grene Pauilion where as he reastethe hym. He is so puyssaunte and so strong that I thynke that ther is none be he neuer so stronge that maye conqueare him but yf that God bi his grace shew an euident myracle Ualentyne sayd the duke well haue you wroughte, for neuer none retourned but that the dyed shamfully by the handes of the grene knyght, well haue you shewed that aboue all ye other you are a knyght ful of prowesse & hardynes. Free duke sayd Ualentine of my prowesse agaynste hym I cannot yet vaunt me. For to morowe in they mornynge muste be a newe batayll betwene vs agayne. Now god be myne ayde and conford. For with out hym none maye haue agaynste thei grene knyghte bodylye vyctory. After that vyctorye Ualentyne was dysarmed, and than he wente into thei chambre of thei fayre Fezonne, it nedeth not to aske yf she was gladde and Ioyous that Ualentyne was retorned safe & sounde eueri body made moche of him for his grete prowess He was praysed of lytell and grete. And whan it came, vnto souper the duke wolde do him so moche honoure that he made hym sytte besyde hym at his owne table. The souper passed in deuysynge of dyuers thynges. After souper valentyne withdrewe him after the leue taken of they duke & of they other lordes, and entred into a secrete chambre for to dresse hys wundes, for he was greuously wouded And whan he was dressed he entred into his bedde for to reste hym. And thee grene knyghte is in his pauylyon yt with hys baume maketh his woudes to be noynted, For he hadde not so grete a wounde but that it was heled anone and cleane as euer it was before. So I shal leue here to speke of hym and wyl speke of Ualentyne that is in hys chambre makynge piteous complayntes and lamentacions. ¶Howe Ualetyne by the grace of god aduised hym for to sende Orson vpon morowe for to fyghte wyth they grene knyghte, and howe Orson ouercame him in cleane batayll. All that same nyghte the chylde Ualentyne slepte not in his bedde. but wepte ad syghed full pyteusly without onye reste saynge. Alas veraye God almyghtye nowe see I well that I shall neuer come to the ende of myne enterprise. but yf that of thyne inestymable grace and boute thou haue pyte on me. In gyuynge me ayde and conforte agaynst this false paynym that hathe sworne my deathe Alas myne entencyon and purpose was stedfastlye concluded that my bodye shoulde neuer haue reast vnto ye tyme that I mighte haue knoweledge of ye fadere that engendred me, and of what moder I was borne, ad delyuered on the earthe, but I knowe that the thinge the which a man purposeth cometh not alwayes to effect but remayneth vndone, For me I may well saye it, for whan I enterprysed thei batayll agaynste they Greane knyght fortune was to peruers vnto me sythe that he is suche that he maye neuer be vainequished saue of a knyght that is a kynges sonne and that in suche maner he shuld haue bene nouryshed so in his youthe that neuer of woman he shuld fele the milke. Now am I not he that maie be so worthy for to be a kinges sone, & that in such maner I haue ben nouryshed in my youthe, soo I se no comfort in my feat that may preserue me from deathe, saue alonelye to inuoke and requyre the ayd of my creatoure Iesus and his swete mother Marye, soo that they preserue me from his daunger and suffre me not to fynysshe my dayes here thus pyteously, In thys contemplacion abode. Ualentyne al the night without ony reaste saue for to wepe his fortune and his ferefull aduenture. And whan he had euery where thoughte by dyuyne operacyon he be thought hym, on Orson the sauage that he had conquered in thei wodde, and soo he thought that by him he might be socoured, for he thoughte well that he had neuer souked no womans breste. And that by auenture it myghte haue falle that some Quene had chylded hym in they forest. And these thynges consyderynge the nyght toke an ende, and the daye began to cleare. Than Ualentyne arose charged wyth thought and melancoly and came towarde Orson, and by euident signes shewed him that he shuld put on his harneys and take his hors for to go fighte with the grene knyghte Of these tidinges was Orson ryghte Ioyous and lepte and daunced aboute the halle for gladnes. Soo he made sygne that the grene knyght shoulde neuer escape his handes. And in makynge these signes he aduysed a grete clubbe of wodde the whiche he toke vpon his necke in shakynge hys heed, and made sygnes with his heed and his armes that he wolde beare none other harneys agaynst the false paynim, or hors nor spere all for to fyghte with the gyaunte. Frende sayde Ualentyne you shall not do so. But with myne armoure I wyll that you be armed, in beringe ye blason that was gyuen me by they kynge Pepyn, and you shall ryde on the stede that I broughte out of Fraunce with me. To thei wyll of valentyne Orson agreed and accorded, for aboue all thynges he wolde obeye vnto valentine and his commaundementes, at his subiecte and seruaunt Than valentine commaunded that they sholde bringe hym his harneys, and that Orson sholde be armed in ye same maner that he was whan he wente for to fyghte with the grene knyght. Thei thynge was done and accomlysshed for the duke Sauary that was there present helped for to arme Orson with hys propre handes with the armoure of valentyne, with dyuers barons that were there. And whan Orson was armed he was moche loked on of the lordes and barons that was there presente, for he semed ryght well to be a man of grete prowesse and hardynesse replete withall beautie hye and well formed in all his membres by righte measure compassed. He beheld the harneys that shoen about hym, and sythe he made synes with hys handes that he wolde strangle the grene knyghte or that myddaye were paste before all the courte, without hauyng oni mercye or pyte on him. At the geastes and manars that Orson dydde make all they of the company beganne for to laughe muche heartelye, And whan Orson hadde take leaue of the duke Sauarye he enbraced Ualentyne ad toke leue of hym in makynge hym sygne that he shulde haue no doubte of nothynge. And that afore hys retornynge he wolde brynge the grene knyghte withe him ether quycke or deade. And Ualentine in weapynge and lamentynge commaunded hym to God in prayinge deuoutly that he myght haue victory against the painim And euen so departed Orson but or he mouted on horsbacke he aduised hym on the fayre Fezenne of the whiche he had not taken leue, so he mounted into the palis and entred into the hall where as was thei fayre ladye Fezonne and dyuers other Ladyes well accompanyed He ranne towarde her and wolde haue kyssed her wher at the Lady and dyuers other began for to laugh right strongli For he made her signe that for to haue her loue he wente for to fyghte wyth the grene knyght. and Fezonne that was replete withal graciousnes in smilyng made them sygne that he sholde beare hym valyaunly and than whan he retorned from the batayll she would gyue hym her loue. Thus departed Orson and mounted on horsebacke the whiche was ryght nobli couayed by the duke of Acquitayne and dyuerse other barons and knyghtes vnto the gate whan he was oute of they cyte euery body retorned in praying God that he wold gyue him vyctorye. The noyse was throughe the cytye that the wild man went to fight with the grene knight wherat they wondred muche. Nowe rydeth Orson in Ualentynes armoure bycause he shold not be knowne He taryed not long tyl that he came vnto the pauilion of the grene knyght. And without saying onye wordde he touched it with the heade of his spere in sygnyfinge that he defyed hym, of the which thing the gren knight had great dispyte in his courage. And swore by hys greate God that he woulde abate hys pryde or it were nyght. He was armed anone and after mouted on horsbacke and toke his speare in his hande and entred into the felde for to reene agaynste Orsone. And semblablye Orson withdrewe hym from him, and than they began to couche theyr speres and in such wyse encountred to geder that both men and horses fel vnto the earth. And whan they were bothe downe they arose vp agayne lyghtly and drew out theyr swerdes for to assayle the one the other right vigorously. The grene knight that was moche prydeful and full of Ire smote Orson fyrst with so great myght that he cut the cercle of golde, vpon his helme, and smote downe a greate quarter of his shylde and wounded Orson ryght sore, and with that strooke his swerde was heauy and fell out of his hande. Whan Orsone sawe his bloode renne downe alonge hys arme he was more feyerser than a Leoparde, and moore courageous than a lyon. He rolled his eyen and shaked hys head, and with his bryght sweard he gaue the Gyaunt so grete a stroke vpon hys head that he touched hys naked flesh, and bare awaye a gret quantyte of the flesh & heer withall, and the stroke slyded downe and hyt hym on the arme so that the bloud ranne down haboundatly. Bue the grene knyght set lytell by that wounde, for he tooke of the baume that I haue made you mencion of before, and also soone as he toched the wounde, yt was also hole as it was before, of the which Orsoe was moche abashed, and he thought well within hymselfe that with wepen he myghte not haue his bodi, whan yt so soone he hadde heled the wounde that was so greate and so profound. Upon this matter was Orson subtil and well aduysed, and caste bothe swerde and harneys frome hym, and then he ronne to the grene knyght and helde hem so strongly bytwene his armes, that he caste hym to the grounde vnderneth hym. And whan he had hym vnderneth hym, he toke his helme of his heede, for to haue smiten it of. There was the grene knyght kepte in suche subieccion that by force he was constrained for to yelde hym vnto Orson, and to crye hym mercye but Orson that vnderstode nothyng his cryenge sette not therby in no maner. And so straightly he held him yt at that same houre he wolde baue taken his lyfe from hym yf that it had not ben valentine that sawe ad knewe the gestes of Orson, that came rydynge toward hi also faste as he myght dryue. And whan he was comen theder he made sygne vnto Orson that he sholde not sle hym. Then Orson reculed hym abake whan he herde valentyne, but alwayes he helde thei grene knighte in subieccion, to whome valentyne spake & sayde knyghte at this houre you may knowe that you haue neythere force nor stregthe for to auenge you nor kepe the frome deathe agaynste thys man, wherfore it is for yt you suffre dethe, and to fynisshe youre dayes, shamefully. For euen soo as the other knyghtes haue ben dysconfite bi youe and hanged on yonder same hye tree, in lyke wyse shall you be hanged vpon they mooste hyeste braunche aboue them al. Alas sayd the grene knyght you reseble wel to be a man of grete curtesee, and garnished withe noblenes, for the whiche thinge I praye you that your wyll haue pyte on me and saue my lyfe. Paynym sayde valentyne that shall I not do, saue that by suche a couenaunt, that you shall renounce the paynyms lawe & the false goddes that you worshyppe, in takynge ye law and byleue of Iesu chryste the god almyghty, and in receyuynge the holy baptym, withoute the whiche none can haue the glorye pardurable. And whan you shal haue done that, you shall goo in to Fraunce to the kynge Pepyn & shall tell hym that Ualentyne and Orson sendethe you toward him as knyght ouercomen by them and so haue aduyse and aspecte on thys feate in gyuinge me an answer vpo your entencyon that is sure and certayn. Frende sayde the grene knyght I gyue you suche an answer. From this houre I denye and renounce all the false gooddes, and take for the remenaunt of mi lyfe for mayster and lorde the true god in which you byleue, and in that same faythe wyll I lyue and dye. And also I promyse you that I shall goo towarde the kynge Pepyn and yelde me also soone as I maye, as youre pore subgecte and prysoner. Whan the grene knyght hade made the othe, and promyse to accomplysshe the thynges aboue sayd. Ualentin made signe vnto Orson that he sholde let hym ryse. And Orson that was wyse and well auysed toke his armoure frome hym to the ende yt he myght do hym no dommage. And whan the grene knyght was vppon his fete he spake to Ualentyne and sayd. Syr knyght me thynke that you are he that hade batayll agaynste me yesterdaye, and that shold haue retorned agayne to day. And he that hathe conquered me is the same that in the palays of ye duke Sauary keste me agaynge the erthe, It is true sayd Ualentyne, that is well knowen of you, the thynge is verytable I wyll not lye to you. Now I shall tel you one thynge sayd the grene knyght the whyche I praye you to accomplysshe Sende me this knyghte yt hathe conquered me to yonder grete tre. and yf he maye take a waye the sheld that hangeth there, I shall knowe well yf it be he that shall conquere mee, for of none other I maye not be ouercomen in no batayll. Than valentyne made sygne vnto Orson that he sholde go towarde the tree for to fetche the shelde that hanged there. Orson wente thether and also soone as he came to the Shelde he stratched forthe his arme and the Shelde lepte into his hande, the whyche he brought to the grene knyght. And whan he sawe that Orson had brought the shelde frome the tre without enforcynge of hym, he knewe that it was he yt was predestyned for to conquere hym, he caste hymselfe to ye earth & wold haue kyssed his fet, but Orsone was wyse and well taught by the sygnes of Ualentyn and wolde not let hym, but toke hym by ye armes and lyft hym vp: Alas sayd the grene knyght I ought well to do you honoure and reuerence, more than to any man on lyue for I knowe well that of all hardy and valyaunte knyghtes you ought to bere the name & fame. And among the other I afferme you and let you wyte that he that hath conquered me is the mooste hardyest and valyautest that is in the worlde. And you ought to beleue stedfastly that he is a kynges sone and a quenes, & is suche one that he was neuer nourished of woman. And that this is treue I maye proue it you by my sister Clerimode. For she hathe a heed of brasse that telleth and declareth vnto her the aduentures and fortunes that to her and all them of her generacyon may happen and befall. And ye same heed shall endure vnto the tyme yt the most worthy of the worlde entre into the chambre where as it is in. And whan he shall be entred at that same houre it shall lese his strengthe & vertue. And that same knyght ought to haue my syster Clerymode vnto wyfe the whiche is so pleasaunt and fayre. Wherfore noble knyghte go thetherwarde, for I haue grete desyre that you haue her vnto wyfe as the mooste hardyest knyght of ye worlde, for so ye maye well be called and renowned. ¶How after that Orson had conquered the grene knyghte valentyne made hym be christened and sent hyme vnto kynge Pepyne and how he had knowledge of hys father & mother throughe the grene knyght. As they had spoken thus, the grene knyght sayd vnto Ualentyne. Syr I shal giue you a ryng to be the better acquaited with her the whiche she gaue me at my departynge and bere it her. And I shall go toward thei kynge Pepyn into Fraunce as I haue promysed you and yelde me prysoner in acquitinge my faythe, and at my retornynge I shall come vnto you to they castell of my syster. And from hens forthe yf it please you we shal be perfyte frendes and fellowes. For I will neuer departe out of your company. And whan the knight Ualentyne vnderstode that the greane knighte had a sister that was so faire by the will of God almighty, and by the inclinacion of naturall loue, he was smitten at the heart with her beaute right ardauntlie. So he made a vowe vnto God that he wold neuer rest till that he had sene the lady that was so gretely comended. And after these thinges the grene knight that was crowned king of thei greene Mountayne, and that helde grete Lordeshippes vnder him made to crie through his hoste that all Paynims and Sarazins that were comen at his comaundement for to serue him before Acquitayn shold retorne agayne into theyr Countreis without dommagynge of the duke. Sauaries contre in ony manner. So departed Paynyms and sarazins makynge greate sorowe for the takynge of the grene knyghte. And Ualentyne and Orson tooke hym and ledde hym as prysener towarde thei cyty of Acquitayne. ye nede not to demaunde of the grete noyse and the grete solace and the grete Ioye that was made of lytell and greate in the cite of Acquitayne. And the duke Sauarye wyth all hys baronnage receyued them in grete tryumphe without the cyte. And whan the grene knight was before they noble duke of Acquitaine and all his baronage he said to them in this maner. Lordes wel oughte you to bere honoure and reuerence vnto thys Knyghte that hathe coquered me by force of armes. And knowe certainly yt this man is a kynges sonne and a Quenes, and he neuer souked no woman in his lyfe for if it were not soo he shuld neuer haue had strength nor puyssaunce for to haue vaynquisshed me, for so it was sayde by the heade of brasse that my syster Clerymonde hathe in her chambre. By my fayth sayd the duke of acquitayne wel mai ye be beleued for he hath wel shewed againste you they grete prowesse and hardynes that is in him. and syth that it is so that I knowe the great valyauntnes that is in hym. I will bere him honour and reuerence with all my puyssaunce. In sayinge these wordes the duke of Acquitayne with all his court and the grene knighte that Orson ledde prysoner bene entred into the towne, and mounted vp into the palays. And whan they were within the duke maunded his doughter, & after said to her. My doughter se here the grene knyghte the whiche for to conquere your body ad haue your loue hathe longe time kepe the moste parte of my londe in his subgeccyon. And how wel that he is not of our byleue. yet fortune was too me contrarye and aboue my wyl maistresse in suche manner that stronge and longe abyding soo haue socoure of some other bodye hadde, constrained my hearte to accorde vnto suche thinges but god yt is the Iudge hathe wylled remedye this dede insuche a maner that of myne enemye I am auenged and comen to the aboue by this same knight that Ualentine hath brought vnto you by the lycence of kinge Pepin for to socour your body. Now may you knowe that aboue al other he is hardy and valyaunt. And I beleue that god hathe transmyted hym for to conquere you. Wherfore my doughter & myne onely, hope in whome remayneth all my Ioye and comforte of my lyfe, auyse and haue aspecte and consyderacyon vpon this case, for it is my wyl that you sholde haue hym vnto husbande, yf youre consentynge and wyl were accordynge vnto myne, for none ought to constraine a body to take one in maryage againste theyr wyll. ¶My redoubted lorde sayd thei noble mayden that was ryght well endoctryned & puruayed of an answer. you know that you are my fader & I am youre doughter, it is no reason and ryghte that I that am after god & nature subiecte vnto you doo ony thynge after my wyll, but am redy and preste for to do all your pleasure, and yf I wolde do otherwyse I shoulde not shewe that I were your naturall doughter, for you knowe wel that you haue promysed for to giue me in marriage vnto hym that by force of armes myghte, conquere the grene knyght. Nowe is he comen by whome the thynge is accomplished thorowe oute. And the whiche hathe accomplysshed & perfourmed the tenour of your crye, and denouncinge that you haue made and publyshed through euery chrysten regyon so it is well, reason that I take hym, and that vnto hym I be gyue And yf in ony wyse I wolde not take hym, I sholde cause your entencyon to be adnychyled, which foreuer sholde be reproche vnto me. Doughter said the duke of Acquitayne ye haue spoken moche hyghlye, and youre answer pleaseth me ryght well and all them that be here presente to my deminge. Now must it be knowen of the knyghte yf yt he wyll take you vnto wyfe & spouce and yf he be contente. I shall gyue him with the mariage of you half Acquitayne. There was presente valentene that by sygnes demaunded Orson his wyl and intente. And he made hym sygne that he wolde neuer haue other than the Fayre Fezonne, thus were these two partyes of accorde, of the whiche thynge they that knewe it were right Ioyous. Thei duke Sauary made to come a bysshoppe for to handfeste Orson and thei faire ladi Fezonne, and to make them promesse that the one sholde take the other for loial spouce the terme of their lyues at that presente tyme there was none other thinge made bytwene them vnto the daye of the spousaylles. And it nedeth not to aske yf the Ioye and myrthe was grete thorughe the cyte of Acquitayne both of lytell and grete, and they grete nombre of dysportes and plays that there was made, for thei rehersinge woulde be to longe. But how well that Orson had sworne and made promese to take the fayre Fezon, yet shall he not wedde her, nor neuer lye by her sydes tyll yt by thei wyll of god he shall speke good language. And that Ualentyne had conquered the fayre Clerymonde, of they whiche thinges I wyll make mencyon here after as well as I maye ¶How on the nyghte that Orson was made sure to ye fayre Fezonne, the aungell of god appered vnto valentyne. And of the commaundemente that he gaue hym. After that Orson hadde handfest the fayre Fezonne, on that same daie was made grete solace thorughe all the countrei aboute for all the lordes of they londe were gladde of that assemble. In ioye and solace passed that daye tyll the night came that it was time to go to reste The duke of Acquitaine dyde withdrawe hym into his chambre for to reste hym. And euery body wente into theyr chambres as they were ordeyned. Ualentyne and Orson wente into a fayre chambre that was apparaylled for them, ad went to reste in a ryche bedde bothe Orson and he for that nyghte. And whan it came toward mydnyght by the wyl of god almyghty an aungell appered vnto Ualentyne and sayd to hym. Ualentyne knowe that god sendeth they worde by me that to morowe in the mornynge thou departe out of this lod and lede with the Orson by whome the grene knighte hathe ben coquered. And without soiourninge or delaye go vnto thei castell of Ferragus, and ther thou shalt fynde the fayre lady Clerymonde by whome thou shall knowe of what lynnage thou art extraught, & of what fader, was thou engendred, and of what moder thou was borne and chylded. And this I commaund the in ye name of god that or euer thy felowe wedde the fayr fezonne thou perfourme this vyage. Of this vysyon valentyne was in grete thoughte. an in great melancoly, and so passed the night vnto the time that it was clere daye without takynge ony reste. And whan ye day was comen he made Orson to ryse and wente into they pallays where as the grene knyghte was with ye other barons and knyghtes abydynge the good duke Sauary, So it was not longe after that the duke entred into ye halle. And also soone as he was entred ye grene knyghte toke the words in saluinge hym wyth all due reuerence and sayde to hym. Fre duke it is true and certayne yt within the terme assygned bytwene vs two I haue be vanquysshed, for the whiche thynge I haue none occasyon nor ryghte to aske youre doughter ony thynge, but at thys houre I quyte her, and wyll leue your lande in reste and peas as I haue promysed in acquitaine of myne othe. And I praie you that ye make me haue the sacrament of baptym, to they ende that I maye be to god, more greable. Knyght sayd they duke well haue you spoken, and to your requeste wyll I obeye in euery thynge for at this presente houre you shall be baptized The noble duke comauded ye they sholde make a preest to come and baptyze the grene knyghte. Whan it came that he was at the fonte for to receyue baptim. Ualentyne that was there presente spake before them all and sayd in this maner. Lordes the whiche be here assembled yf it please the valiaunt duke for to geue me a gifte, that is that I praye hym that this same knyghte be named Pepyn, for it is the propre name of the noble ad valyaunt kynge of Fraunce that hathe nourisshed me ryght swetely, and that aboue all prynces is the mooste puyssaunt and hardy, for the whiche I desyre that this knyghte, maye bere the name. To the demaund of Ualentyne dyd consente & accorde all they that were there presente. And at the requeste of Ualentyne he was called Pepyn, the whiche name he bare frome that houre vnto the laste ende of hys dayes. And after that he was baptezed the duke of Acquintayne made Ualentyne ad Orson come for to wedde his doughter the fayre Fezone. But valentyne sayd to hym in maner of excusacion that bothe he and Orson had vowed and promysed for to go vnto Iherusalem afore they dyde ony other thinge, after that they hadde conquered thei grene knyghte And vnder the vmbre of this ezcusacyon they duke gaue them leue by this condicion that Orson sholde swere and promyse for to retorne into Acquitaie after that he sholde haue acomplysshed and parfourmed his vyage, and that also soone as he sholde be retorned that he sholde take his doughter Fezonne vnto wyfe. And valentyne and Orson swore that they sholde do so, & than be vttred it them Ioyously, and the grene knighte at ye same houre toke leue of they duke of Acquitaine for to go into Fraunce to the kynge Pepyn and yelde hym in acquitayne of his promyse. And valentyne before his departynge asked hym ye rynge yt he had promysed hym & he gaue it hi saying who yt bereth it on him maye not be drowned, nor by false Iugemente condampned. Ualentyn toke the rynge & put it on hys fynger. And than Orson and he toke leue for to acheue theyr vyage. And the grene knyght toke leue for to go into Fraunce. So departed the thre knyghtes out of Acquytane and toke theyr wayes towarde theyr Iourneys. Ualentyne and Orson mounted vpon the see, and with strenght of saylles anone they hadde gone a grete waye, for the see was peasyble and the wynde agreable. They demaunded the maryners the waye for to drawe towardes the castell of Ferragus the gyaunt. And the maryners shewed them, for they knewe it well bycause yt for to passe that passage it was of custome for to paye a trebute. Now is valentyne and Orsone vpon the see that desyreth strongly for to fynde the castell of Ferragus. And the grene knyghte rydeth through the countree towarde the realme of Fraunce for to yelde hym vnto the kinge. But or yt he arryued before the kynge Pepyn Blandymayn the squyer of the Empresse Bellyssant of whome I haue made mencyone before, that was mette by Ualentyne in the habyte of a pylgrym, salued the good kynge Pepyn in grete honoure & reuerence. And whan ye kynge Pepyn sawe hym in suche habyte. & with so florysshed a berde, he demaunded him yf he came from the holy sepulcre, or of what vyage he was pylgrem. Free kynge sayd Blandymayn a pylgrym am I not, but for to encheue more surely myn enterpryse I haue put mi selfe in the habyte of a pylgrym. And knowe that I am messenger of a hyghe and puyssaunt lady that by treason hathe ben deiecte from her countree, and put pyteously in exyle. Alas syr the lady that I speke to you of is your syster, that is to wyte. Bellyssante the free lady, the whiche hath bene chaced shamefully awaye by the Emperoure Alexander, and lyueth in great pouerte & calamyte for defalte of socoure. Well haue you youre harte harde when that for her deliueraunce ye will not employe you none otherwyse. ¶Howe kynge Pepyn hadde knowledge that valentyne and Orson were his neuewes by Blandymain and the grene knight that came and yelded him to the kyng as he had promysed valetyne. When kynge Pepyne hearde speake of hys Syster, he began for to syghe hartely, and asked hym where he was. Syr sayde Blandymayn, I knowe thei truthe but I haue promysed her that I shall no bodye ensygne to the place where she is. But and ye be in doubte of her loyalte. I shall bring you a man that wil fyght for her quarell. Alas sayd the kynge I haue seene probacion ynough of her loyalte by the false Archebysshop that the marchaunt ouer came. I haue made her to be sought long tyme, but I can haue no tydinges of her in no maner. And that whiche greueth my harte mooste, is that my syster Bellyssante was greate with childe whe she was expulsed from the Emperour, And I wote not what chylde shee hath borne, nor also howe she escaped that great daunger, for I knowe well that she hath not had suche helpe at her nede as vnto her apperteyned Syr sayd Blandimayn for to speake of this matter. Knowe that my lady Bellyssante your syster, felte the paynes of chylding in the forest of Orleaunce. And when the euyll hade taken her, she sente me vnto a vyllage there besyde, for to fetche her a womane for to helpe and succoure her. Then I made the moste diligence that was possible for me, but or euer I was retourned the noble ladye had delyuered two fayre sonnes, of the whiche a wylde beere muche furyously bare away one of the chyldren into the wodde, in suche maner that the Empresse Bellyssant after her power wende for to haue saued and succoured it, but she wyste not wher it became, she had folowed so longe that I founde here lyinge vpon the grasse in a sowne piteously aiourned, the whiche semed better dead then on lyue. I tooke her vp betwene myne armes and comforted her as well as I myght. And when she was come to her selfe and that she myght speake in syghynge muche pyteously she recounted vnto me the maner howe she had lost her chyld by the wylde beaste, and howe she had lefte they other vnder a tree. And when I vnderstode those wordes I ledde her vnto the tree wher as I had left her and ther doubled her sorowe, for she founde not the other childe, that she had left there. And thus were the two children of your syster loste in the foreste. And other tydynges knowe I not. And if you doubte you of this thynge for to haue the more greater knowledge knowe syr that I am Blandimayne that was geuen all alone for to conduyte your syster Bellyssant, when she was sent in exyle by the Emperour Alexander. Alas Blandimayne sayde the kyng youre woordes geueth me distresse and displeasaunte when that I maye not knowe thei place where as my Syster is, nor of her twoo children haue certayne knowledge, but sythe that I can knowe none other thynge tell me if that it be longe ago syth that she was deliuered within the forest of the twoo chyldren. Syr sayde Blandymayne it was vpon the propre daye that you mette me in the forest of Orleaunce and that I tolde you the pyteous tydinges of thei exyle and vytuperable blame of my lady Bellyssant your syster. As the kynge Pepyn vnderstode these wordes of Blandymayn, he was ryght pensyue in his courage. And euen so as he was in that thought he bethought hym of Ualentyne that he founde in the forest that same daie. and on Orson that had bene conquered by him in that sam wodde. For this thinge he was in great melancoli. And when he had all considered he knewe by the sayinges of Blandimayn that they were sonnes of hys syster. Bellyssant. He sent for the quene Berth his wife & dyuerse other lordes and ladyes of his courte for to tell and declare it theim. Alas lordes sayde he I haue holden and nourysshed longe tyme in my house as poore chyldren, and vnpuruayed, the that be sonnes to an Emperour and an Empresse, and my propre neuewes, that is valentyne that I founde in the foreste of Orleaunce, that was by my syster Bellyssant in the tyme of her misfortune childed within the wodde. And I let you to wyte that Orson the sauage that hathe ben coquered by valentyne as I may vnderstande is his propre brother naturall, and they bothe are sonnes vnto the Emperour of Grece. ¶Of these tidinges was thei quene Berthe muche ioyous, and all the lordes barons and knightes of the court. There was presente the two enemies mortall of Ualentine, that is to wyte Haufray and Henry, that with semblaunt made ryght ioyous chere, but at their hartes and courages they were tryste and sorowful. For aboue al thinges they desyred the death of thei noble Ualentyne, for and to they ende that with Charlemayn their lytell brother they might do theyr will disordinate, to whome thei were muche contrary as you shall here aftarwarde recounted. Nowe was Blandymain right sore abashed when he harde the kyng speke thus of the dedes of they twoe chyldren, and demaunded hym. Syr knowe you in what lande these two children may be founde that you make mencion of. Frend sayd the kynge I haue nourisshed one in mi house right longe, in suche maner that he is become greate hardye and stronge, and hath conquered they other that lyued in the foreste of Orleaunce as a beaste, and didde great dammage in the countrey aboute. And after that he had conquered hym, and that they hadde bene longe in my court they departed fpom me, and toke leue of me for to go into Acquitaine to fyghte with a hardy and a valyaunt champyon that the grene knighte maketh hi to be called. And syth theyr departynge I myght neuer haue tidinges of them. Syr sayde Blandimain after that the whiche you tell me I let you wyte that I met they two chyldren besyde the cyte of Acquitayne, wherfore I am ryght dyspleasaunt that I myght not know them, for of all my dolours I sholde haue had than alegement. Of this matter they deuysed longe tyme. And after these thinges the king commaunded that Blandymayn shulde be fested and serued honourablye in all thynges that was necessary for hym. Than was Blandymayme taken by the offycers of the palays and was ledde amonge the barons and knyghtes of hys courte, the whiche receiued him in grete honoure and reuerece in festyng hym. Nowe it happened that on that same daye the greene knyghte that I haue made mencyon of before arryued at the courte of kinge Pepin that was at Parys. And soone as he was dyscended he wente into the halle ryall, in the whiche kynge Pepyn was with his barons & knyghtes muche notable. He salued the kinge right reuerentlye. And whan they kinge sawe hym armed with grene armoure he maruayled muche and demaunded hym before all his barons & knyghtes Tell vs whome you are and also what is they cause of your commynge hether and wherefore you bere suche grene armoure, Noble and honorable kynge sayde the grene knyght knowe that I am extraught out of sarazins londe, and borne, and of a fader sarazin I am engendred, and of a moder painime I haue bene chylded, So it is tru that for to haue to wife the doughter of ye duke of Acquitain named Fezonne I haue by a whole yere holden the londe of the duke in my subieccyon. And haue doone so muche that at the laste I dyde gyue him syx monethes of trewes, by such a couenaunt that yf he gaue me not a knyght that by force of armes myghte conquere me duryng that same tyme that I shold haue his Doughter Fezonne vnto wyfe. And in cause that I were conquered and vainquisshed I sholde make myne host to departe out of his countree wythoute harmynge or hurtynge it. Now I haue ben ryght longe before the cyte of Acquitaine in abidinge euery day batayll, to there came to me many valyaunt knyghtes of deuers countrees and regeones, the whiche I haue put all to death and hanged on a tre saue alonelye two worthy knyghtes wherof the one is named Ualentyne and the other Orson, ye same Ualentyne foughte wyth me the space of an hole day, and we dyd so many feates of armes bytwene vs twayne that the nyght constrayned vs to leue and depart as wery and trauaylled. And whan it came one the morowe that thee battayle sholde haue begonne agayne bytwene vs twayne, hys felowe Orsone armed with his propre harneis, entred into the felde for to fyght wyth me, wenyng to me that it had ben Ualentine. And whan that same Orso was entred into the fielde muche fierslye he made me sygne of dyffyaunce. Than I lepte out agaynst hym. but lyttell auailed my strengthe, for I abode not longe or that I was vainquished by hym. And he woulde haue taken my lyfe frome me yf Ualentyne had not come rennynge vnto vs, whiche made me swere to receyue baptyme and beleue in Ihesu Chyrst and to submit my life entierely vnto your commaudement and ordenaunce. And therfore in acquitynge my faythe and promyse by the knyghte Ualentine I am comen to yealde me vnto you as to hym that may do with me your pleasure and to whom after God apperteyneth to approche mi deth or to prolong my lyfe. Not for that my redoubted lorde I yelde me before your maiestie ryall in demaundynge and trustinge to haue grace for the honoure of that same god that I haue taken they byleue for knowe that I am christened and byleue in Ihesu Christe, and frome hens forthe wyll obserue it with true mind. And whan I was baptysed at the holy font stoone, in the honoure of youre highe and puyssaunte name I was called Pepyn, and Pepyn I am called whan they kynge vnderstode the wordes of the grene knyght he answered hym swetely before all the barons and knyghtes sayenge. welcome be you vnto vs for of youre comynge wee be ryghte Ioyous more than of onye other thinge, Make good chere for the loue of hym that sente you to vs. for I assure you of your lyfe. And yet I tell you before all that within shorte tyme I shal gyue you in my realme grete londes & possessios if that it plese you for to abide in my seruyce. But tell vs where thei two knyghtes is that hathe conquered you. Syr said the grene knighte I lefte them in the cyte of Acquitaine with thei duke Sauary the whiche holdeth them more dearer then all the other of hys court, By the tidinges of Blandymayn and by the grene knyghte kynge Pepin hadde tidynges of his sister and of his two neuewes, the whiche she chileded in the foreste of Orleaunce. Wherefore he promised God that he shulde go into grece for to tell themperoure this tidinges. and for to make his sister to bee sought in this maner that she myght be found in some place. For aboue all pleasures hee desyred ryghte ardantly to se his sister Bellissant that was so gracious when he bethought hym on the greate iniury that had bene done vnto her, he wepte full biterly with both his eyen, and was ryght sorowfull at his harte, ¶Howe the good kynge Pepyn departed out of Frauce for to go towarde the Emperour of Grece to beare him tidinges of his sister Bellissat. And howe afore his retorninge he made warre to the Soudan that had besyeged Constantinoble. In that same tyme that kynge Pepyn had tydynges of his syster Bellyssant, he made redy his hooste withoute deley and departed fro Parys for to go to Constantinoble towarde the Emperoure of Grece for to beare hym tydynges of his syster Bellyssant as you haue heard. The kynge made suche diligence that within short time he arriued at Rome. There he was receyued of the Pope with great honoure, for of the christe fayth he was thei chief defendoure. He dyned that daye withe thei pope in hys palays apostolyke the whiche tolde him tidinges of the Soudan that had besyeged they cytie of Constantinoble. And thus as they spake and deuised of that matter theyr arryued a knyght of Grece the whiche after that he had salued the pope and the kynge and all they assayauntes in muche great reuerence he sayd to hym. Holy father that arte god in earth know that the sarazins with great puissaunce and strengthe of armes haue assieged and put in subieccion the lande and country of Constantinoble. So they emperoure of Grece send you worde by me that for to kepe the chrysten fayth soo as you ought to do ye sende him socoure thether, or els you shalbe cause to let the countrey be lost, & the christe fayth to diminisshe, for withoute your help and sucour at this nede there is no remedy. When the pope vnderstoode these tydinges, he was muche dyspleasaunt but the kyng Pepyn that was ther present, comfrted him greately sayinge to hym. Holy father takein you courage and comforte for if you wyll gyue me your follies Romayne vntyll a nombre sufficiente I shal conduyte them and leade them towarde Constantinoble wythe myne hoost, and I shall do so muche by thei helpe of god for the sustentacyon of the Christen faythe, that the Soudane and hys armye I shall put too vytuperable confusion for of none other thinge I haue not so grete desyre as to susteyne the christen faithe againste the painims. Whan the pope hearde the kynge Pepyn speke so and knewe his courage, he thanked him with all his hert, and sayd to him. Fre kinge right christen of god be thou blyssed, for of al other kynges thou arte the most puyssaunce in wordde and dede, and syth, that you will vndertake suche a thynge. I shall make so greate nombre of Romayns come hether for to accompanie you, yt you maye surely arryue in grece againste the infideles and enemyes of the fayth, The pope in that same tyme of al the londe Romayne assembled so grete a nombre of folke that it was maruaell & made to crye thei croysee, that is to knowe that all that would go in that batayll in the honoure of the passyon of Ihesu chryst. and were a crosse takynge of the pope his blessynge, shulde haue pardon of all their sinnes. In the cyte of Rome wt in a lyttell tyme assembled great multitude of people for to go ouer the sea with the kinge Pepin and the pope at theyr departinge gaue them his blessinge, and absolucion of al their sinnes. Thus the kinge Pepin toke leue of the pope and of the cardinalles in recommaundinge him vnto the Prayers of holy chyrche. And with thirty thousande Romaines besyde his owne hooste he mounted vpon the sea. And so muche the tyme was agreable vnto hym that within fewe daies he came and aryued at Constantinoble. And there he sawe that the soudan Moradyn hadde besyeged it on all sydes. And this soudan had brought with him .xx. kinges the whyche for to distroy chrystendome with towe hondred thousande paynyms had passed the sea. And so muche was this soudan fered and redoubted for his puyssaunce, yt the Emperoure of Grece with diuers other christians accompanied hadde withdrawen hym into Constantynoble, and so well he kepte the cytie that it myghte not be taken of the paynym. Alwayes in his courage he bewaylled his wyfe Bellyssant, and he bethought of they shame that he hadde delyuered her to without cause, & thought well within this sorowfull harte that she was decessed out of this worlde for it was twenty yere paste sythe he hearde any tidinges of her, but anone he shall here some by kynge Pepin that roweth so much vpo ye sea that within two myle of Constantinoble he is arriued and descended. And made his tentes and pauilios to be pyght vp in the fielde, and made his folke too be put in right faire ordinaunce. Then was the currours and ryders of the soudan Moradyn muche agaste, that in great diligence retourned towarde his pauilion and said to him as men afrayed and full of feare. Sir soudan be ryght certayne that to daie ther is arriued vpo this grounde mo then two hundred thousand Romaynes all armed for to put vs vnto confusion, Wherefore auyse you vpon this matter, for the thyng is doubeful and peryllous, Holde your peace sayde the Sodan and of them haue no drede, for it is not possyble that out of the Empyre of Rome there be descended so many folke we be pussaunt ynoughe for to abyde them in battayll ernged. For I haue hope that within short tyme I shal put in my subieccion both Rome and Fraunce. ¶He comaunded the capitaines to put his hoost in paine for to receyue them. When the morow was come, the king made ready his hoost for to assayle the paynims fyersly Than kinge Pepin sente a letre secretely into thei cyty to the Emperoure whiche specified to him in his comming for to socour hym. And that he sholde make al the men be armed throughe the cite in al diligence, ad that they sholde yssue oute vpon the painims and sarazyns for that daye they shuld be socoured by the Romaines and Frenshemen. The Emperour was muche Ioyous of the comminge of kinge Pepin, and after ye tenour of they letter made his hooste to be assembled and armed and after yssued out of they cyte of Constantinoble for to go agaynste they paynims and sarazins that aboode batayll, And also sone as they were in the felde they apperceyued the standerdes and banners of thei hooste of kynge Pepyne that came thederwarde wyth so greate nombre of trumpettes and clarons making noise that it was maruaile. Well sawe the Painimes that there came againste the gret puissauce of men. The Soudan called two Sarazins of the moste hardiast ad commauded them that they shuld goo secretely and nombre the host of the christiens that came against them. And that whan they shulde haue done so that they sholde retorne to hym agayne and tel him. The two sarasins that was named Claryan and Vandu mouted on horsebacke ad rode towarde the hooste of the noble king Pepin. But they had not ryden longe whan that thei grene knyghte espied them vpon a litell mountaine. And in continent as he had apperceiued them hee knewe well, that they were sarazyns. Then he smote his hors with they sporres and all alone rode towarde them with his spere on his thighe like a hardy knight. And whan they two sarazins sawe hym aproche to them bicause that he was all alone they had shame for to fle for hym, and saide by Mahoune it shall be great shame to vs if this christian escape from vs twayne. ¶Howe the grene knyght Iusted against the two sarasins and how he slewe the one and the other fledde and howe the king Pepin with his hooste was eclosed within Constantinoble. When the two sarazins had saide so they ran againste they grene knighte, and he hit one of them so that he neuer arose, & thei other fled sore wounded. Well sawe kyng. Pepyn that valiaunt dede. Then he made to assayll the Soudan Moradyns hooste. And there Myllondangler slewe the kynge of Acquyle at one strooke, and thre more or euer he rested. And he did so greate dedes of armes that they soudan Moradin apperceyued him, so he cried on highe to his folke that they shoulde, assayle Myilon Dangler that made so grate slaughter of sarazins. At the commaundemente of they Soudan Myllon dangler was assayled on all sydes by they paynyms & sarazyns. And he was put in suche subieccion that they cut of one of his horses thies, bi the which he was constrayned to fall vnto the earth, ad at that time had bene taken or slayne if they grene knighte had not bene that maugre the sarazins put hym selfe in ye prese and slew ad smote down so many that he approched vnto Myllon dangler and gaue him a horse and mounted him vpon him. At that houre did the grene knighte and Myllon dangler so great dedes of armes agaynste they paynyms that it should be to greate a thyng to recout it, for all that found them selfe before them neuer wet out of that place. Great was the batayll and endured long. Kyng Pepyn and his men that daye made greate slaughter of the painims. But not withstandyng their hardynes they should haue loste the fielde if the Emperoure of grece had not bene, that with all his hoost valyauntly accompanied assayled the paynims on thei other syde ryght hardeli, and put great nombre to death well knewe the kyng that the Emperoure didde greate deades of armes. Then he toke force and courage & assembled his men agayne, and entred into thei battayll more ardauntly then before, & thus the painims were assayled on both sydes. And as soone as the kinge sawe the Emperoure he sayde vnto hym. ¶Free prince now shewe your selfe valiaunte, for to daye by me you shall haue tydynges of youre wyfe Bellyssant. At these wordes they Emperoure was ioyous and double hys courage. And cryed Constantinoble to his men, in promysyng them great gyftes if they beare them valyaut At these wordes he entred into the batayl with so maruelous a courage that he was to hardi that abode him And kyng Pepyn and the grene knight entred in on the other syde in smytynge vpon they paynyms so impetuously, that wheresoeuer they passed they made a large, waye thorough the prewesse of the grene knyghte well wende they Soudan Moradyne to haue knowen hym that behelde his armes, for he was of a highe lynage because that he was brother vnto Ferragus. But because that he knewe that the grene knyght was a paynim he would neuer haue thought that he had bene come on that syde. Nowe was they paynyms and Sarazyns at that houre put in suche necessite that the wede neuer to haue escaped death, and toke the flyghte. And then the kynge of Sclauayne that had the soudans regarde accompanied with fifti thousande fighting men yssued out of they christen men in makinge soo great a shoute that it semed that all should founde. And when the Emperour and the kynge Pepyn knewe of their comynge they sawe and considerd that that the were trauayled, and the men of the kynge of Sclauouye freshe wherefore it was delibered amonges them not to abyde them, And after the counsayll taken, they made too sowne trompettes and Clarones for to withdrawe the into Constantinoble. When they Soudan sawe that the christen men were entred, he made too assyege they cytie ryght nere. And there was so great nombre of paynyms about the cytie vpon euery syde that the emroure and the kynge Pepyn myghte not yssue oute of it. ¶Thus thei abode long time in they subieccion of their enemies that kepte them streyghte in desiryng of their death, and purchasyng the destruccion of the christen fayth. So I shall leue you to speake of this matter and wyll tell you of Ualentyne and Orson that for thei loue of Clerymonde bene entred into thei sea, as ye haue heard before. ¶Howe Ualentine and Orson arryued at the stronge castell, where as they fayre Clerymonde was, and howe by the head of brasse they had knowledge of their generacion and howe Ualentyne Iusted with the Seneshall of the castell for the entre and slewe hym. After that Ualentine and Orson hadde log tyme abyden vpon the hye Sea, the aduysed an yle in the whiche was a castell right stronge and puyssaunte. and full of greate beautie, that same Castell was all couerd with laten right clere and shynynge, and for the greate beaute of it Ualentyne thought wel within him selfe yt it was that there as the greane knyghte had sente hym to for to fynde his sister Clerymonde. He wente anone thederwarde and dyscended at one of the portes of the Ile. And whan he was dyscended he enquyred and demaunded who ought that castell that was so faire and so ryche. And it was answered hym that the castell was in the kepinge of the fayre Clerymonde syster vnto the gyaunte Ferragus and that by a ryche sarazyn it was edefyed, the whiche Sarazyn amonge all the excellente thynges that are in that castell made to make ad compose a chambre ryght fayre and ryche, of they whyche chambre the rychesses shal be declared to you afterwarde. And moreouer it was sayde vnto Ualentine that within the same chambre there was a muche rych Piller and excellente, vppon the whiche was a head of brasse that of olde antiquite had bene composed much subtyllye by Nygromancie of a Fare the whiche head was of suche nature that it gaue answer of al thinges that was asked it. And whan Ualentyne vnderstoode the declaracion of the Castell. he was ryghte Ioyous in his hearte, for he thought wel that it was the place yt the grene knyghte hadde tolde hym yt he shoule fynde hyz syster in that was so gretely commended aboue all other of litel and gret for her great beaute. He demauded not ferder forthe for that present time but put him vppon the waye wyth Orson for to goo into that same castel and so muche they haue gone that they are come before the gate for to entre in. but they dyd fynd .x. knyghtes stronge and hardye there that dyd kepe thei gate nyght and daye. And whan they sawe Ualentyne and Orson that wolde haue entred in they sayde to theym. Lordes withdrawe you a backe, for within thys castell entreth no body be he neuer of so hygh a lygnage with out the leue and lycence of a mayden to whome ye garde apperteneth, the whiche aboue all them of ye worlde is garnisshed with beaute. Frende sayde Ualentyne go towarde they mayden and demaud her yf it be her pleasure to gyue me entre in to her castel, Than the porter mounted vpon hye, ad entred into the chambre where as the fayre Clerimonde was. After he set hys knee on the grounde and sayde to her. Lady before the gate of your castell is two men that woulde entre and they seme men of ryght fyers courage and full of grete pryde and it semeth by theyr maners that they are men of euyll courage & dede, and contrary to oure lawe. Nowe tell your wyll and answere to the gardes of thei gate yt hathe sente me towarde you, yf it please you that they shall entre or not, Frend sayde thei mayden dyscende adowne, and I wyll goo vnto a wyndowe for to wytte what men they be, and make thei gates for to be kepte well, for I wyll speake to them. The porter went downe and sayd to his felowes that they gate sholde be wel kepte, tyl that the lady were at the wyndowe for to gyue them theyr answere. Than Clerymonde that was well taught lened vpon a quysshynge of golde at a wyndowe and sayd vnto Ualentyne. What are you that bi so great hardynes wyll entre into my castell withoute demaundynge lycence. Lady sayde Ualentyne that wake hardely, I am a knyght that passethe my waye. So I wolde gladly speke vnto the heed of brasse yf it pleased you that gyueth answere vnto euery body. Knight sayd the lady so maye ye not speke therto, but yf yt you brynge mee certeyne sygnes from one of my bretheren that is from the king Ferragus or from the grene knight that of Tartarye hath the lordshypp and dominacion. And yf that you brynge me from onye of them both tokenne or certificacion I shall lette you entre into the castell at your owne pleasure and wyl. And know that by none other manye ye maye entre into this castel saue alonely by one point that I shal tel you, that is that you take leue of the Seneshall of this place the whiche I shal gyue you by such a condicion that before or you entre you shall Iuste with him fiue or syxe strokes with a spere. Wherfore auyse you whether you loue beter to goo fetche me certayne sygnes of one of mi brederen or doo as I haue tolde you Ladye sayde Ualentine make doo come your Seneshall, for I haue leuer fyght agaynste hym and wynne and deserue to entre into your castell, than I goo by prayers, requestes and flatteringes. Thus spake Ualentyne vnto the fayre Clerymonde yt had hys courage so valyaunt and hardy not withstandyng that he brought from the Grene Knyght certayn sygnes by the ringe of golde, that he loued better for to Iust for to proue his bodye than for to shewe the rynge the whiche he should presente vnto ye fayre Clerymond And whan the Lady sawe the wyll and hardy caurage wherwith he was repleate from that same houre shee was espyred and taken wyth his loue ryght ardauntly at the hart, Thanne incontinente she mounted in too the chambre where as the head of brasse was and said vnto it, what is that knyght that hathe so grete courage for to entre into this castell. Lady sayd the head. Of the knyght nor of his estate shall you knowe nothyng vntyl the tyme that you haue brought him before me for that answere was the fayre Clerimond for the loue of valentyne in grete thoughte. ¶How as Ualentyne was before the castell speakinge to the gardes Clerymonde made her complaynte all alone of valentyne, and howe he Iusted for the entre of the castell and wanne it. When she had consydered by her self ye maintene and the fayre speche and hardines of Ualentyne she was enbraced with his loue more tha of oni other that euer she had sene and sayde Ueray God what maye he be for aboue al lyuynge he is worthy to be loued for he is pleasaunt & streyght, and of beaute corporal passing all other, and yf they heede of brasse do after my wyll I shall neuer take other than hym. whan thei fayre clerymonde had sayd al these thynges and thoughte in her courage, she sente for the Seneshall and tolde hym the tydynges of the knyght that wolde entre into ye castell By my god sayd the Seneshall he dothe procure a grete folye. for he shall not enter without a prouynge of his body agaynste myne And yf he be soo hardy for to take batayll agaste me I shall shewe hym clerelye before all yt for to haue your loue he is comen to late. Seneshall sayd they lady, sythe that ye wyll not gyue hym lycence for to entre in to the castell go and arme you anone for, I let you wyte that you shall haue batayll, of him, and I am in grete doubte that you shall repent you to late wherefore I counsayll you that ye put not youre body in this daunger. Lady sayd the Seneshall that was ryghte proude leue in peas suche wordes, for or euer yt he entre his body shall aby it. At these wordes they Seneshall departed and wente to arme hym and after mouted on horsebacke. And whan he was mouted he yssued out of the gate with a grete spere in his hande well heded, And the lady was at thei wyndowe for to beholde the batayll of the two champyons. Whan Ualentyne sawe they Seneshall come towarde hym with a fyerse courage, he couched his spere and smote his hors with the sporres. Than they encountred the one the other so euen that bothe theyr speres flewe in peces. After thei toke newe speres incontinnente, and met so fyersly to deder that bothe champyons and horses fell vnto they erthe, but anone Ualetynes hors recouered that was fyerse and stronge withoute settynge his maister on ye grounde. And whan the noble knyghte valentyne was rysen vp he sayde vnto the Seneshall moche swetelye, Nowe ryse you vp and mounte vpone your hors all at youre case, for it sholde be lytell honoure vnto me yf I dyd fyght with you thus. The Seneshall was moche Ioyous and praysed gretely the curteysye of Ualentyne, so he mounted on his hors and after toke a spere, ad came agaynst Ualentyne ryght impetuously, But the noble valentine that at that tym coud playe well with a spere gaue hym so grete a stroke that he smote of hys helme frome his heed, and made horse and man fall vnto the erthe. And whan he sawe hym selfe smyten downe and in so greate daunger he sayd vnto Ualentyne, Knyght I cannot tel of whens yau are nor of what coutree, but neuer the dayes of my lyfe founde I a knight that was so valyaunt as you. I wyll yeld me vnto you and shall let you enter into the castel at your owne pleasure the which is soo fayre and soumptuous on suche a condycyo that without my leue you shal not speke vnto the fayre Clerymonde by no manere. By my faythe sayd valentyne you are full of grete folye to saye suche wordes, for specyally for the loue of here haue I passed the see, and ame comen thys waye, and howe well that I neuer sawe her, yet ame I enamoured one here more than on ony other lady. And I lat you wytte yt I shall neuer departe from hens tyll that I haue spoken with her and with ye heed of brasse at my pleasure. Thus as Ualentyne and the Seneshall spake togyther the faire Clerymonde that was at ye wyndowe meruaylled moche of the grociousnes of valentyne. Alas sayde she vnto her maydens that were with her se howe this Seneshall is folyshe for to fyght with so valyaunt a knyghte whiche myghte haue slayne hym longe a goo yf hys gentylnest had not refrayned hym. Doughters by the god almyghty I maruayle me moch what he maye be that hathe so greate desyre for to entere into my stronge and puyssaunt castell. In ryght grete thought was the noble lady Clerymonde, and sayde that she wolde haue ones that knyghte for her loue. For euer the more that she sawe hym the more was her loue fyxed vpon hym. Whan valentyne sawe the grete pryde of the Seneshal and his grete ouer wenynge he smote his hors with the sporres and gaue hym so greate a stroke in the myddes of his body that he smote hym through the liuer ad the longes and felled hym downe deed to the erthe, whereof the gracious lady Cleremonde was ryghte Ioyous. Than she comaunded the porters for to open the gats & that Ualentyne sholde be brought vnto her into here halle prepayred. The porters dyd the commaundemet of the lady Clerymonde, and ledde towarde her the noble valentyne and Orson his brother. And whan the excellente layde Clerymonde sawe Ualentyne she wente agaynst hym & sayde to hym. Knyght well be ye comen for I sawe neuer so valiaunt nor so hardy a knyght entre in to my castell, well shewe you by youre dedes that you are extraught oute of a gentyll bloude. Lady sayd Ualentyne knowe that by the propre name I ame called Ualentyne and ame a poore aduenturer that of my generacyon and lygnage had neuere knowlege and yet I sawe neuer the father by whome I was engendrede, nor the mother that bare me, nor also dyde my felowe yt you se here. for he was nourysshed in a forest lyke a wylde beest, where as I conquered hym with the swerd moche valyauntly. And knowe for a certaynte that he neuer spake noo more than you se hym doo at this tyme, Nowe haue I gone so moche for to haue knowledge of my frendes that I haue passed ye se for to come hether for the loue of your grete beaute. ¶How valentyne shewed they rynge vnto Clerymonde that her broder the grene knyght hadde gyuen hym and how he spake vnto the heed of brasse, whiche tolde hym all his generacion. In sayinge those wordes Ualentyne drew out the rynge that the grene knyghte hadde giuen hym, and in smylynge gaue it vnto the fayre Clerymonde, the whiche incontynent knew it well. And thanne she sayde vnto Ualentine. Knyghte fayre syr yf you hade shewed me that rynge whan you arryued before my Gates, wythoute abydynge onye Iustes or putting your bodye in daunier, at that same houre you should haue entred into my castell with out contradiccion. But you haue shewed the greate noblenes that is in you, whan that by your hardines you haue loued better to enter into my castel ad com toward me than to seke onye other meanes. Soone after that Ualetyne and the fayre Clerimonde had spoken thus togyder the tables were spredde and the Mayden set. And Ualentine was sete before her yt toke none other solace. nor plesure saue alonely to dehold her that was set before him. Alas veray God sayd Ualentine in hys courage please it you to take my hart out of this dolorous dystresse shortly, which and for the loue of this lady so profoundelye wounded at the harte that neuer ye daies of my life I was in such melancoly. Alas god she is so muche garnyshed wyth beaute, and so full of grete bounte, the eyene grene in laughing stedfast the foreheade cleare and polyshed, and the face ruddye. And all the other membres of her body by right measure naturally composed. Now am I soo ardauntly taken with her loue that ye death shuld be more agreable vnto me than for to fayle too perfourme and accomplisshe, this thinge. In thys manner complayned the noble knight Ualentine for the loue of the excellent Clerymonde. ¶And she vppon the other syde in beholdyng him loste both maners and countenaunce. In this grete melancoly the moost honestly that they might kepe theis coutenaunces passed the knyght & the lady the diner. And whan the tables were taken vp Clerymonde toke Ualentyne by the hande and sayde to hym. Frend so moch haue you doone yt you haue deserued for to enter into my secrete chamber, where as you shall se the head of brasse, the whyche of your lygnage shall tell you good and certayne tydynges. Nowe come your waye wyth me and brynge your felow with you, for I haue a gret desyre to heare the answere that shal be gyuen you by the head of brasse. The noble knyght Ualentyne was muche Ioious whan he heard the amerous lady Clerimonde speke so. They yssued out of the halle and wed towarde the chambre wher as the head of brasse was rychelye aourned. And anone as they were at the dore for to haue entred in, they found on the one side a meruayllous, ferefull and a stronge vyllayne ryght greate and croked, that bare a clubbe of yron vpon his necke the which was right heauie, The which villain semed to be rebell and full of great outrage. And on ye other syde of the dore was a lyon right great fierse & proud. These twayne were ordeyned at all ceasones for to defend ad kepe that none should enter into the chambre withoute the ladies leue, and without fightyng with the vyllayne and the lyon. And whan Ualentine apperceiued the villain and the lion that dressed the against theym for to defend the dore. He demaunded the faire Clerymonde what suche thinges signified and would say. Lordes sayd Clerymonde these twaine that you se here are for to kepe the doore & there maye none enter without fightynge with them. wherby dyuers bene deade without passynge ony ferder. And to the regard of the lyon he is of suche a nature that he wil neuer do a kings sone harme nor dommage. Ladi said Ualentine I canne not tell what shal happen, but at auenture I shal put me in the garde of god hauyng confydence to ouer come the lyon. Than he aproched him to ye proud beast and by strength of armes enbraced him about ye body, but also soone as he smelled Ualentines clothes and fleshe he let him goo and was curteis and humble without doynge hym hurte or dommage. And Orson was on the other syde that assaylled the vyllayn ad or euer he myght lyfte vp his clubbe of yron he toke him by the mydle so rudely that he threwe hym agaynste ye walle, and than toke his clubbe from him & gaue hym so great a stroke that he felled hym to ye earth in suche facyon that yf it had not ben the fayre Clerymond he would haue slayne the villayne in the place. And thus was the vyllayne vaynquysshed & the Lyon by ye two knyghtes. After the gaet was opened and they entred in to the chambre that with al rychesse mondain was dressed. For it was painted with fyne golde and azure poudred with in with rubyes and saphyrs, and manye other stones, it was hanged wyth fyne clothe of golde set with dyamondes and grete pearles. In ye chambre was foure pyllers of Iasper meruaylous riche and wt subtyll werke edefyed of whyche the fyrst twayn were yelower then fyne goulde. The thirde more greaner tha the grasse in Maye. The fourth more redder tha a flambinge cole. Betwene these pillers was an amery more richer than I can deuise or say, in the whiche the head of brasse was that gaue answer to eueri bodi set vpon a rich piller right sumptuously aourned & closed valentyne opened the amarye and behelde the heed in coniurynge it for to tell him the trouth of his estate & natyuyte. Than spake the heed so hye and so clere that euery body herde it and sayd to hym. Knyght of great renowne I tell the that thou arte named valentyne ye moost hardy and valyaunt that euer syth the world began entred here in, & art that same to whome the faire Clerymonde hathe ben gyuen, and ought to be, nor neuer shall she haue other than you. Thou arte sone of ye Emperoure of Grece and of ye fayre Bellyssant syster vnto kynge Pepyn, the whiche with wronge hath ben chased out of his Empyre thy moder is in Portyngale in the castell of Ferragus, ye whiche hath kepte her by the space of .xx. yere, the kynge Pepin is thin vncle, ad this felowe that thou ledest with the is thy propre broder naturall. you twayne was childed of the gracious Empresse Bellissant in the forest of Orleaunce, in grete pyte and dolorous distresse. And whan the empresse had put you vpon the erth, thy felowe was borne awaye from her by a beer, and by her hath ben nourysshed in ye wodde without helpe or comforte of ony natural woman. And thou was founde that same daye in the forest be kinge Pepin and borne awaye, the whiche wt out hauynge ony knowledge of the hath swetely nourysshed and brought the vp. And also I the tel that thy broder that is here presente shal neuer speke vnto the tyme that thou make a threde to be cut yt he hathe vnder his tongue. And whan thou shalte haue made it to be cut he shal speke also playnly as ony body. Now thike to do well as thou haste begonne and all good shall happen the, for sith that thou art entred in to this chabre my tyme is past, & than it stouped downe sodaynly & neuer syth was there by it ony worde spoken. Than Ualentyne that was rauysshed for Ioye came to Orson and in wepynge moche tenderle kyssed his mouth And Orson on the other syde enbrased hym and called hym in castynge oute grete syghes anguysshous. Alas sayd Clerymonde to Ualentine Free curteyse knyght I oughte to be ryghte Ioyous of your comyng, for by you I am out of greate thought and melancolye, in ye whiche by the space of ten yere I haue passed my tym languyshynge in doloure, abydynge hym yt I oughte to be giuen to. Now you are he I se it clerely, for bi none other the heed of brasse sholde lese the speche. And syth that it is thus that by your comynge it hath loste the speche. I gyue me and habandone me vnto you as to my parfyte loue, and to hym that by ryghte and reason I ought to be vttred and gyuen. And from hensforth I promyse you and swere to you with herthe, body, and goodes that I shal serue you loially after my lytel puyssaunce & encheue your good pleasure. Lady saide Ualentyne of your good wyll I thanke you hertely, it is well ryght and reason that I loue you aboue al the thynges of the worlde and holde dere, for frome before Acquytayne you were gyuen me by the grene knyght your broder, the whiche by the helpe of me & of my broder Orson was conquered and vaynquysshed, & whan it shal be your pleasure for to take the lawe and the byleue that the greene knyght hathe taken I am contet for to wedde you. That is for to wyte the lawe of Ihesu chryste withoute the which none can haue the Ioye eternall. Syr sayd the mayden suche thynge wyll I do gladly. For with all my courage I am redy and apparaylled to fulfyl your mynde & obeye to your commaudementes more than to ony other lyuinge. On that same daie was demeaned great Ioye throughe al the castell, for they knewe well by the heede of brasse that it was he that sholde haue the fayre Clerymonde. Soo grete was the renowne of the knyght Ualentyn that al they of the countree aboute made grete ioye, but ye grete Ioye of Ualentine & the same Clerymonde was soone torned in to sorowe & dystresse by the false treason of her broder Ferragus as it shal be declared vnto you here afterwarde. ¶How by an enchauntour named Pacolet the giaut Ferragus had tydynges of his syster and of valentyne And of the answer that he gaue Pacolet. In the castell of pleasaunce of the fayre lady Clerimonde was a dwerfe that she had nourysshed from his chyldhode & sette vnto the scole. That same dwerf was called Pacolet He was full of greate wytte and vnderstondynge, the whiche at the scole of tollette had lerned so muche of the arte of Nygromancye that aboue al other he was perfyte, in suche manere that by enchauntemente he had made and composed a lytell hors of wodde, and in the heade there was artyfycyelly a pynne that was in suche wyse set, that euery tyme that he mounted vpo the horse for to goo somwhere, he torned the pynne towarde the place that he wolde go to, and anone he foude him in the place without harme or daunger, for the hors was of suche facyon that he wente throughe the ayre more faster than ony byrde coude flee, That same Pacolet that had ben nourysshed in the castell of Clerimonde, all the daye he behelde and consydered the maners and facions of the noble Ualentin. Than he thoughte that he wolde go in to Portyngale & recount vnto hym the enterpryse of Ualentyne and the maner of his comynge. He wente vnto his horse of wodde & mouted vpon hym, after he torned the pynne towarde Portyngale, and incontynent the hors of wodde mounted into the ayre & so moche he wente that that same nighte he arryued in Portyngale, and to the kynge Ferragus tolde the tydinges. whan Ferragus vnderstode ye speche of Pacolet the enchauntoure he was moche angrye and sorowfull at his harte agaynste Ualentyne ye noble knyghte that sholde haue his syster Clerymonde and also agaynst her bicause she had gyuen her herte & her loue to a chrysten knyght, for ye whiche he was sory And swore by his grete god that he wolde take vengeaunce on him, but before pacolet he shewed not his furoure nor the wyll of his courage, for ye man that thynketh treason holdeth alwayes his mouth secret for to come the better vnto his entencyon. Ryght so did Ferragus that sayd vnto pacolet the enchauntour. Frende retourne vnto my syster Clerymonde and say vnto ye knyght that shall haue her in maryage yt I am ryght gladde of his comynge, and that I shall se hym ryghte shortely accompanyed with my baronage to be at his weddynge. Syr sayde Pacolet I shall do gladly youre message, and than he mouted on his hors & was there in an instaunt. And whan he was before Clerymonde he sayde vnto her. Madame I come from Portyngale and haue sene your broder Ferragus, the which is ryghte Ioyous of the noble Ualentine that shal be your husbande, and knowe that with in shorte tyme he will se you in greate tryumphe to make your maryag. Ha Pacolet sayd the lady I wote neuer what shall hapen but I fere me gretely that my broder thynke not som treason, for I knowe well that he wyll neuer loue noo knyght of Fraunce, nor no man that holdeth the lawe of Ihesu chryste. And on the other syde I am right dyspleasaunte that I knewe not of thy goynge, for thou sholde haue enquyred after a chrysten woman that of longe time hathe ben abidinge with my broder Ferragus wyfe in his castell. ¶How Pacolet retorned in to Portyngale for to seke Bellyssante Ualentynes moder, and how he sawe her in Ferragus castell. Lady sayd Pacolet I shal be sone retorned agayne, & to morowe before my daye I shal brynge you tydenges, By god sayd Ualetine that may you not do without the art of the enemye. Ualentyne sayde Clerymonde let hym werke and do his crafte, for he is so well taughte that he wyll go more than a thousande myle on a daye wha Ualentyne knewe that Pacolet coude suche and arte he meruaylled mouche. Than he called Orsone and cut and toke awaye the threde that was vnder his tongue. And after yt it was out he began for to speke veri ryght and pleasautly, and that same houre recounted vnto them all his lyfe that he hadde ledde in the forest. So they were herkenynge hym the moost parte of the nyght. And on the morowe Pacolet found hymselfe in the halle before Ualentyne and said to hym. Syr I come from Portyngale where as I haue seene your moder that is in good heale. Frende sayd Ualentine thou arte welcome, for it is the thynge that I desyre mooste to here good tidinges of her and se her. Loue sayd Clerymonde take comforte to you, yf my brother comme not hether we shall go into Portyngale and se her ther Ladye saide Pacolet knowe for a certayne that youre brother wyll be here shortlie, for so he did promyse me. Alas sayd the pleasaunt Ladye Clerymonde I am to sore a ferde in my heart that my brother Ferragus do not some thinge where by our ioyous enterpryse maie be torned into harde dyscomfort, for I haue dremed a dreme much meruaylous which putteth me in greete thought and fere. The night whan I shold haue taken my rest I dremed that I was in a great and a meruaylous water profounde, in the which I shoulde haue be drowned if it had not bene a face that drew me out of the water. And than me thought I sawe a Gryffon yssue out of a cloude, the whiche with his nayles sharpe and longe tooke me and bare me soo farre that I wyst not where I was arryued. Ha my laue said Ualentine take no thought for your dreame, for who that wolde byleue in dremes shoulde haue to much to suffre. It is true sayd the fayre lady Clerymonde but I cannot kepe my selfe therfro. At these wordes the lady & Ualentine entred into a fayre arbour that was garnished wt all maner of floures, and therin they were a gret while talkynge of their secreat loue. Nowe it happened that the same day Ferragus the traytour arryued there & whan the ladye knewe that he was comen she went towarde hym for to welcome him. And he sayd to her moche swetely. My syster aboue all worldly creatures I hadde desyre for to se you. Nowe tell me I praye you whiche is the knight that shal wedde you, fayre broder here may you se hym. Than Ualentine approched and salue the one the other with grete reuerence. Knyghte sayd Ferragus ye be welcome in to these quarters for to wedde my syster Clerymonde. For right soo as my broder the grene knyght the whiche hathe sent you hether after that he hadde ben conquered by you did taken the fayth of Ihesu christe, euen so haue I my wyll and synguler desyre to receyue baptim and take your byleue. Syr sayd Ualentyne of your wyl be Iesus thaken, for he for your redemptyon suffred dethe and passyon, without the whiche none can be saued. Alas Ualentyn thought well that the traitoure Ferragus had sayd those wordes by greate deuocyon, but vnder the shadowe of swete and fayre wordes he ymagyned mortall treason. And whan the giaunt Ferragus had said so Ualentyne sayd to hym. Syr it hathe ben tolde and recouted vnto me that within your hous syth the space of twenty yere or there aboute you holde a christen woman the whiche I desyre for to se with all my herte whiche is my moder, and is named Bellyssante, syster vnto the kynge Pepyn, and wyfe vnto the Emperour of Grece. By mahoune sayd Feragus you say trouth but to ye end that you be the better enfourmed of her you shall come into Portyngale and se the lady. And whan you shall haue spoken to her you maye know yf she be suche as you demaunde or not, gramercy sayde Ualentyne, than he lefte hym and sayd vnto hys syster the fayre Clerymonde in maner of good & perfyt loue My syster and mine onely esperaunce, I desyre aboue all thynges your honoure, and auauncemente & ame ryght Ioyous that you haue found so valyaunt a knight to your husbande and spouse and for his great valyauntnesse I wyl that you and he come with me into portyngale, to the ende that with ye greater tryumphe you maye be maryed togyder. ¶Howe Ualentyne and Orson were betrayed by Ferragus, and how he put them in an obscure priso, wher as the made pyteous complayntes. Whan Ferragus had spoken so to his syster Clerimonde, he made his shippes and hys galees to be apparaylled, and his men for to mount vpon the sea. After he sent for Ualentine the whiche was ryght Ioyous for to go in to Portyngale with his loue Clerymonde. For he wend wel that the gyaunt Ferragus led them ouer for to do them honoure, for he had promysed the that he wold be christened ad al thei of his court, wher by Ualentine was betrayed a his brother Orson. For also soone as ye cursed sarazyne was mounted vppone the see, and yt he had Ualentine in his subgectyo wyth in his shippe, he thought that he shoulde neuer escape his hande & without death, but at the entre of ye sea he made him fayre semblaunt, and by false worddes and promyses he made them come with hym, but whan it came toward midnighte that the two knyghtes were gone to reast them, the traitour Ferragus made them to be taken secretely in their beddes and be bouden surely, and made theyr eyen to be bended as a man yt we opely condempned to death by faute crymynell. And whan the fayre Clerymonde sawe her louer Ualentyn taken and bounden, she made so great sorowe that he had a harde harte that wept not. Alas sayd she knyght Ualentine our Ioye and solace is sone torned into dolour and dystresse, you haue bought my loue to deare whan that for my sake you muste suffre death, I wold that I had neuer bene borne for your sake, for in paine and in trauayle you haue conquered me, and in doole and in sorowe I shall be taken frome you to sore is the loue bought whan one muste suffre deathe for louing trewlye wythoute to haue deserued it. Alas alas now ought I wel to syghe withe my herte and tenderly wepe with myn eyen, whan it behoueth that for my loue the moost valyaunt, the moost hardy, and the most noble of the worlde be delyuered vnto shamful deth, ha, Ferragus my fayre broder to euyll do you werke. For of all the worlde you haue betrayed and deceyued the moste valyaunt knyght, and yf it be soo that he muste suffre dethe for me, I shall neuer the dayes of my lyfe haue Ioye at my herte, but ye moost sonest that I may I shall procure my dethe by some waye. And I do you to wytte that yf you put the two knyghtes to deth, ye shall haue ones a villainous reproche, and therfore let them alone. For in purchasyng theyr dethe you can haue no prouffyte. And yf you wyll put them to deth, make me be caste fyrste in to the see, for I wolde not lyue to se suche two valyaunt knightes die before me with out hauinge deserued it. So moche was the lady Clerimonde smyten profoundly at harte wyth sorowe that at that same houre she wolde haue slanne herselfe, or lepte into the see yf she had not ben letted. Tha Ferragus her broder made her to be kepte by his barons, ad comaunded the kepers that thei sholde not let her speke one worde to the prysoners, and so abode Clerimonde in teres and pyteous syghes, and Ualentyne & Orson were bounde ryght faste by the sarazyns and paynyms. They reclaymed god moche deuoutely prainge hym that he wolde delyuer them out of daunger. Alas sayd Ualentine nowe is fortune moche contrary to me and at my dede peruerse and dysloyall. Nowe haue I all my lyfe in payne and trauayll vsed my youthe for to seke and fynde the place that I was extraughte oute of, and the fader and moder that hathe broughte me in to this worlde, and now whan I am all moost at the ende of my doloure, in conuertynge in to Ioye, ad that of my dere moder yt I haue desyred so muche I hoped to haue had tydynges shortly, and certayne knowledge, and in thynking to haue ben assured to perfourme myn enterpryse, but in ye places dysloyall I am vnhappely comen and fallen into the handes of mine enemyes that of my lyfe are enuyous and desyreth my dethe. Alas my fayre broder Orson well is our thoughte and our entencion in a short time chaunged and reuersed for we shall neuer se frendes nor kynnesmen. In this wyse complayned Ualentine & Orson in lykewise and the sarazyns demeaned grete Ioye, and so moche they rowed vpon the see that they arryued in Portyngale at the castell of Ferragus. And also soone as ye empresse Bellyssant herd say that Ferragus had broughte with hym two chrysten men prisoners she lepte out of her chambre for to go se them. Whan she saw valentyne and Orson the whiche she knewe not she demaunded them. Chyldren of what countre be you & in what londe were you borne. Lady sayd valentyn we be of ye countre of Fraunce and borne besyde Parys. Also sone as Ferragus sawe the Empresse Bellissat that spake vnto the chyldren, he sayd vnto her fiersly, lady leue me this language, for I shal make them dye in my pryson with great sorowe but yf the byleue in mahoune, He called the gailer and comaunded him to put ye two prysoners in the moost depest pryson and ye mooste derkeste, & that they sholde haue none other meet nor drinke but brede and water. There was ye cursed sarazins that with grete staues and with theyr fystes smote vppon the two chyldren without hauinge ony pyte more than of dogges, and in a dongeon full of fylthe and ordure cast them and lete them downe. Whan they were in pryson they set them on theyr knees cryenge god mercy, and in praynge hym that he wold forgyue them theyr sinnes, for they neuer wende to haue comen out of that place. And after that Ferragus hadde thus enprysoned Ualentyne and Orson, he mounted vp in to his palais, and made to be brought before him the fayre Clerymonde that wepte so pyteously that with ye teres that yssued out of her eyen all her face was be wepte. My syster said Ferragus leue your wepinge & chauge your courage, for bi mahowne my god you haue to longe byleued ye hed of brasse whan that you wyll wed and take in maryage a straunger and oute of our byleue. To whome haue you your herte varyable and wil of a woman whan you wyll loue him yt hathe shewede himselfe mortal enemie of your brother the grene knyghte, well appertayneth you to haue a man more worthy and of more hygher lygnage. And yf you wyll byleue me and do after my wyll, I shall gyue you to husbade the puyssaunt kinge Tromparte, by the which you maye be at all seasones of highe lyfe and rychly honoured. And therfore forgete the two chrysten Frenshmen and haue no more truste on them, for I shall make the dye and be hanged by the necke. Broder said Clerimode it behoueth me to obeye vnto your comaundemet for one muste forbere and passe lyghtly for the thing yt they maye not haue, the force constrayneth, right hath no vertue, for necessyte maketh oftentymes a man sel good chepe. After these wordes finisshed Ferragus dyde departe, and the quene his wife entred into the hall the whiche in grete honoure and reuerence hath receyued the fayre Clerymonde in sayinge to her. My Sister you be ryght welcome hether, for I hadde righte great desyre for to se you. Lady sayde Clerimonde I thancke you a hondred tymes, but knowe that I am ryghte sorowfull and dyspleasaunte of two christen knightes the whiche my broder Ferragus vnder the vmbre of surenes and loyalte hathe made to passe they sea, and after hathe put them into an obscare pryson vyle and abhomynable, and in greate dispyte hathe sworne their deth yf they forsake not theyr lawe and byleue. Alas my dere syster it is true that I shoulde haue had one of the knightes in marriages, the whiche among al the liuing menne is the mooste fayrest thei mooste valyaunte, and the mooste hardy, and that bi force of armes hathe conquered my loue, wherfore lady I beseche you counsayl me, for I haue grete nede, and also that you shewe me the christen woman the whiche you haue kepte so longe in this castell Fayre sister saide the quene here may you se her. Than spake Bellyssante and sayde. Ladie what is your will speke on hardeli, for I haue grete desiry for to here you speke. Alas lady I brynge you tidyngs that wyll make you gladde and after sorowfull and, dysplesaunt. Knowe for a certainte that of your estate and of your lyfe I knowe the veray trouth, for ye be syster vnto kinge Pepin, and wyfe vnto thei Emperoure of grece, they whiche with wronge and againste righte hathe banysshed you oute of his Empyre and soone after you were deliuered of two fayre sonnes in a forest, where of the one was taken away from you by a wylde bere, and the other was loste you cannot tell howe. Now is your chyldren yet on lyue, and I knowe they place where as you may fynde theym. At these wordes the quene Bellyssante fell vnto the earthe in a sowne for ioye and pyte that she hadde, and Clerymonde toke her vp muche swetely betwene her armes. And when she was rysen vp, she demaunded thei mayden how she myght knowe suche thinges, Then Clerymonde recounted vnto her the feate and the maner how Ferragus her brother by false and cursed treason had put them in pryson. And when the Empresse Bellissat vnderstode that her two chyldren was in pryson demaude not if she made great sorowe, for she begane to wepe so pyteously that Ferragus wyfe entred into thei hall and demaunded wherefore she made so great sorowe, and they fayre lady Clerymonde tolde her from poynte to poynt the cause and reason. nowe sayde the wyfe of Ferragus appease you and make not of this thinge no semblaunte, for if they kynge Ferragus knew it paraduenture the king shuld rather enpayre then amende. ¶Howe Pacolet coforted thei two ladies. Ryght so as they thre ladies spake of this mater Pacolet entred into they chambre, that was come on hys horse of wodde. And when Clerymonde sawe hym she sayde vnto hime pyteously wypynge. Alas Pacolet what haue I doone vnto the that thou seperate me frome all my ioye, and betraye, me for thou myght haue aduertised me of the euill wyll of my brother Ferragus, well tolde me my harte that I should haue sorow bi the when thou went so soone into Portingale withoute my lycence for to beare hym tydynges. Lady sayde Pacolet be not so angry agaynste me, for by they God of whome I beleue I knewe not thei treason of your brother Ferragus, but sythe that he hathe wylled for to worke treason, I promyse you by my lawe that I shall finde a remedy, and auenge you ryght shortely. And here I swere vnto you that I shall serue Ualentyne and you truely also longe as I lyue. Frende sayde Bellyssant if thou maiest do so muche as to delyuer my two chyldren out of prison. I shall neuer fayle the whyles that I lyue. Ladye sayde Pacolet be ioyous and take comforte vnto you, for or that it be longe I shall worke so craftelye and soo subtylly withe myne arte that of my persone you shall bee ryght well contente and pleased. ¶Howe Pacolet by his arte deliuered Ualentyne and Orsone out of kynge Ferragus preyson and cnduited them oute of his countrey with their mother and thee fayre Cleremonde. By the enchauntour Pacolet they fayre clerymonde and thei Empresse Bellyssante were recomforted of their great sorow, and made great diligence, whyles that thei kynge Ferragus and his barons, daunced and made greate chere and when they had trauayled sore they wente to bedde and slepte. Pacolet slepte not, but was ryght dylygent aboute his geree for to playe his crafte with. And then he came to a greate towre whereof they gates were of fyne stele great and thycke and surely locked, But also soone as he hade casten his sorte they gates opened, and the lockes broke, then he entred vntyll he came to they doore of they pryson that thei children were in, and also soone as he touched the dore it opened and brake as the other gate dydde. When the two chyldren that were in ye darke pyt hard thee doore open, withe ioyned handes, deuoutly they kneled downe to the earth and cryed god mercye, for they wende well that they Gyaunte Ferragus hadde sente for them to make them die. Ualentine bygan for to wepe tenderly, and Orson sayde to hym Take in you comforte and pacience for it behoueth vs to die and finishe our daies I se it clereli, but sith that it is soo that I see none other remedye, I thynke for to venge me or I dye on hym that setteth fyrst handes on me. Than Orson toke vp a gret barre that laye besyde hym. And when Pacolet aduised theym he sayde vnto them thus Lordes for me haue no doubte, for I am come hether for youre delyueraunce. Come lyghtly after me for or the daye be cleare I shal shew you the mother that bare you. Ualentyne was muche ioyous when he harde Pacolet speake soo, but Orson that behelde him fyersly would not truste therin. ¶And when Pacolet sawe Orson beholde hym so fyersly he withdrewe hym abacke for great feare that he had but Ualentene recoforted hym muche swetele, and assured hym of his brother Orson. Then Pacolet ledde them and conduyted them vnto the chambre where as the sorowfull ladyes were wepyng, They dores were locked but he coulde open them wel. After they entred into the house where as Pacolet threwe so his charme that he made al them of the place to slepe so strongly that they knew nothing of their mouyng. And when they were entred in to the chambre where as the twoo sorowefull ladyes was, they went towarde their mother that myght not spake one worde but fell vnto the earth in a swowne, and the fayre Clerymonde sayde vnto Ualentyne pyteouslye. Alas knyght it is your mother that for the loue of you is fallen in a swowne. Then Ualentyne embraced here and toke her vp, and Orsone colled her betwene his armes in saying to her. Swete mother alas speake vnto me, and then kyssede her whiche myght speake neuer a worde, and they were all thre soo profoundly smyten to the harte wt pyte that they fel vnto ye earth in a swown and lay there a great whyle. For their pyte Clerymond wept full bytterly. And when the lady Bellyssant and the chyldren were rysen their mother said vnto them al wepyng. Alas my childre for your sakes I haue suffred and endured more greater payne & anguyshe then euer poore woman suffred. And of all my lamentacions you were the cause, but sythe that God of hys diuine grace and puyssaunce hath saued you in suche maner yt once in my lyfe I may se you betwene myne armes, of all mi dolours I am recomforted. But tell me and declare me howe and by what manner sythe the tyme that I chylded you, you haue been norysshed and gouerned, & in what country, and with what men you haue ben retayned. For I haue right great desire to know ye truthe. Then Ualentyne beholdyng his mother ryght pyteously tolde and recounted vnto her the truthe of their deades and gouernyng and howe they were founde in the forest in declareng her the fortunes and peryllous aduentures that they had ben in al the tyme of theyre lyues vnto that present houre. ¶And when Ualentine had finished his wordes the Empresse Bellissate that knowe clerelye that they were her propre children was with a naturall loue so asperly taken that wyth greter haboundaunce of teres than before she wold haue fallen in a sowne. Then Pacolet that was in the chambre sayd vnto her in this maner. Lady leue this wepynge, and thynke for to departe from this place, for it is tyme that we go oute of Portingale, yf you wyll be delyuered out of the subieccion of kinge Ferragus. Alas sayd Clerymonde my loue Ualentyne wel oughte you to remembre the othe ad promise that you haue made me. Hold your couenant ad take me vnto wyfe as you haue promysed me. Lady sayd Ualentyne of my loyalte haue noo doubte, for that whiche I haue promysed you with good hart I wyl truely kepe, but for thys present tyme the naturall loue of my moder toucheth me, more at the harte that I haue soughte so longe than all the other pleasures of the world, Not for that my loue doubte you not, for I truste neuer nor haue no volente to haue other than you to wife, and spouse. Upon these wordes came Orson & said vnto Pacolet that he shold go and open Farragus chambre doore, and that withe his handes he wolde sle hym. Orsen sayde Pacolet com wyth me, for I shall open at youre owne pleasure. Lordes sayde Clerymonde leue that enterpryse, for I wyll neuer consent vnto his death. And I let you wyt if you sle him you shal lese the loue of mi broder the grene knight, the whiche may healpe you in dyuers thinges. By my fayth sayde Ualentine you saye the veraye trouthe and you haue spoken more wiselier than we haue don for of the dethe of your broder you ought not to be culpable At that houre they departed out of the cyte, and Pacolet wente before that opened them the gates. So they folowed hym tyll that they came too a porte of the see and there entred into a galee that Pacolette hadde made redy for them. They had wynde at wyll and saylled so longe that they arryued at Clerymondes castell Whereas they toke lande for to refreshe them. ¶How Ualentyne and Orson concluded for to depart out of the castel for fere of Ferragus, and how they and the Ladies sayled into Acquitaine. Also soone as they hadde taken londe, they wente vnto the stronge Castel, but Ualentyne that euer hadde feare of Ferragus soiourned not long ther but retourned vnto the port and badde the maryners to stuffe, theyr galey with vitaylles and artyllerye, and that thei shold be redy to depart whan he called vpon them. And than he retorned vnto the castel without makinge ony semblaut. After he sayde vnto his moder Bellissant ad to thei lady Clerimonde that they wyll goo into Grece towarde Constantinoble, for to se his father Themperour Alexander that wyth wronge and agaynste righte had expulsed hys mother from him. To his will obeyed the ladies & also Orson and Pacolet. Than they mounted on thei sea for to perfourme their vyage They daye was cleare, and the hour approched that the Gayles of kynge Ferragus was accustomed for to go se his prysoners He wente toward the great toure and bare bread and water with him for to giue them to eate, Whan he was at the gates of the prysone that were all open, hee sawe well that the prisoners were gone. Than he retorned hastely towarde kynge Ferragus and sayde to hym in greate feare. Syr I aske you mercy, for this night I haue lost thei two christen knightes prisoners that you had gyuen me to kepe. In sayinge these wordes there aryued another messenger that sayd all on hye before al the assistentes. Puissaunte kynge Ferragus to great a mischefe is hapned to night in this place, for you haue lost they christen woman that you haue kepte so longe and holden so dere. And that wors is she leadeth wythe her youre fayre syster Clerymonde that you loued soo whan Ferragus vnderstode these tidynges as all enraged he began for to crye and rente hys cloothes furyousli, and in great Ire made his men to arme them and yssue out of the gates. Tha he toke a clubbe that was greate and heauy, and before theym yssued out of the gates without a horse, for he was soo great and so heuy that with payne myght he fynde ony hors that woulde beare him. He hade a great head & blacke hear, styffe as wylde hogges brystylles and hys armes greate and boned, and the shoulders large, of legges and of bodye he bare the stature of thyrten fote of length. Wha he was oute of the towne he called hys men for to accompanie hym, and put hym on the waye for to fynde theym that ledde awaye his syster, and hee demaunded tydynges of all them that he mette by the waye, but none coud not tell hym nothinge, for Pacolet coude playe so wel with hys arte whan he wolde, that where someuer he passed he made his folkes to slepe. And whan Ferragus sawe that he might haue no tidinges, he swore mahoun that he would assiedge Clerimondes Castel for he wend wel to haue founde them there. Than he made suche dylygence that on the morowe he was at the stronge castell but there he found them not for they were departed or he came. Whan he vnderstoode that they were depated fro that place, he swore by al hys goddes that he wolde fynde Clerymonde and all her company, or christendom should haue much to suffre. ¶How the kyng Ferragus for to haue vengeaunce on Ualentyne and on hys syster Clerimonde made assemble hys hoost, and howe he dyscended in Aquytayne. Whan Ferragus thei gyaunte sawe that he might not find Ualentine and Orson thei whiche had taken hys syster and their moder from him, and ledde oute of hys londe he swore and promysed hys gods that he wolde take vengeaunce on thei christen men. ¶And for thys cause he sente through all hys realme that all they that were holde to do hym obeisaunce withoute soiournynge or delaye should come vnto hym and appeare before hym for to mounte vpon the sea and goo agaynste the christen men for to take vengeaunce vpo Ualetine The crye was made anone throughe al the lond of Ferragus, and by hys heraudes & messengers were assembled grete multitude of men of armes, which made a huge hoost. They mounted vppon the see and set ye sailles in the wynde that was ryghe good to them, And as they were mounted vppon the see, the kyng Ferragus comaunded they marryners yt they shold drawe towarde the cyte of Acquitayne, for he thought well to fynde in that place them that he was departed for And so the patrons dyde and they exployted so muche that they aryued in the countrey of Acquitayne. ¶Ualentyne & Orson that were vpon thei see as you haue herd etred into the cyte of Acquitayne and withoute makynge ony mencion of they estate vnto onye persone as straunge men lodged them with a burgeys, and Ualentyne wolde haue gone gladly into they duke Sauaryes palays, but Orson aduysed hym of a greate subtylyte sayd vnto his broder Ualentyne in this maner of wyse Broder I haue aduysed me in thynkynge, by my selfe, that the nature and wyll of Women is varyable and lightely chauged, and for thys cause I am delibered that no mencyon shall be made of oure cominge vnto the tyme that I maye knowe by some euydente sygne of the fayre Fezone that reclamed me soo muche her dere louer yf she haue chaunged her courage. Broder sayd valentyne it shall be but well done, and yf you can do it, it shall be subtylly wrought. Than Orson clothed him in the habyte of a knyght that sought aduentures, and toke the lytell Pocolet for his squyer, Than he wente towarde the palays and entred into the hall of they duke of Acquitayne by the lycence of they gardes. Whan he was before hym he salued hym and made hym reuerece suche as appertayned vnto hym, for to do suche a thinge he was wyse and well lerned. And whan he had salued him the duke behelde hym moche, and well hym thought he was Orson, but bicause he spake he knewe him not, and studied no more, but sayde to him knyght tell me what bryngeth you hether. Fre duke sayde Orson I am a knyght aduenturous that gladly wolde finde maner to aduenture me for to do good and loyall seruyce with my body, knyght sayde the duke you be gret and fayre, and me thynketh you sholde be valyaute and hardi in armes. And therfore yf you wyl serue me I shall gyue you suche wages that you shall be contente and you may do so muche to my wyl and pleasure that or you departe from me I shal make you the rychest of your kynne. Gramercy sayde Orson I shall deserue it, an shall do so muche that you maye knowe thei loyalte of me and my poore puyssaunce. Knyght sayd the duke I reteyne you of my courte, and for the grete trust that I haue in your seruyce a hondred pounde Parasii or ye serue me ony ferder I shall make to delyuer you. Soo moche was Orson wyse and well taughte in maners & countenaunce, that for his prudence and mayntayn he retayned hym in hys palays and made hym dyne withe his knightes. And whan he was at ye table his maners and countenaunce, was so pleasaunte and agreable to euery body, that of they barons and knyghtes he was moche beholden. And aboue all thynges of ladyes and damoyselles he was aduysed, There was the fayre Fezonne that was his sworne wyfe, ye whyche was in grete melancolye for his grete beaute, but she wold neuer haue wende that it had ben Orson for his habyte & language. In this maner dined Orson in ye dukes court And whan it came after dyner they duke called his tresorer & mode to be delyuered vnto hem a hondred poun parasii as he hadde promysed hym. And Orson toke leue of him for that tyme in thankynge hym for his noble largesse, in promisinge him his fayethe that he wolde serue him truely in his necessitie. And than he retorned vnto the lodgynge where as thei noble ladyes were that abode hym. And whan he was comen vnto them he tolde, them and recounted vnto them how the duke in grete honoure hadde reteyned hym for a soudyoure. at his wages, whereat they laughed moche and made grete Ioye. Now it happened that same weke that the duke of Acquytayne had certayne tydinges of ye kynge Ferragus that was dyscended for to make hem warre He sent for all his subiectes, barons and knyghtes byddynge theym come to socoure hym in redy harneys for, to abyde batayll yf nede were. Syth he made they cite to be vitayled aboundauntely bothe withe flesshe and whete for to defende his countree & kepe the cyte of Acquitaine againste the kinge Ferragus they whiche in that same weke set his siiege before Acquitain, in thei propre place where as his broder the grene knighte had pighte his pauilion whan he was vanquished by Orson. Grete and large maruaylouslie was the siege of the painims and sarazins and thei dide righte greate dommage in the countree of Acquitaine at theire arriuayl And kepte they countre in greate subieccion where as they had dominacion, and thei thoughte well for to haue conquered all thei countree, and haue distroied all the christen men But the noble duke of arquitain that was muche hardi & valiaunte made anone to arme his men, and in great and notable compani of barons and knyghtes yssued oute of the cyte of Acquitain for to fyghte agaynste the paynyms and reyse vp theyre syege, & amongest ye other Ualentyn and Orson and thei lytel Pacolet without makynge greate noyse or knowledge to ony body put themselfe amongest the host of Acquitayne, Nowe there was that same day of the cyte of acquytayne diuers noble knightes on the felde in armes for to fyght agaynste kynge Ferragus. ¶Howe the duke of Acquetayne was taken in the batyll by Ferragus and How Orson delyuered hym by the ayde of Pacolet. Whan the good duke of Acquitayne sawe ye hooste of the sarazins that was moche grete ad large he recomaunded hym vnto god with al his his herte, prainge him to be his defender that day, After he made to ordeyne his bataylles and blowe trompettes and Claryons, and ranne vppon the sarazynes couragyously, the whyche stalked agaynste them in grete pryde. On that daye was before Acquytayne a moche pyteous batayll, and there dyed valyante knyghtes and mene of eche estate, so many that the bloode ranne in the felde lyke a lytell ryuer. The gyaunt Ferragus entred into the batail also nere his neuewe Dromadyane that bare hys banere as he myght, aboute hym was grete puyssaunce of sarazyns for to defende hym that smote vpon the christen men so impetuously that at that same houre they slew syxe valyaunt knyghtes, that is to wite. Baudumain Bondry. Wyllyam. Galeram. Anthony the good marshall, and the hardy Gloryam the whiche were all nexte the good duke of Acquytayne. The christen men wer so asprely assaylled of the cursed sarazyns that they were constrayned to recole abacke. And the good duke of Acquytayne was enclosed with hys enemyes that abode all alone without any helpe or socoure, the whiche dyde suche feates of rmes that none durste abyde before hi he cryed Acquytayne agaynste the cursed and false sarazyns, but nothynge auaylled hys prowesse, for also sone as kynge Ferragus aspyed hym and knewe hyme he wente towarde him and toke him & ledde him awaye And whan he hade bounde hym surely he made hym be ledde to his pauylyon, the whyche was moche rych and pleasaunt. Than Ferragus retorned into the batayll. vpon the chrystians, but the Iournay was so euyll for the christen men that for the losse of theyr good maister they wolde all haue taken the flight. Than Ualentine and Orson came before them in cryinge to them right hyghe. Ualyaunt knyghtes of Acquytayne shewe your chyualry, for and you faylled at this nede it shuld be a greate reproche to you, haue a hardy courage and a good heart and God shall helpe you. Thus recomforted the two knights the people of Acquitaine that for feare hade almoost fledde, in suche manner that they retorned vpon the sarasins agayn, and began the batayl more stronger than before. The tydinges was befoore Acquytayne of the duke that was taken prysoner, and bothe litell and great wepte for his taking, but aboue all other dolorus was incomparable and piteous the complaynt of the fayre Fezonne that in wryngyng her handes, and pullynge her heer more bryghter than golde wyre sayinge in syghinge with hearte, and wepynge tenderly with her eyen. Alas poore sorowful what is happened the, now thou art the most vnfortuned that is vpon the erth. Alas my dere father nowe muste you dye, for from the handes of the false sarazyns you can neuer departe nor escape. I bydde you fare well my ryght swete father, for I shall neuer se you. I shall abyde here vnpuruayed as a poore Orphelin ferre frome all pleasaunce, nere discomfort bitter and dolorous. Alas Orson my good louer your longe abydinge ought wel to noye me at the herte, For yf you were here present, ye wold delyuer my father that is so sorowfull. ¶And in this maner weapte and lamented the fayre and pleaseunt Fezonne. And the chrysten me & sarazins fought vpon the feld much impetuously one against another The battayle endured so longe, that with dead & with wounded al the earth was couered. There was the noble and valiaunte Knyght Ualentyne, that with hys sharpe sworde made such gret occision of sarazins that ther was non so hardy that durst bide before him. And Orson was on the other side that swore by god and his sayntes that he shulde finish his dayes in the battayle or he wold do fatch the duke of Acquitayne with in the tent of the gyaunt Ferragus. Pacolet was beside him that gaue him good confort and promised him socour, answeryng by his god that he woulde not fayle him at his nede. Then Orson smote his horse with the spurrs and entred into the battell so fearsly, that or euer he rested, he broke the battell and passed forthe. And when Orson and pacolet were passed the battell thei hurled their shieldes doune, and hanged at their neckes sarazins shieldes wherin the ymage of mahomet was painted, and after they went to the pauilion of the Gyant, Ferragus without that anye sayde the contrary, for pacolet could speake their language right well. Then entred into the tentes for to haue the good duke again But whan Pocolet sawe that there was too many sarazyns that kepte hym, he wente and played with his charmes so well and so subtelly that he made them all lye downe and sleape. And when they were all asleape Orson came vnto the duke of Acquitayn and sayd vnto him: Fre duke come with me and mount vpon this horse without any tariyng, for from the handes of Ferragus I shal deliuer you. I am the knight that in your halle asked you wages the daye that you gaue me a .C. pound haue no fere of the panyms, for without daunger I shall leade you into your hoost. Knyght sayde the duke you be right welcome that casteth me out of seruage & deliuereth me from my mortall enemyes, & for the good seruice that you haue done to me to daye, for rewarde & guerdon I shall geue you my daughter the fayre Fezonne in mariage. I hadd geuen her not longe a go vnto a knyght that was moche wylde and coulde speake no language: but syth that he is note comen agayne towarde me, his longe abidyng shall beare hym dommage. I geue you my daughter, for you haue well wonne her, & you shall haue with her in mariage halfe the coutrey of Aquitayne. Gramercy sayd the knyght suche a gifte is not to be refused, but thynke we for to make diligence for to escape oute of this place, and retorne vnto your hoost. Then the thre champions, both the duke of Acquitayne, Orson, and Pacolet toke the armes of sarazyns and passed on their waye withoute contradiction of any bodye, for to go vnto the christen hooste. ¶Duryng the same tyme that Orson wente towarde the duke of Acquitayne, Ualentine that was in the battell demauded diuers where his brother Orson was. But none could tell tidynges nor knowledge of hym, wherfore Ualentyne was right sorowfull and angry at his hert, for he wende that he had ben slayne in the battell. wherfore he made many piteous cryes saiynge: A;as nowe am I vsurped by bytter fortune on all sydes, and all my Ioyes are well chaunged in to sorowe and distresse, when I haue loste my pryncypall frende the floure of al my comforte, and the hope of al my lyfe. Alas my fayre broder Orson now haue I loste you by the false sarazyns, for I knowe wel that your valyauntes and hardynes is cause of your death shortynge. For I knowe so moche by you, that you wyll rather dye valyauntly, than lyue in reproche and shame, Alas valyaunt brother Orson in vayne and in trauayl I conqeured you in the wodde and sythe I haue kepte you in peryll and in daunger. And nowe whan I purposed and thought to haue solace and mirthe of you ye be separed and gone from me but sith that it is so that I cane haue no tydynges of you in no maner of wyse. I swere and promyse to god that I shall knowe shorelye where you are, and fynde youe qucke or deed, or youre loue shall because of my dethe anon. At these dolorous wordes entred the noble knyght Ualentyne in to ye batayl, and as a man dyscomforted and charged with malancoly, helde his swerde of fyne stele in his hande, and shewed suche knyght hode with his bodye that or euer he rested ony where slewe syxe or seuen paynymes deed to the erthe, and in doynge thys prowesse the gyaunte Ferragus knewe hym and wente towarde Ualentyne and kepte hym soo nere that he constrayned hym insuche wyse that he bare hym away before euery body, for his hors was deed vnder hym. Ferragus the gyaunte made to bynde Ualentyne straytly, & swore all his goddes that he wolde take vengeaunce, but he dyde not al his wyll, for ryght so as he bare him throughe the felde Orson Pacolet and the duke Sauari recountred him Than sayd the valyaunte duke, for god se yonder false paynym that wolde put our lawe and our men to dystructyon he bereth with him on of our knyghtes straitly bounden. By god sayd Orson yf we be valyaunt he ought not to escape vs. Than he smote his hors with ye sporres and ranne towarde the paynime, to whome he gaue so greue a stroke with his spere that he and valentyne fell to the erthe. The gyaunte arose vpon his fete and lefte valentyne that for great fere began for to fle And Orson cryed vnto him broder retorne againe and haue no doubte. Thanne Ualetine retorned towarde hym the whiche conquered him a hors & mounted him vpon hym. And Pacolet that was amongest the hooste of the sarazyns cryed ryght hyghe, Portyngale the more. And in makynge that crye he passed the batayl and came vnto the hoost of ye christen men. And so they wer delyuered all out of the hades of theyr enemyes. And whan the christen men sawe that the duke was delyuered theyr courages grewe and theyr force doubled, ad they were so Ioyouz that they cryed al with one voyce lyue Acuytayne. And in makynge that noyse they ranne vpon the sarazyns by suche a vygoure and force that they giaut Ferragus after that he had lost many of his men by force of armes wos constrayned for too flee and with drawe hym, and to reyse his syege ad drawe abacke. They made to sowne trompettes and Clarons and the men of armes retorned in to Acquytaine for to refresshe them and rest them. In that same daye that the christen men and the sarazyns fought togyder there was so grete slaughter that for to nombre ye bodyes it sholde be a piteous thinge. At the retorning from the batayll Ualentyne & Pacolet retorned vnto theyr lodges, and Orson wente in to the palays withe the duke Sauary and the other barons and knyghtes whan the duke of Acquytayne was retorned in to his palays, he sente for all the lordes and knyghtes of hys courte and his doughter ye fayre Fezonne, Syth he called Orson and asked him what was his name. And Orson was subtyll & sayd syr I am called Rycharde, than the duke of Acquytayne sayd before them all. Fordes knowe for a trouthe that aboue all thynges I am beholden, and wyl that honoure be doone vnto this same knight here in presence, for be him I am retourned into Acquytayne, and haue ben deliuered from my aduersary and mortall enemy. And you my doughter it is my wyl and desyre that you haue in mariage this same valiaunt knyght, for aboue all other I holde hym and may holde him the most valiaunte and excellent. And for the great prowesse that he hathe shewed towardes me, I haue promysed hym in guardone and rewarde, your gentle bodye, and that by lawe of mariage you shall be wedded vnto hym. Well ought you for to haue hym when he hathe loued your father so moch that he hathe saued hys lyfe. ¶To the opinion of the duke was consentyng all the barons and noble knyghtes of the courte, & sayd by a comen accorde that the knyght was well worthye to haue the fayre ladye in mariage that hadd doone so great prowesse for her fathers sake. But Orson that was in presence woulde not declare vppon that deede hys opinion vntyll the tyme that he hadd assayed the courage and the wyll of the fayre Fezonne, euen so as he had enterprised before, and tolde his brother Ualentyne. ¶How Orson wolde assay the wyll and loyalte of the fayre Fezonne er that he weaded her. Orson was wyse and subtyll or that he wedded the fayre Fezonne: for he wolde knowe and assaye if she were for to kepe her fayth stedfast and loyall, for oftentymes he had hearde say that women were of suche a nature that for a lytle thynge they chaunged their thoughtes and promises, and broke them falsly, but howe well that diuers of them ben of suche a nature, for al yt the vices of the shrewed ought not to be taken nor aleged for to corrupte the loyalte of the goodons, for amongest a bushe of thornes is oftentymes founde a florished rose. And also amonge a great sorte of euyll women may well be founden one good one, and happe be Euen so as Fezonne was the whiche Orson found loyal, for he sayd vnto the duke in this maner for to assaye her. Syr for the honoure that you do me I am bouden for to thake you, but to ye regarde of your doughter I woulde well knowe her wyll, for it apperteyneth her well to haue a man of more hygher estate than I. And therfore before that I take her I wyl speke to her for to knowe her wyll and courage. For mariage done agaynst the wyll cometh not lyghtly vnto perfeccyon, Knyghte sayde the duke of Acquitaine you haue good reason, and I accorde it you. Nowe go into her chambre ad speke with her, to the ende that you be the better enfourmed of her case. At these words he entred in to the chambre of the fayre Fezonne and sat hym downe besyde her. And syth he toke her by the hand & sayde vnto her much swetely. Lady the grete beaute of you hath taken me so sore in loue that withoute you I can haue none alegemente. Nowe thanked be god wha it hathe pleased him to doo me suche grace that for wyfe you be gyuen me, for I may wel vaunte me that of all other I haue the fayrest loue. And sith that it pleaseth the good duke your fader that you haue me for husbade, ye ought well by reasone to be contente, for I shall serue you and holde you parfyte loyalte duryng al the tyme of my lyfe. Wherfore I praye you ryghte dere ladi yt for to haue more remembraunce the one vpon the other ye wyll enbrace me and kisse me at this presente time, and refuse not my louynge requeste I praye you For syth that for the tyme to come we muste be assembled you ought not to refuse me to do my wyl. Knight answered the lady that was wel taught for to demaude suche thynges you ought to refrayne you, for you lese your payne. I loue all knyghtes and men of good dedes in al goodnes ad honoure, but aboue al other I loue one and hym wil I loue and kepe faith & loyealte as I haue sworne vnto hym, nor neuer for other wil I chauge him nor forget him. Lady said Orson it ought by reason to please you whan it pleaseth your father. Syr sayde the mayden. It is well reason that I obeye vnto my lorde my father, but if it happen that he constrayne me vnto suche a thyng, and that he would gyue me vnto other then hym that conquered the grene knyght. I shall rather departe from hym without beryng any thyng with me saue my fayth. By God lady sayde Orson I maruayl me muche how you be so sore enamoured on that knyght, for you knowe that he is of a wylde nature, and that he cannot speake nor saye one worde wherby he myght reioyce you and tell you his wil. Syr sayd the lady true loue learneth me to loue him naturally. For it is sayd comonli that ye thyng that pleased one is halfe solde. wherfore fre knyght in me haue no more trust, for neuer in my life wil I chauge hym that I haue promysed my faith to. Orson was muche ioyous of the wysdome of Fezonne that gaue him such an aunswere, not for that he made semblaut that he was ill content, and departed out of the chambre without takyng leue of her, & wente towarde the duke and sayd to hym. Free duke knowe that I come from speaking with your doughter, but she hath geue me for a fynall aunswere, that neuer in her lyfe for no ma that speaketh she wyl haue other vnto her husbad than him that conquered ye grene knight. Knight sayd the duke of her aunswere care you not, for in her lieth not to do her wyll, be a lytell pacient and anoye you of nothynge, for to daye I shall speke with my Doughter more forder in this mater. Gramercye sayde Orson I am beholden vnto you. Than Orson yssued out of the palays and went vnto the lodginge of his brother Ualentyne, to whome he tolde and recounted the answer that had ben giuen hym by the fayre Fezonne. Broder you haue wrought well, and thys ought to suffise you for you may wel know the great loyalte and loue that she loueth you with. But I wyll that you and I go toward the palays to gither, for al so sone as ye duke shall se me I am certayne that we shall be ryght well reecyued. Syr sayd Orson your wyl bee done. Than Ualentyne arayed hym in precyous clothes, and Orson toke the iaseran that he had fyrst whon he came into Acquitayne, and so he went vnto the palais with ye litel Pacolet that in al thinges folowed them. They entred in to the hal in the which ye duke of Acquitaine was speking to his doughter before diuers barons and noble knyghtes. ¶Doughter saide the Duke of Acquitaine fro whence cometh to you this courage that you wyll not accomplysshe my wyll, and take my maryage this noble knyght that I woulde gyue you, in whome is so muche prowesse and renowme, for by the valyautnes of hym I haue bene delyuered and my lyfe saued. Alas father sayd the maiden wherfore speke you to me therof, for you knowe well that I haue gyuen my faith vnto him that deliuered you from the gren knight. Now there is not a greter reproch to a lyuing creature tha to fals his fayth and breke his oth. And if it hapen that I be constrayned to suche a thynge by you, you shal be the cause to put my soule in daunger, whych shall be a reproche to you before god and the worlde. And as the duke of Acquitayne spake so to his Doughter se sawe Ualentyne and Orson comminge, whiche he receiued in grete honour and enbraced them. And whan Orson had salued the duke he wend toward the fayre Fezonne that for great Ioy began for to smyle. Alas sayd she you be hertely welcome, for your longe abydinge hath greued me sore. And if you had not commen mi father wold haue maryed me vnto an other knight than you that for to haue me hath taken much great payne. ad much wel he resembleth you of nose and mouthe. My loue sith that I was here I haue learned to speke and am the same yt prayed you of loue to day in your chambre. Than was the lady so Ioious that I canne not recount it, and Orson entred into a chambre and chaunged that habite & put on right precious robes that he hade made the litle Pacolet brynge with hym, and after entred into the hall. And whan the Duke aduysed him he went and enbraced him swetele and said to him Faire sonne pardon me of that I wold haue geuen my doughter to a nother than you. For I wende well that you woulde newer haue retorned. Syr sayd Orson wt good hert I pardon you. Than the Duke demaunded them how they had done syth theyr departinge. And orson recounted before them all the fortune and auenture that they had ben in, and how they were sonnes to ye Emperoue of Constantynoble named Alexander, and of kynge Pepins sister named Bellessant, the whyche they had founden in Portyngal. whan the duke of Acquitaine vnderstode that the two valyaunte knyghts were of so hye a bloude extraught he had so great Ioy at his heart yt tel it I cannot. Than he sayde knightes you be worthy for to haue great honoure & reuerence whan of al the christiens you are the noblest extraught and dyscended. But of one thinge I am sorowfull and despleasaunte that is of your fader the Emperour of Grece, and of your vncle the kynge Pepin that are assyeged in Constatinoble by the painims and sarazyns and theyr warre hath endured so long that if god helpe them not shortly with socoure they muste yeald them vnto theyr enmies, whiche is a thinge muche piteous Whan Ualentine hearde that his fader and his vncle were in dauger he made such dole that none might appease hym and complained more his vncle Kynge Pepin than his fader. Than Pacolet said vnto hym. Sir, leaue this sorowe, for yf you wyll beleue me I shall set you or to morowe at night within Constantynoble, by God sayd Ualentine he is folyshe that byleueth the or the deuyl must bere the. Syr sayd Pacolet yf you wyl mounte vpon my horse and do that whiche I shall tell you, we shall be in Grece or the day fayl. Pacolet saide Ualentine I accord me vnto thy sayinges, for I desire nothynge soo muche as to see my father that I neuer sawe. At that houre the knyght Ualentine was delbered for to departe on the morowe to go vnto Constantynoble, and for the loue of his departinge the duke of Acquytayne made fyrst Orson to be wedded vnto his doughter Fezonne. And made theyr weddynge so rychly that ther had ben neuer none such sene in that citye They made so great noyse with trompettes and claryons that the painims heard it in theyr pauilons. The duke of Acquitaine made Bellissant and Clarymond to be brought in his palais with great honoure. Than was there a spye that sawe al this and went and tolde it to Ferragus, how he had sene the with the traytour Pacolet. By my mahoune sayd ye gyaunt Ferragus I ought well to be dolent of the traytour Pacolet that hath so falsly deceyued me, and led away my syster Cleremonde that I loued so muche, wyth the christians. But I swere my god Mahoune tha wythin shorte space I shall take vengaunce on hym and on all his other complices and helpers, for I shal make them al dye an euill death. ¶How the gyaunt Ferragus for to haue sucour sent for the kyng Tremparte, and the enchauntour Adramayne. Fferragus the false Sarazyne was muche angrye and full of Ire whan he sawe that of his syster Clerymonde and the two knyghtes he myght not take vegaunce. Then he called a heraud and toke hym a letter that he had made to be wrytten, by the which letter he sente worde too kynge Tromparte that incontinente and without delaye also soone as he hadde sene the letter that he woulde come towarde hym well accompainyed and with greate puyssaunce of men of armes as well as he myght. And yf so were that we woulde geue hym sucoure he should geue hym to wyfe his syster Clerymonde. And withe this he demaunded hym that he shoulde brynge the enchauntoure Adramayne withe hym that had learned soo wyll the arte of tolletre, that for to playe with Nygromancy he was passed mayster, thus were the letters made and geuen the mesengere, the whiche put hym vpon ye waye for to do his mesage So will I leaue to speake of the gyaunt Ferragus ad shall speake of Ualentyne that is withe in Acquitayne where as he taketh leue of lordes and ladies and of the fayre Clerymonde, the whiche for his departynge was muche sorowfull, & demaunded hym, Loue when wyll you wedde me, holde me loyal couenaunt, for in you is all my truste. Lady sayd Ualentine haue no doubte of me, for I shall be true to youe and I swere to you and promyse you that also sone as it shall please God almighty that I retourne from Constantynoble, wythout soiournyng or delacion I shall wedde you. Then he sayde to the Duke of Aquitayne and his brother Orson. Lordes I shall leue you my loue Clerymonde to kepe as to my pryncypall frendes that I truste my mooste in. I prayinge you that also soone as as it shall be possible to you that you make to be minstred vnto her the sacrament of baptisme. and chaung not her name for none other, for it is me wyll that she bere that name. Ualentyne sayde the duke of Acquytayne take no thought for her, for also derely shall the fayre Clerymonde be kepte as my propre doughter Fezone. Then Ualentine toke leue of the duke of Acquytayne, that for his departing had his heart sorowfull & syth he embraced the fayre Clerymonde and in takyng leue of her he kissed her swetly, but the noble lady was so sorowfull that she myght speke neuer a word. Ualentine lefte her and began to wepe. And Orson tooke leue of hym the whiche sayde vnho hym right swetely Brother I praye to Iesu christ that he kepe you & saue you, and amonge all other thinges I beseche you humbly that you wil recommaude me to vnto my father ye Emperoure of Grece and to myne vncle the kyng Pepyn, for an it pleased god I shall se them within shorte tyme. Brother sayde valentyne I shall do the message for you as I would do for my selfe. At these wordes departed the two brethre from to gether that for to leue eche other had their hartes sorowfull. Orsone abode in the palays, and valentyne retourned towarde his lodgynge for to speke with his mother Bellissant, that for his departyng was muche trobled at the harte. And when she saw that he was redy to departe, she embraced him weping to haue take leue of hym, but the noble lade had her harte so full of distresse that she myght not speke one worde to her sone. Ualentine helde her betwene his armes in recomfortynge her swetelye, for how well that he was ryght sorowful and displeasaut yet for all that he bare his doloure and great dystresse the beste wise that he myght for to recomforte his mother and reioyce her. ¶Of the pyteous complayntes that the Empresse Bellissant made vnto her sonne Ualentyne or he went vnto constantynoble, and howe he spake vnto the Emperoure his father before his vncle kyng Pepyn. When Ualentyne sawe hes mother make such sorowe he sayde vnto her. My mother haue no feare of my doloure nor thought, for if it please god mi creatur I shall retorne agayne shortly. Thynke and haue euer your harte in God and praye for me, for in al my deedes and prayers I shall thynke on you, And aboue all other thinges I recommaunde vnto you they fayre Clerymonde that pruttethe all her confidence in me and wyll kepe my loyalte. Alas my sonne sayd the Empresse Bellyssante I oughte well to syghe with my harte and bere doloures anguysshe, but by the & bi thy hardynes thou haste done so muche that the daye shall come by the pleasure of Ihesus that mine occasyon ad blame I shall be founde innocent and pure. And when thou shalt be within thei cyti of Constantinoble, salue from me thy father the Emperoure Alexander & thyne vncle the valyaunte kynge Pepyn my brother and say to hym on my behalue that I take vpon they dampnacion of my soule that neuer the dayes of my lyfe of thei great blame and vytupere that I haue ben caused wt I was neuer culpable. And if that ther be any be he neuer so harde that will take bataill for it, or say the cotrari fight you for me and take the quarel for if you be ouercome I offre my body to be brente shamefulle before all the worlde. My mother sayde the noble Ualentyne dyscomfort you not, for yf it please God almighty and they virgyn mary in whome I haue all my truste I shall do so muche for you that shortly you shal be yelded and accorded to they Emperoure Alexander my father and that of the wronge that he hathe done you, he shall aske you mercy and pardon. At these wordes they departed in sundre makyng great sorowe, and wepinge full sore. And at theyr departynge the Ladye enquyred her sonne Ualentine that also sone as he myght he sholde sende Pacolet agayne for to brynge her tydynges. And Ualentine: promised her that he wolde do so. After he entred into the chambre where as he founde the lytell Pacolet, they whiche in abydynge hym had made redy his horse of wodde. Now vp said Pacolet it is time to go, mounte vp behynde me, and without hauinge ony drede holde you faste by me, Frende sayd Ualentyne that shall I do well, Than he lepte vpon they hors and Pacolet tourned the pynne so wel in dede that the hors rose vp in they ayre, and in that same nyghte they made so muche waye that they passed ouer the see and ouer dyuers wodes rochesse townes, castels ad greate cytees. And they wente so faste that on they morow before myd daye they apperceyued Constantible, He demaunded Pacolet what place it was, and he answered hym that it was the cyte of Constantinoble in the whiche he had so grete desyre to be Much Ioyous was the noble knyght Ualentyne whan he sawe himselfe so neare, for Pacolet had conduyted him so well that or eue song time he was within the cite. And at thei hour that the Emperoure and the kynge Pepyn were in the hall imperiall sette for to soupe. Pacolt that ledde Ualentyne entred into the halle, whereof Ualentine was moche abasshed whan he sawe him selfe before such a company. Than the grene knight that was in thee hal knewe Ualentyne and ranne anone vnto him. And they kinge Pepin that aduysed Ualentyne sayd vnto thei Emperourd. Syr yet is not your lygnage faylled, for you may se here a muche valiaunt knight that is your own sonne, Whan the Emperoure heard those tidynges hee chaunged coloure and rose vp from thei table for to go kisse his sonne. But the grene knight was the first at him whyche toke hym in his armes and welcomed hym After came kynge Pepine and enbraced hym, and then the Emperour his father toke him betwene his armes and kissed him swetely, half ioyfull and halfe sorowfull ioyful for his cominge and sorowfull for they thoughte of his wyfe. They olde Blandimayne knewe Pacolet, for he had sene hym in Portingale, so he came towarde, him and axed him tidinges of the Lady Bellissante, and he tolde him the maner howe all had bene done, & howe valentine had bene in dyuerse gret perilles for to haue knowledge of the Emperoure and of his mother. Grete Ioye was made throughe all the cytie for thei comynge of the Emperour Alexanders sonne valentyne Knightes and barons came from euery syde for to see Ualentyne and do hym reuerence. And so as there arryued diuers great lordes in the Emperour halle, Ualentyne that was full of greate hardynes speake in this mane before all they company. Lords and knightes that are here presente of the honoure and reuerece that it pleaseth you to do me. I yelde you graces with my puissauce and thanke you and aboue al the other I thack mine vncle the kinge Pepin, the whiche hathe nourished me vnto this houre, for I am more beholden vnto hym then vnto any man on lyue. Not withstandinge that it is sayde oftentymes that neuer one maye be so subiecte as a father and mother, but I may name myselfe poore orphelyn as for my fathere that is here presente, for I had ben dead dolorously had not myne vncle bene that founde me when my mother was banisshed falsy fro the Emperour by the dede of the false Archebishop wherfore to shewe that she is innocente and replete wt truthe I as her naturall sonne legytyme offreth my body for to fyghte agaynste the false traytour Archbishop that hathe accused her falsly, and also agaynste al them that wyll present them for to accuse my mother in any maner of wyse. ¶Howe Ualentyne and they grene knight were taken prysoners in the batayll before Constantinoble by the Soudan Moradyn and his men. When they Emperoure vnderstode hys sone Ualentyne speke so for they greate disshonoure of his doloures mother, he begane for to wepe right piteously, & saide with piteous Wordes vnto his sonne Ualentyne Alas my dere sonne I knowe clerely that thou arte my sonne legytine, & that with good right thou wilt fight for thy mother, the whiche by a false ad an euyll report and light bileue I haue put and sent thy mother in exile, but as for to vndertake too fighte for her deade in a field it is no nede, For the false & coursed Archebisshop, that had accused her hath bene foughten with, and shamefully vanquysshed and put vnto vilaynous deathe, by a valiaunt marchaunt, the which in the presence of the kynge Pepyne thyne vncle, and of me and before all the congreacione of diuers princes barons and knyghtes hathe tolde and confessed how with wronge & euyll cause by enuye and dyabolyke temptacion he had accused the good lady towarde me, When I vnderstode, hys confession I was wounded so bitterly at the hart that of my doloure it should be to great a thynge to recoute And sythe that same tyme I haue sente diuers messengers into dyuers countreys and regyons in trustinge, to haue had of my wyfe some certayn tydinges, but I myght not do so muche as to haue some knowledge of her. And therfore my chylde and myne onli hope if thou knowe any thynge of thy mother hyde it not frome me, for aboue all my desyres I haue a synguler desyre for to here some tidinges. Syr sayd valentyne for to speke of my mother knowe for all certayne that yesternyghte aboute mydnyghte I sawe her and spake to her within acquitaine, & tolde him yt Pacolet brought him so sone of they whiche thynge they Emperoure his father was muche amaruayled. For the comyng of valentine was made great ioye throughe all the cytie of Constantinoble. And soo muche was the Emperour Alexanderre ioysed that comaunded to rynge all they belles of they cytye. And when the paynyms and sarazins hearde the great ioye that they of the cytye made, the ranne vnto armes and in great dylygence were armed & in poynte And when they were all ready & armed the soudan moradyn accompanied with .xxx. kynges stronge and puyssaunt made to assaile the cytie of Constantinoble, they whiche was so full of people that manye horses were dead for hongre. And also dyuers men and women and lytell chyldren from day to day by faute of natural substauce fynished ther dayes piteously in the stretes. And When the noble Ualentine aduised and knew the great multitude of paynyms and sarazyns and the necessite of the cytie of Constantinoble, he spake before all they lordes and captaynes sayinge in this maner. Lordes ad knyghtes you knowe and se that within this cytie you are in great necessitie of vitailes, and yet you maye recouer none but by your valyauntnes vpon youre enemies. Wherfore I am of the opinion that there should yssue oute a certayne nombre of men for too conquere some vitaylles. And I all thei firste am ready and apparaylled to conduyte withe my litell power and as well as I maye all them of the cyti that wyll yssue out with me. To that cousayll was consentynge all the capitaynes of the armye. So their issued out of the cytie with the valiaunt knyghte Ualentyne .xx. thousand men of armes, and there yssued oute also a greate multitude of small people that for the indygynce and thei greate necessyte that the were in folowed hym gladly. When they were out of the gates thei ran vpon they sarazins so fiersly & so valyauntly that within a short space they toke and wonne thre hundred charyottes wyth vitayllles but as they led them towarde the citie of Constantynoble they soudan that for this losse was sorowefull with a greate companye of sarazyns and painyms put him selfe betwene them and the cyti of Constantinoble for to recouer the vytayllaes agayne that thei had lost And when the kynge Pepyn sawe that thei had stopped the passage he smote his horse with thei sporres and set his spere in the reste and dyd so valyante that he smyte dead vnto the earthe the proude Maragon, they which was kynge of Capharaz. Then he drew out his sword and smote Arcillon that was right strong and and puissaunt in suche wise that he smote hym oute of his sadle vnto the earthe. And when valentine ad ye grene knight sawe the great deades of armes that kynge Pepin did they entred into the batayll, and without ceasyng thei dyd so muche by force of armes that before thei Soudan they hewed downe the chefe standerd of they false paynims and sarazyns. And when they standerde was downe Ualentyne possed forthe agaynste the false soudan, and gaue hym so great a stroke with his spere that he smote him of thei Olyphante that he was mounted on muche rudely and valyauntly. ¶At that hour was done so many feates of armes by Ualentyne and they grene knight that Moroldos was dead and they admyrall taken by the grene knight. And valentyne maugre all the painims and sarazins did cast vnto thei ground foure kynges and sarazins, & smote of both ye armes of the admirall of Ombrye. But the two good knightes that same daye for to Wynne honoure and fame were to ardaunt, and entred to ferre wythin the hoste of thei painims and sarazins, for whan they thought to haue retorned they were enclosed withe Painims and taken after bounde strayghtly as prysoners and ledde before the Soudan, they whyche also soone as he sawe theym he swore his grete God mahoun that thei should neuer retorne vnto the christen men agayn, but should make a gybet to be reysed vp before the cyte of Constantinoble and make them be hanged so hye that al theire frendes myght se them. Thus was Ualentine and the grene knight in grete fere of their lyues, thynckeng neuer to escape from their cursed handes, And the christen me dyd retorn maugre painims and sarazins, for ther was with theym vitaylles in grete haboundance so that all the people of the cyte wer refreshed and comforted. But or they arryued within the cyte they hadde a pyteous recountre of paynims and Sarazyns and ledde a pyteous recountre and strong batayl, so that the christen men wende neuer to haue retorned into the cyte of Constantynoble, Than thee of the cyte that sawe wel the necessite of their men made to cry through the cyte that vpon payne of deathe all manner of men, priestes clerkes Chanons monkes Freers, and women, shoulde bere the crosse before them in the honour of thei passio of our Lorde Ihesu Christe and yssue oute againste the painims. Than was the nombre so gret of they people that yssued out of the cytie of Constantinoble that the estimacion was fourty thousad. And wha the painims and sarazins sawe the great nombre people that came out againste the, they reculed abacke into their tents & let the christen men bere away they vitailles. But or ye paynyms was in their tentes the batayll was so great that foure thousande christen men were slayne whiche was a pyteous thyng to them of the cytie. Ryght sorrowful and displeasaunt was the Emperour of Grece for many noble barons and knyghtes that he had loste in the batayll but aboue al the other he was sorowful in his harte, and vtterly displeasaunte for his valiaunt sonne valentine and the grene knight that had done so great dedes of armes and in lykewyse was they kynge Pepyn of Fraunce, These twaine made great dole and lamentacio castinge out great cryes and syghes for the chylde Ualentyne that they had loste so soone. But the lytel Pacolet recomforted theim much saying. Lordes leue your wepynge and dyscomforte, for of Ualentyne you shall be ioyous, and of hym haue good tidinges sooner then you wene fore. Frende sayde he God here the and geue the suche puyssaunce, for an thou may do so muche as to brynge hym vnto me, and deleuer hym from they handes of the soudan that hathe sworen hys death, thou maist sai sureli that aboue the other I shal mounte the in honoure and rychesse. Syr sayd Pacolet put your truste in me, for shortly you shall knowe with what loue I loue you and your sonne valentine. Then Pacolet toke his horse of wodde, and withoute ani mo wordes departed for to go into thei soudans hoost. And the soudan is in his pauilion that for to iudge Ualentyne and the grene knyghte had assembled al the great lordes of thei hoost. But his enterpryse was all turned contrarye as it shall be shewed you more playnly here afterwarde. ¶Hwe the enchauntoure Pacolet delyuered Ualentyne and the grene knyght out of the pryson of the soudan Moradyn. Whan the Soudan Moradin was wythdrawen into his pauilon, he made to be brought before him the chyld Ualentine and ye grene knight in the presence of all the most greatest barons and knights of hys court and sayd in this maner. Lordes at thys hour you maye well se and knowe the twayne of the worlde that dothe moost dyspleasure and outrage vnto the kynge Ferragus. And amonge the other thynges this knyght hathe left our lawe and made hym to be christened to bere vs the more domage, wherfore me thyneketh it were well done to sende them vnto kynge Ferragus, for I wotte well that he will take vengeaunce on them, & that he shal make them dye a shamefull death as thei haue wel deserued. Syr sayde thei sarazins and paynims that of theyr deathes had great enuy. It is no nede to soiourn so muche but make forkes to be reysed vp in thei fielde for to hange the two false caitifes on to morow in thei mornynge that hathe borne vs so great dommage, and harme. Lordes sayde the soudan Moradyn your counsayll is fayre and good, and soo wyll I vse it, for by the god mahowne I sweare you and promyse you that to morowe in they mornynge I shall make theym to be hanged so hye that all they of the cyte of Constantynoble mai se them and take ensaumple at theyr death. After these wordes sayde as the Soudan entred into hys tent for to go to souper the litell Pacolet foud himself before hym the whych salued him by mahoune hyghly Pacolet sayd the Paynem thou art welcome. Now tel me lyghtly howe doth the feate of the kyng Ferragus that aboue al the other is my perfyte frende. Syr sayd Pacolet he fareth right well, and aboue all recomaundeth him vnto you, and by me he sendeth you tydinges good that are muche secrete the whiche I shall tel you yf it plese you to here me. Frende sayde they souden ryghte voluntaryly ad with good harte I wyll here youre message. Than he drewe him a parte for to tell hym his secrete. And Pacolet saide to hym all softly. Syr wyte that I come from Portingale and am sente hether by my redoubted lady the wyfe of Ferragus they whiche with all her harte recomaundethe her vnto you, muche more hartely than I can recounte, and that it be true I do you to wyte that aboue all the men of the worlde she loueth you best, for she is so esprised and taken with your loue that she maye neyther slepe nor reaste in noo place. Nowe it is true that she the which in all trusteth her in me hath sente me towarde you, and sendeth you worde by me expressely vpon the loue that maye be bytwene two true louers that without soiourning or deferrynge you come and se her. For the kynge Ferragus is at this presente tyme gone towarde Acquytayne, so maye you at your owne pleasure and wyll of the pleasaunt ladi that aboue al the other shineth in beaute do your pleasure & wyll, And therfore syr come your way with me, for vpon my hors I shall conduyte you so well and in suche manere that to morowe in the mornynge, I shall set you in Portyngale before the noble and fair lady by the pleasure of my God mahon. Ha Pacolete sayd the soudan Moradyn thou geuest me at my harte more greater Ioye and comfort than any other person dydde euer before this. For aboue al the wemen of the worlde I am and haue beene longe tyme of the wyfe of kynge ferragus enamoured but so muche there is that neuer no daye I myghte fynde my selfe before her in no maner that I myght accomplysshe my wyll, or tell my secrete, but at this tyme I shall accomplyshe the desir of my hearte, that so muche and so longe I haue abiden For I promyse the that to morowe in the mornynge I shall go with thee and accomplysshe my wyll, or tell my desyre. At that houre that I recount vnto you the soudan Moradyn satte hym downe at the table and made the enchauntoure Pacolet to be sarued also honestlye as he myght, for he was so ryghte Ioyous of the tydynges that the enchauntour Pacolet had broughte hym, that the heart lepte in his bely for Ioy, and made great cheare, And Pacolet that sawe wel that they Soudan was in greate ioy sayde all softlye to hymselfe. I am feasted and kept wel at ease, but or that it be to morow at nyght suche gyueth me of hys bread to eat that shall curse the tyme that euer I was boorne. Nowe Ualentine and the grene knyght was in the tente and pauilyon of the soudan Moradin that were wel and strayghtli bounden well knewe they Pacolet whereof they were ryghte Ioyous in theire courager in sayinge and thynking in their hartes that for their deliueraunce he was comen theder but the made no semblaunt. And Pacolet in shewinge grete chere and fayre semblaunte vnto the soudan Moradin in beholdinge the prisoners sayde all on heyght. Syr how be you so curteys for to kepe ye grene knighte in youre prisons withoute makinge hym dye, for aboue all liuinge men he hath borne dommage vnto his brother Ferragus And for to greue him ye mo he hath renounced Mahounde, and founde they waies and manere to take frome hym his syster Clerymonde, for to geue her vnto a christen knight, Wherfore me semeth you are to symple whan him and all they other of his sorte and company you make not dye Witheout ha hauinge on them ony mercy or pyte. Frend said the soudan Moradyn it is well my wyll and intencyon for I am entyerly delybered to make them be hanged bi the neckes to morowe in the morning. Pacolet was so wyse and soo well taught that vntyl thei houre to slepe he kepte the soudan with sportes and playes. And whan the houre was comen that they shold go to reaste, they soudan commaunded that the prysonars shuld be kept so wel and so strayghtly that vpon ye paine of ther liues they myght yelde hym acountes. And so he wythdrewe him into hys chambre. and left Ualentyne & the grene knyght in kepyng of a great sorte of sarazyns and paynyms that aboue all thynges were couetous of theyr deathes. ¶Howe pacolet deceyued the soudan Moradin, & made hym mounte vpon his hors of wodde, and broughte hym into the cyte of Constantynoble, wenynge to him that he had brought hym into portyngale. Nowe the houre was comen that eueri body was withdrawn saue pacolet that made all the watche sleape. Than he came vnto valetyne and the grene knight and vnbound them, and led them out of the host so that none knew of it. Than whan it came towardes the dawnynge of they day he entred into ye tente of the soudan and escryed vnto hym on hye sayinge. Ha syr to euyll gothe our feate and euyll shewe you that you loue the wyfe of Ferragus whan you make no more diligence to accomplyshe her wyll. Whan the soudan herd Pacolet crye so he wakened sodeynly and sayde vnto Pacolet. Frende by Mahoune almyghtye thou haste done well to haue wakened me, for thou has taken me out of a greate payne, for I dremed a maruaylous dreame. And in dreaminge methoughte that a Crowe dyde beare me farre awaye in the ayre, and in flyenge in thei ayre ther came vnto me a great byrd that with his byll stroke me so sore that the blode ranne oute in great haboundaunce so I wote neuer what thys wyll saye and am in drede that the kynge Ferragus knoweth this dede. Syr sayde Pacolet you haue a slouthefull courage whan for a dreme you wyl leue the Ioyous enterpryse of her that desyreth you so muche, by mahoune sayd he thou sayest trouth. Then he called her chamberlain to make him redye and after sayd vnto him. Frend be secrete, & if myne vncle Bruyant demaunde for me, tel hym that I am gone to sporte me a lytel with Pacolet, Syr sayd he it shal be done. Than Pacolet made ye Soudan to mounte vp behende hym and tornen thei pynne and the horse rose vp in the ayre so impetuously that also sone they were in the cite of Constantinoble in the Emperours palais. And whan the soudan moradin sawe that pacolet was abiden. he saide vnto him, frende muste we lodge here. ye said pacolet haue no feare nor doubte of nothinge, for we are within portyngale in the ryche palays of the puyssaunt and myghty kynge Ferragus By mehoude in whome I beleue sayd the soudan Moradyn I am muche amarueyled howe the deuyll hathe borne the so soone. Nowe hye you sayd Pacolet and entre into this halle, and I wyll goo into they chambre of the pleasaunt lady they wyfe of Ferragus, and as this same houre I shall make the chambre to be opened too you and to lye wyth her. Frende sayde they Soudan of great ioye thou makest me to laughe. Nowe go in thei name of Mahoune the whiche conduyte the. ¶Howe the soudan Moradyn was taken and bounde and after was hanged. Pacolet the inchauntoure lefte the Sowdan Morodyn wyth in the haulle, the whiche was well loocked on euerye syde, so that he myghte not yssue oute. Then he went towarde the chambre of the Emperoure and gaue so greate a stroke agaynste the dore that the chamberlayne harde it and cryed on hyghe in demaundynge what are you that at thys houre in the chambre Imperyall commeth smytynge and makyng suche noyse. Frende sayd Pacolet doubt you not of nothing, for I am Pacolet that is come fro the hoost of the soudan Moradyn, where as I haue deliuered Ualetyne & the grene knyght fro the handes of the sarazins yt had iudged & condened the to death. And more ouer say vnto the emperour yt I haue brought wt me into this palays the soudan Moradyn, the whiche beleueth stedfastly to be in Portyngale. Now he must be take without any soiourning & slayne al quicke, for he hath well deserued it. When the chamberlayn vnderstode the tidinges, he went toward the Emperour & ye kyng Pepyn, the which for to se the souda with a great nombre of knyghtes armed them. And the Soudan was in the hall that cryed hydeously sayinge. Ha false traytour Pacolet mahoune curse the. For I haue well hard the & vnderstand the speke, thou hast betrayd me by thy false deceit cursedly & shamfully, but by ye faith that I holde yet shall I make thee repent it. Than he drewe out his swearde and as a madde man that were out of hys wytte began for to renne about the halle in smytynge the walles and the stoones so rudely that he made the fyre to sprynge out of the marble stones. And so as he fought alone in the halle, the Emperoure and kyng Pepyn with torches and cresettes came toward hym well accompanyed. And when he apperceiued the he put hym selfe in defence muche outragyouslye, and slewe a squyer before kyng Pypyn that woulde haue taken hym, and the kyng that was ryght displeasaunt auaunced hym and gaue hym so great a stroke that he felled him vnto the earth. Then he was taken & boude muche streyghtly by that it was daylight. Ualentyne and the grene knyght entered in to the palays whiche was come from the hoost of the soudan, and when thei found hym there they were muche ioyous. Then the Emperoure and kyng Pepyn made great ioye for the dellueraunce of Ualetine, and also of the grene knight for he was muche praysed and loued. The Emperour thanked muche Pacolet for the delyueraunce of hys sonne Ualentyne, and the kyng Pepyn said vnto hym. Pacolet fayre syr thou muste shewe one gambaude wt thy horse, Syr sayde Pacolet mounte vp behynde me, and I shall brynge you withoute restynge into helle, frende sayde the kynge Pepyn, God kepe me frome it. Then sayd Pacolet, lordes make dyligence to put this false Soudan to death for if euer he escape you, thynk that euyll shall happen therby. At that houre was assembled within the palays dyuers great lordes for to se the soudan. by the counsaill & deliberacion of whom he was iudged & condempned to be haged on the great toure of the palays, to the ende that he myght be sene of the paynims. and so it was don. And when the paynyms sawe the soudan hanged there they were sore amarueiled how he was brought into the citie. Bruiat tolde them howe he had bene deceyued by Pacolet. Then was there great sorowe through al the hoost for the death of the soudan, for he was a valiaunte man & a gret persecutour of christen people. And after yt they had made great cryes and great lamentacions thei assembled theyr counsayl and chose for their souda Bruyant that was the vncle of Moradyn. That daye was sorowfull paynims and sarasins, and the christen men within the cyte made great Ioye and solace for the dethe of the soudan and also for the vytaylles that they hadde recouered and wonne. And than after all these things thus done Pacolet toke leue of the Empirour and of all his courte for to retourne into Aquytain towarde the fayre Clerimonde as he had promysed her. Than Ualentyne came to hym and sayd. Frend Pacolet syth that you go in to aquitaine salue me swetelye my mother the Empresse Bellyssaunt, & my loue clerymonde, and my fayre brother Orson, and the good duke of Aquytaine with all the other barons and knyghtes, and geue this letter vnto my Lady my moder, by the which she may know clerely the tidinges from hece Syr sayd pacolet I shall do your message gladlye, than he toke his hors and bare him into a greate wyndowe of marbill, and after lepte vpon his backe and turned the pinne and the horse rose vp in the ayre as tempeste The Emperoure and the kinge pepin were at the windowes that behelde him strongly. By god saide the kinge pepin for all the golde of the world I woulde not be there, Nowe goeth pacolet by soo great diligence that vppone the morowe in the morninge he arriued in Acquitaine, and found there the good duke that kept the cite, and also the Empresse Bellyssant, Orson, and the fayre Clerimonde, the whiche he salued on Ualentines behalue much honourably as it appertayned to them Frende sayde Orsan how fareth the feate of my father Syr sayd pacolet he fareth right well, but for to know tydynges here is a letter that I brynge vnto my ladye Bellyssant from your brother Ualentine. The lady toke the letter with grete Ioye, and called a secretary for to rede it. Lady sayd the secretary that he helde the letter. Knowe that the valyant knyght your sonne Ualetine sendeth you worde by thys letter that the mighty Emperour the which would se you gladly salueth you humbly with al hys harte, the which from the tyme of your departynge in payne and in trauayll longe tyme hath made you to be sought. And sendeth you worde yt sone after that he had expulsed you he had cleare knowledge of your loyalate, and of the false treason & enterpryse of the false Archebysshyp, the whyche hathe bene foughten with by a marchaunt ad put in such subgeccyon that before hys death before al the worlde he confessed hys false treason. For the which thynge the Emperoure your husbande desyreth from daye to day for to se you, & tyll he haue you agayne he wyll neuer bee gladde at hys hearte. And knowe that also soone as he shal be rydded of the false sarazyns he wil come hether to you with the grene knyghte that your sonne Orson dyd conquere before this citie. Thus your noble sonn Ualentine sendeth you word by tenour of thys lettre whan the lady heard those tidinges for greate Ioie she fell in a swowne. And Orson toke her vp betwene hys armes muche swetely. My childe sayd the Empresse I ought well to thanke God, and to be Ioious whan the Emperoure of Grece hathe certaine tidinges that I am innocente and cleane of the diffamynge and cryme abhominable that by false treason had bene conspired agaynst me. Nowe God gyue me the grace for to finde myselfe before the Emperoure shortly, for yf I might se hym ones in my lyfe I woulde desyre no more of god nor for to lyue lenger in this worlde whan he hathe done suche grace that too myne honowere and to all the bloud of fraunce he hath shewed the treason of the false irreguler Archebysshope the whiche hathe knowledged hys greate malyce and trecherye. ¶How the kynge Trompart came before Acquitane for to socoure the gyaunt Ferragus, and brought wt hym Adramayne the enchauntoure, by whome Pacolet was deceyued and betrayed falsy. On that same daye that Pacolette aryued with in Acquytayne the kynge Trompart came in to the hoost of Ferragus with grete puyssaunce of men of armes to socoure hym agaynst the chrysten men, and in great honoure receyued hym the kynge Ferragus. whyche for hys comyng made great feast through all hys hoste Free kynge sayde the giaunt Ferragus of your cominge I oughte to be Ioyous for I haue esperaunce that by youe I shall be auenged on them that haue deceyued my syster the fayre Clerymonde. Nowe I knowe well that she is within Acquytane, for she hathe ben sene, wherefore I prayse lyttell my puyssaunce if I may not haue here agayne, And yf that yt be so that by your puissauce and healpe she may be conquered from this hour I gyue you her to wyfe. Ferragus sayd the kyng Tromparte of thys doubte you nothing, for I haue brought wyth me Adramayne the enchauntour the which shal soone haue deceyued Pacolet, for he knoweth more of the arte of Nygromancy than all the lyuinge creatures. By mahoune sayd Ferragus I am ryghte glade of his comynge and yf he maye do so much as to yelde me Pacolet I shall make hym of al the most ryche and puyssaunt. Syr sayd Adramayne haue trust in me, for I shall serue you so well that shortly you shall know it Than departed Adramayne and made redy hys charme for to playe wyth his crafte, and syth wente towarde Acquitaine. And to the ende that he myght enter in to it more surelye he made him to be laden with vitail so he dyd so muche by his engyn that he came befoore the gates, and asked entre for to selle his vytayls, He coude speke well to them of the cytye, wherefore they opened hym the gates and he entred in for to sel his vitaylles. When after he had solde the he wente vnto the palays where as he founde Pacolet that knewe hym well, for he had sene him other tymes. Adramayne said Pacolet you be welcome. Nowe tel me if it please you from what place you come, and what thynge dryueth you hether at this houre. Pacolet sayd Adrymain you knowe well that I haue serued longe tyme kyng Troparte. So it happened the other day that be one of his court I was smyten & outtraged muche vyllaynously because that I would not learne him & shew hym the secretes of my craft and when I sawe my selfe smiten I had dyspyte in my harte, and with a knyfe I slewe hym. whan I had done that ded, for feare of deathe I yssued out of the corte. And thus expulsed from ye seruyce of king Tropart I am come towarde you for the truste that I thynke to fynde in you. And from henceforth I will abyde with you as loyall and true felowe if it please you that it be so. Adramayne sayd Pacolet I am contente, make good cheare and care not for nothyng. Than Pacolet made hym to be serued and honestlye receyued as his felowe that of his coming was ioyous. And in makynge chere together Adramayne sawe the fayre Clerymonde passe through the halle, so he demaunded Pacolet what lady that was that was so fayre and gracious. Frende sayde Pacolet it is the faire Clerymond sister vnto kyng Ferragus the which muste be ryght hyghly maryed vnto a much ryche and valyaunt knyght. At that houre arryued Orson befor the two felowes and sayde vnto them. Lordes playe a lytell betwene you both of your craft, and scyence for to reioyce the company. ¶How Adramayne and Pacolet plaied before the barons, & how Adramayne stole away Pacolettes horse of wodde and the fayre Clerymonde. vnto all the that were there presente that thorowe the place rane a great ryuer and horryble, and in that same ryuer them thought they sawe all maner of fysshes bothe lytell and great. And when they of the palays sawe the water so great, they began all for to lyft vp their gownes and to crye strongly as they that had fere to be drowned. And Pacolet yt behelde the enchauntement began for to singe and made a charme so subtyl in his song that it semed vnto all them of the place that through the ryuer ran a great herte, that caste and hurled to the earth al that he found before him. Then the thought that thei sawe hunters folowe him with many greihoundes and brachettes. Then there was dyuers of the company that lepte forth and wolde haue taken the harte, but Pacolet made the hart to lepe incontenet. By my faith said Orson you haue played ryght well and you can vse ryght well your arte. At these wordes rose vp the two enchauntours, and Pacolet that thought but al wel led Adramayne into his chambre for to slepe  & repose him that night, wherfore he was right sorowful and angry afterwarde, for whan it came towarde mydnyght Adramayne kest a charme throughe all the palays, that bothe lytle and great slepte so strongly that for cryeng nor brayenge they might not waken vnto the morowe that the sunn was vp, and made Pacolet to slepe also wel as the other. After he went towarde the hors that he hadde sene in the chambre, but he had made no semblaunte. And whan he had the hors he wente into the chambre of Clerymonde and by hys subtyll arte in slepynge he made her to ryse and clothe her, and sette her on the hors with hym, and came vnto a wyndowe and torned the pynne, for he knewe well the guyse, and dyd soo much that without soiournynge he arriued in the pauylyon of kyng Trompart wt the fayre Clerymond Then Adramayne cryed. Syr kynge Tromparte slepe not, but ryse vp incontynent, for heare maye you see ye pleasaunt lady Clerymonde, the whyche I haue stolen within acquytayne, And haue done so much & wroughte so subtylly that I haue stolen Pacolettes hors. Adramayne sayd kyng Trompart at this houre I know that thou arte a true frend, and that aboue al other I am beholden vnto thee. Is it not the doughter of the great kynge Iustamon that is syster vnto kynge Ferragus. yes sayd Adramayne I haue ryght subtylly stolen her a waye, and betraied Pacolet the enchauntore for of his horse he shal neuer haue the gouerning. Adramayne sayd the kynge Tromparte can thou plaie also well as he, yes sayd Adramayne I lerned it longe ago. Then he shewed hym the maner and the facyon to torne the pynne and to gouerne the hors. And whan kyng Trompart had sene ye subtilte, he thought within him selfe that he wolde lede the fayre lady Clerymond into hys courte vpon the hors of wodde and there take her vnto wyfe. Then he enbraced the fayre Clerymonde that slepte yet for the charme of Adramaine, and with him sette her surely vpon the hors of wodde, And Adramayne behelde hym and sayd to hym: My lorde yf you fayle for to play with ye hors you put your selfe in gret daunger and peryll, and the lady also. No sayd Trompart of that haue no doubte, and then he turned ye pin ryght in his course and went through a cloude so ferre that he went more than two hundred myle before day And at that same houre a wakened ye fayre Clerimond that was so dolent & sorowful for to se her selfe in that estate that she fell in swowne, wherof the kyng Trompart was much abasshed, and afrayd at his hert, for he wende that she hadde ben dead, He torned the pyn and stopped the hors in a fayre grene felde beside a fountaine that was ryght fayre and clere. And whan he hadde discended the lady vpon the grasse, he toke of ye water and cast it in her face to make her renyne agayne, and the ladi for the coldnes of the water began for to remoue a lytell and open her eyne, and began for to make so piteous cries and lamentacions that the kyng Trompart wende verely that at that houre her hart would haue brosten, wherfore great sorowe toke him. And he found no maner howe he myght succoure her saue by a shepeharde that was there besyde them, of which he demaunded some bread. And the shepeherde gaue him a quarter of a lofe which he brought vnto ye fayre Clerymonde, and put it in her mouthe. The mayden eate a lytell, and with the fountaine she washed her throte. And when her harte was a lytell come agayne, and her speche stregthed she begane for to wepe in saiynge. Alas vnhappy ad aboue all dolorous what is happened me, nowe haue I loste all my solace ad my Ioye by vnhappy fortune and cursed treason. Alas my loue Ualetine now haue I lost you, of god be he cursed that hath departed vs. when the kynge Tromparte hearde the great lamentacions that the fayre Clerymonde made for her loue Ualentyne, he sayd vnto her muche rudly Lady leue suche wordes, and of the christen boie neuer speake more before me, or by my God mahoune I shal take thy lyfe from thy body. It is more ryght and reason that I wedde you, and that youde geuen me that haue my realme vnder my domynacion and lordshype than for to take that same vnhappy knaue that hathe neyther lande nor lordshyp. In saying these woordes he enclyned him towarde the lady and would haue kyssed her, but the noble lady that of his loue was litel curious gaue hym vpon the mouthe with her fist so that the bloude came out for the whiche the kynge Tromparte was muche angry & set her on the horse furiousli But it is sayd comonly that it is euyll thinking to be maister of the crafte that they can nothing of. Euen so dyd it to kynge Tromparte that wende well too haue played with Pacolettes horse, but he torned the pyne so euyll that he faylled of hys waye more than to hondred myle. ¶And as he thought to haue aryued in his lande he arryued in ynde the great a great place wher as a market was kept that daye. And seynge al the people he descended on the ground with the fayre lady Clerymonde. Of the which thyng they were muche ameruayled that sawe it. And at that houre the lady Clerymonde knewe the horse. For she myght not knowe him the nyght before for the great doloure that she was in Alas Pocolet sayde the noble ladye nowe am fasly betrayed, and you the fyrst of all robbed. Alas now maye I well say fare well my loue Ualentyne, aboue all the other moost curteys and amiable. By mi god mahoue sayd the kynge Trompart that wend wel to haue ben in his country if euer you speke to me of that christen boye ryght shortly you shall se & know with what loue I loue hym, for wyth mi cuttyng sworde I shall make your head to fle of your shoulders. Now is Trompart well deceyued that thinketh to be in his countrey, and that for the fayre Clerymonde hathe wylled too playe Nygromancy for he is arryued in the place where as it behoueth him to finishe hys daies: For after that he had bene sene of diuers in the place, some saide among them that it was the great god mahoune that in flesh and bloud for to vysite his people was descended from heauen. The tydynges of this vysion came vnto the kyng of ynde, the whiche comaunded that they should be brought before hym. Nowe in an euil houre ariued the kyng Trompart, for also sone as the kynge of ynde sawe hym he knewe hym. ¶Howe the kynge of ynde made kynge Trompartes head to be smitten of, because he had slaine his brother and howe he would haue hadde the fayre Clerymonde vnto his wyfe. Trompart sayd the kynge of ynde, ye be well come, for nowe is come the tyme that of the death of my brother I shal take vengeauce to whiche by your fyerse courage you haue made warre bi the space of seuen yeare and after at ye last in tormente and martir you haue made hym dye shamefully, So wyll I shewe vnto my brother that in thys lyfe I loued hym truely, & that after his death I haue auenged hym on his enemies. Than the kynge of ynde without any other delyberacyon at that same houre made his head to be smiten of. And after the Iustice was done he made the fayre lady Clerymonde to be taken with the horse of wode, and for the beaute of the lady he made her to be ledde in to his palays muche honourably, and well serued and kept. After he entred into his hale and made her to be brought before him by them that were the moost nerest his persone. When she was come before hym he behelde here gladli for her maners and countenaunce, that of beaute corporall passed al the other and sayd vnto her much swetely. Lady I can not tell what you are, nor frome whence you be come, but the prudence & beaute that is in you maketh me to be so take with your loue that neuer the dayes of my lyfe I was so in braced with no womans loue. wherfore I am delibered for to tak you vnto wyfe and spouse, and make you quene and maystresse of all the lande of ynde the greate. Syr sayd the fayre Cleremound that could answer ful wel, you speke gracious and promyseth and presentethe me more goodes & rychesses than I am worthy for to haue, but as to the regarde for to take you vnto husband & spouse for this presente houre yf it please you, you shal pardon me, for withein thys lytell whyle I haue made an oth and auowe before the ymage of God mahoune for certaine necessities that I haue found my selfe in that from this daye come a twelue moneth I shall take no man vnto husbande nor spouse. And therfore syr if it please you let me holde and accomplysshe myne auow vnto the yere be fynyshed, and when the terme shal be passed and accomplisshed, than take me vnto wife and spouse, and do with me your pleasure. ¶By mahune sayd the kyng you saye but well, and sythe that you haue so enterprysed and vowed to oure God mahoune, I am of accorde and content to abide vnto the tym that the end of your auowe be come. So abode the noble ladye in the palays of the kynge of ynde the greate, the whiche thought well to haue hys desyre of heer or the yere had bene passed. And comauded that the fere Clerymonde shoulde be well kept and serued aboue al the other, And make too delyuer vnto her a fayre chambre that was muche richely adurned, in the which the pleasaunt lady made to bere the horse of wodde, and in the moost secretest place put hym vnder her wardrope, ad whan the noble lady Clerymonde sawe the horse in bewaylyng Pacolet with her eyen she wepte tenderly, in praying God deuoutly that he would delyuer her out of that daunger. Alas sayd the noble lady, veray god almyghty in whome is myne onely beleue, resplendysshe your grace vpon this poore woman or elles I ame and shall remayne a poore strayed woman separed from all my frendes, and amonge the other the moost sorowful And in the handes of mine enemies it behoueth me to vse the remenaunt of my lyfe. Alas true redempture do by thy puissauce so much afore ye ende of me daies yt I maye see with bothe myne eyen the pleasaunte Ualentyne to whome I am geuen. For I loue beter to be dead and suffer greuous torments than to habandon my body to other than hym. The lady is in ynde the great at the whiche is nyght and daye in syghes and in cares, praying God deuoutly that he wold put her out of the daunger and yelde her safe & sound to the noble knyght Ualentyne, whyche she had geuen here fayth, and her corage before any other man lyuynge. Nowe wyll I leue to speke of her & of the kynge of ynde, ad to folowe my mater I shal speke to you of Pacolet & of ye sorowe yt was made for clerymonde within Acquitain. ¶Howe Pacolet in a medens clothyng auenged hym on false Adramayne. After that the nyght was passed in the whyche Adramayne had betraied Pacolet: and ledde away the fayre Clerymonde, through the cyte of Acquytayne was made great lamentacyons for the losse of the lady, for the gardes of the palays that myssed her made so grete lamentacyons and soo great noyse in the mornyng that throughe out all the cytie was the tydynges. And wha Pacole knewe that he was departed, he doubted hym of some treason. Then he loked aboute the chambre & sawe anone that his hors was loste, soo he wronge hys handes and drewe his heere in cryenge hyghely. A fals Adramayn by the I am deceyued. For falsly thou hast stolen my hors and my lady Clerymonde hathe borne awaye vpon hym. Well ought I to hate my lyfe whan by the I am thus betrayed and vnpuruayed of yt thinge that I moost loued. Nowe death come vnto me for to take me out of this worlde, for I haue no more hop to haue comforte nor consolacyon. So pensyfe and sorowfull was Pacolet for the fayre Clerymond that yf it had not ben Orson that came toward hym he wold haue slayne hymselfe with a knyfe. On euery syde of the palays was herde pyteous cryes, and wofull complayntes. Bellyssaunt ye Empresse wepte and cryed sore. And ye fayre Fezonne made suche dole that she rent her ryche clothes for the loue of Clerymonde that was stolen awaye so falsly. And all they of the cyte made innumerable complayntes & bewaylynges. And among all the other it was a pyteous thynge to here the complaynt and lamentacyon of the good Duke of Acquytayne. And whan pacolet sawe the great sorowe that ery body made he sayd vnto them. Lordes I swere vnto to god that hath formed al the world that I shal neuer haue Ioye of my lyfe nor comforte vnto the time that I haue taken vengeaunce of the traytour Adramayn by the whyche we ar betrayed and deceyued. At these wordes he departed heuy and sorowful and put of his gowne, and toke the habyte of a woman, in clothynge hym ryght gentylly as a yonge mayden. And in that estate departed out of the cytie of Aquitayne, and went in to the hooste of the kynge Ferragus, And also soone as he was in the hoost of the paynyms there came one towarde hym that prayed him muche of loue, because hym thought he was soo fayre a mayden. For Pacolet had wasshed his face wyth a water ryght subtyl made by hys charme in suche maner that al they that beheld hym sayd a mongest theym that they had neuer sene a more fayre woman nor a more gracyous. Of dyuers paynyms and sarazyns he was beholden and required but euer he excused hym and sayd. My lordes pardone me, for at this time I am promysed and haue made couenaunt wyth the enchauntour Adramaine, ye which hathe receyued me. Mayden sayd the other go on your waye. And so Pacolet toke the waye to go vnto the enchauntour. Adramayne yt was in the tente. And whan Adramayne sawe hym he was so enchaunted that Pacolet semed him the moste fayrest woma that euer god created. And he was so muche enamoured on him that for to slepe wyth hym that nyght he reteyned hym, ad Pacolet accorded therto ryght gladly and sayd to him My lorde knowe that I haue bene requyred of menye but aboue al the other me thinke you are worthiest to be seruyd. Doughter sayd Adramayne doubte you of nothynge, but make good chyre, for I haue a good wil for to serue you, and do you good ryght largely. Than Adramayn comaunded one of his seruauntes that he shoulde kepe the mayde, and that she should be serued at souper with all maner of meates & wine at her pleasaunce. Nowe is the inchaunter Pacolet in the tente of Adramayn well and honestly serued. And Adramayn is in the hoast of kyng Ferregus seruyng. Frende send Pacolet to the varlet of Adramayn, where is the kyng Trompart that is so puyssaunt and well renowmed, By mahoune said he my lady I thinke he is retourned into his countrey, and leadeth with him the fayre lady Cleremonde vppon an horse of wood, that my mayster hath geuen hym. When Pacolet heard those tidynges demaund not if he were sorowful, but he made no somblaunte. Then entred Adramayne in to the tente, and presented wyne and spyces vnto Pacolet, & after sayd to him: My doughter it is time to go to rest, se here the bedde that you and I shall slepe in and dooe our pleasures. Lord sayd Pacolet your wyll he done. And then Adramayne the inchauntour vnclothed hym & entred into the bedde, thinkyng that the mayden wold come and lye with hym. But also as soone as he was in the bed, Pacolet inchaunted hym in suche wyse, and made hym slepe so strongly that for any thyng that myght be doone vnto the morowe in the mornyng he myght not awake. And when he had made hem slepe so, he made all them aboute to slepe, Then he put of his womans clothyng, and putte vpon hym the rychest cloathes of Adramayne, after he toke a sworde that hanged in the chaumbre and smote of Adramaynes head, and bare it with hym, When he had done so, he wente vnto Ferragus pauilion the which was well kepte with sarazins, and so well he coulde playe with his arte that he made all fall vnto the earth & slepe. Then he entred in to the tente where as Ferragus slepte, the whiche he enchauteth so muche that he made hym lepe out of his bede & clothe him, Then Pacolet toke his gyrdle and tied it aboute his necke in suche wyse that as a beaste he ledde hym and made renne after hym vnto the gates of the cytie of Acquitane. when Pacolet was at the gates of Acquytayne he founde the duke Sauary accompanied with diuers lordes and barons that hadde much desyre to knowe of that enterpryse, And also soone as they sawe Pacolet they sayd vnto hym. Frende where is Clerymonde that you bryng not her agayne. Lordes said Pacolet haue a litel pacience for at the first stroke with an axe the tree in not smyten downe. Knowe that of Adramaine I am auenged, for se here his heade, and yet I haue done soo muche by myne arte that I haue brought Ferragus with me, the whiche all in slepynge I haue made renne after me through the fyeldes. By my fayth sayd Orson well haue you wrought. Lordes sayd Pacolet yet haue I done more maystrye, for in al the hoost of kynge Ferragus there is neyther paynym nor sarazyn but that they slepe vnder the trees muche strongly. And therfore if you wyll haue victory vpon them at this houre you maye confounde theym euerychone My lordes sayd Orson Pacolet telleth vs good tydynges, and me thinketh it wer good to yssue out of the cytie and renne vpon the paynyms that are on slepe. Thus was the counsayll ordeyned, and the thynge belybered. Then they made Ferragus to be put in a darke pryson vnto theyr retournyng. ¶Howe kynge Ferragus hoost was all discomfited, & put all to death, and how Ferragus was slayne afterward within Acquytayne. Then fyftene or syxtene thousand men yssued out of the cytie of Acquitaine, and they entred so pryuely into the hooste of the sarazyns that or the sunne was vp thee had vanquyshed them and put them all to death. At that houre was so great slaughter of painims that all the earth was couered with their bodyes. After the the batayll they wente into theyr tentes and tose all theyr rychesses and Iewelles. They retorned in to acquitayne with ryght great ioy. So when the duke was in his palays with all his barons he made to be brought before hym the gyaunte Ferragus. Than the kynge Ferragus that was awakened was so sorowfull that with the cryes he semede madde, Tho sayde the duke of Aquitaine to hym. The dyspayre auayleth you nothynge. But & you wyll be baptyzed, and take the lawe of Ihesu chryste, I shall saue youre lyfe, and make youe be honoured in my palays. By mahoune saide Ferragus yet hadde I rather be dead, and then he was beheaded incontynent. ¶After all these thynges, Orson wolde take leue of the durfke of acquitayne for to go into Constantynoble to succoure his father and the kyng Pepyn his vncle yt were besyged by the false sarazins, and tolde the duke al his entencion. ¶How Orson and the duke of Acquytayne went into Constantynoble with a great hoost, for to succoure the Emperoure. And howe Orson ledde the Empresse bellyssant with hym. Orsone sayd the duke you speake resonably and syth that you are delebered for to do so I wyll go in youre companye and mounte vpon the see wyth force and strength of me of armes, for to goo socoure youre father The Emperoure of Grece, ond your vncle the Kynge Pepyne. Muche Ioyous was Orsone and thanked the duke a thousand tymes. Soo it was not longe after than the duke assembled his men. And after that he had gyuen the cyte kepe to a noble knyght they entred vpon the see for to accompany Orson, the whyche ledde wythe hem his mother & his wyfe Fezonne. They wer much well garnysshed wyth men and vyttaylles, and rowed so muche vpone the Grekysshe see, that in shorte space the sawe the cyte of Constantynoble, wherof they were right Ioyous, and amonge the other the lady Bellissant begane for to wepe muche pyteouslye, in making lamentacyons whan she thought on her husband and on her fortune. Mother said Orson take comfort vnto you, for if it please god you shal se him shortly that you desyre soo muche, and of the treason by the whych you were accused you shall haue tidynges to your honour but I am pensyf howe we shall enter into Constanstynoble. Syr sayd Pacolet of this haue no doubte, for I shall shortely fynde the maner howe we shal entre into the cyte. For I wyll go into the cyte and tell theym of your comynge. Frende sayd Orson of that I pray you And declare vnto Ualetine the pyteous fortue of Clerymonde. By my fayth sayd Pacolet of that you shall pardon me, for to sone cometh he that bringeth euil tydynges. After these wordes pacolet went into the sarazins hoost for to delyuer Ualentine & the grene knight but of the prysons of the soudan that hadde bene take that daie by the sarazins afore Constantinoble as you shall here afterwarde. ¶Howe the chrysten men for to haue vytayles yssued out of Constantynoble. And howe Ualetyne and the grene knyght were taken prysoners by the false sarazyns and paynyms. The Emperoure of Grece and kynge Pepin that were besyeged wyth in Constantinoble by the false enemyes of our faythe and that knewe nothynge of the commynge of the Duke of Acquytayne that came for to succoure hym were in great indygence and necessyte. For themperoure and the kynge Pepin with dyuarse valiaunt and noble knyghtes were within the citie of Constantinnoble in ryght great scarcenes of vytaylles, ad they might get none in no maner of waies but wt ye sworde vpon their enemies. Then Talentyne knewe theyr great necessite, for the whiche thynge he that was full of hardynes accompanyed with the grene knyght and twenty thousand of fyghtyng men for to conquer som vytayles yssued out of Constantynoble and of the vytayles of the sarazins and paynyms thei charged two hondred charyottes, and slewe and put vnto death all them that kepte the vytailes. But as they retourned toward the cytie thynking to lede away the vytaylles there came agaynst the the soudan on one syde, and the kyng of Arabye, and the kyng Afficion on the other syde. There was ryght great destructio of the paynims, and muche pyteous slaughter of the christen men. Of the prouesse and valiantnes of the noble Ualentyne, it is not to be spoken of, for at that assaute he slew the kyng Dramagon, with the knight Clarian, and diuers other of whome the names by vnknowen. And the grene knyght with one stroke smote of the arme of the kyng of Moryenne with the shelde, and before hym he slewe his brother Abyllan withe ten othere knyghtes ryght stronge. But not withstandyng their strenght & hardynes they were euylly sucored, and hade euyll aduenture, wherof it was great pitie, for of their mortal enemies they were taken prisoners and ledde vnto the cursed soudan, the which for their takyng made ryght great ioye and feast. And for to iudge them vnto death he made to asseble .xv. kinges paynims. And ye christen men yt retorned into ye cyte fleyng told euery body that they were deed in the batayl. Now was Ualentyne & the grene knyght in the pauilion of the soudan straytely bounden and rygorously detayned, wherfore Ualentyne wepte sayenge. Alas fayre Clerymonde I shall neuer se you, wherof I haue my hert tryst and sorowful, By longe tyme you haue a biden me, and in paine and trauayll of my body I haue sought you long tyme as she that by the wyll of god was elect for to be my spouse and wyfe. And whan the tyme was comen yt of myn euylles I sholde haue had ailedgement, and of my dolours recomforte and consolacyon, I am of all pleasure vnwrapped and separed from my friendes and am in the handes of myne enemies. Farewel my fader noble emperour of Grece, for in me you shall haue no more a chylde. Farewell the noble Byllyssant my mother for you had neuer for me but a lytle pleasure nor comforte, and you shal neuer haue more but sorow and distresse. Farewel my valliaunt broder Orson that hath loued me with so good hert. For we hadde purposed to haue passed and fynysshed our dayes with our fader & mother, and nowe by a case vnfortunate it is sodainly reuersed, Whan the grene knyghte sawe that Ualentyne complayned him in bewaylynge his frends, he sayd vnto hym. Syr for god forgete fader & moder frendes and kynnesmen and make wee prayes vnto God that he wyll haue mercy on vs, and receyue our soules into his paradise. Take we our leue of this life and in worthe the dethe for to susteyne the fayth, & haue we trust in god that for vs wold suffer death. Now was ye soudan set in a chayre prepayred in great pryde rychly clothed, the which sayd. Lordes I haue made an othe vnto god mahowne that these two christen knyghtes the whiche at this present tyme and other tymes haue enforsed them for to bere vs domage shall dye velanosly wherfore aduyce you a monge you of what death thei shall dye. In saynge these wordes Pacolet keste hymselfe in the prece, the which threwe suche a charm that for all that they had sene hym before in the tyme that the Soudan Moradyn was taken, yet at that hour he was not knowen of no body. He entred into ye pauilio where as the iudgemente was gyuen on the two chrysten knyghtes, and also sone as he apperceyued Ualentyne and the grene knight he set him on both hys knees, and in sarasyns language by mahoune he salued ye saudan, & syth sayd vnto hym thus. Ryght dere syr vnderstonde my message. Knowe that I am messengere vnto your broder Groart the puyssaunt kyng of Argiere, the which for to soucour you and for to confound the chrysten men cometh toward you accompanied wt foure kynges stronge and puyssaunt and a great nombre of capytaynes that haue valyaunt knyghts for to helpe you. And by me he sendeth you worde to wete on what syde you wyl that he set his syege. And yf you haue ony christen prisoners that you sende him them and he wyl make them be led into his countrie for to draw the ploughe as dome beastes. So me thynketh that I see heare twayne that should be much propre for to do suche payne, of whome your father shal be Ioyous. In sayinge these wordes Pacolet blewe agynst the Soudan and made a charme so subtyll that of all that whyche he sayd was byleued. The Soudan was moche ioyous of thoose tydynges, and made hym to be wel serued that nyght, for he wende that he had sayde trouth Greate ioye demeaned Ualentyne & the grene knyght in their hartes whe they sawe Pacolet, but they made no semblaunt. Nowe the nyght was come that euery body withdrawe them vnto reste saue two hundred sarazyns that were in armes the which were committed for to kepe the prysoners that nyght. But they made euyll watche for theim. For when it came towarde mydnyght Pacolet wente vnto them, and in speaking vnto the sarazins by mahowne he kaste his charme by so subtyll a mater that they fell all vnto the earthe on slepe. Then he toke two good horses & came vnto the prysoners that were bounde againste a pyller. And after that he had vnbound them, incontinent & without any delay he made them for to mounte on horsbacke. And in this wyse he did deliuer them, and caste the out of theis enemies handes when they were in the fyelde out of the hoost Pacolet said vnto them. Lordes make good chere and take comfort vnto you. For know that vpon this lande is descended the good duke of Acquytayne, and the knight Orson for to succour you, and diuers captaines with a great nombre of fyghting men. And there is come also in their compani, the noble Empresse Bellyssant, and the fayre Fezonne. Frende sayd Ualentyne, wherefore commeth not the fayre Clerymonde. By my faythe sayde Pacolet she woulde haue come ryght gladlye, but also sone as she was mounted vpon ye sea, for the odoure of the water she was so seke at her harte that it was force to leade her agayne into Acquytayne. Ualentyne beleued hym and for that tyme he questyoned hym no forder, for Ualentyne wend verely that he had said truthe. Then sayd Pacolet lordes goo in to Constantynoble and make to morowe in the mornyng in suche wyse that you yssue oute of the cytie with the greate nobre of men of armes that you can make for to go against your mortal enemies. And I shall do so muche on the other syde that all the hoost of the duke of Acquytayne that is come shall geue assaulte. And at that houre soudan shall beleue that yt is succoure that cometh to him. For I haue made him to vnderstand that the kyng of Argy his brother is aryued, accompanied with foure kynges, the whiche to morowe in the mornyng oughte to fynde them in hys hoost. Pacolet sayde Ualentine you speake wysely & so it shal be done. At these wordes they toke leue the one to the other. Pacolet retourned towarde ye duke of Acquytayne that was vpon the seasyde with his hoost, & tolde hym howe he had bene within the soudans host & how he had deliuered Ualetyne and the grene knyght. And after he tolde hym how by his sorte he hade made the soudan beleue yt his brother the kyng Groan wold come and sucour on him the morow. Pacolet said Orson you are much to be praysed when you can do such thynges. Syr sayd Pacolet there is an other thynge, yt is that to morowe in the morning we go and assail the hoost of the sarazins. For they of Constantynoble with great puyssauce of men of armes ought to assayll the on their syde. And by this maner they shall be all discofyted. For of all the armye on this syde the soudan shal thynke that we be paynyms by the subtyll languag yt I haue enchaunted him with. Of this enterprise was Ioyous and muche ameruayled the duke and they of his courte. He made his men to be armed and appointed for to perfourme the dede, and al ye nyght he made to make good watche aboute hym. ¶The tydynges were anone throughe the citie of Constantinoble of ye deliueringe of Ualentine and the grene knight. The Emperour and king Perin made great Ioye for theyr deliueraunce. And Ualentine recounted to them al ye maner of his takynge. And howe that he and the grene knight hadde ben delyuered bi Pacolet out of the handes of the Souda Bruiant. And tolde vnto them also the comminge of the duke of Acquitaine and his brother Orson, whiche for to come and succour them had passed the see with a great nauie of men of armes, and finablie he tolde them all ye enterprise that was made for to assail the painims and sarazins, euen so as it had ben delibered bi Pacolet. ¶How by the succoure of the duke of Acquitaine all the painims and sarzins were slayne before the citi of Constantinoble. Whan the Emperoure & king Pepyn heard those tydynges dylygently and wythoute ony soiournyng they made to armee their men all the nyght and put them in poynt. And of theyr host they made to make fyue bataylles. The Fyrst was gyuen vnto Ualentyne, the second to the grene knyght. The thyrde to the kynge Pepyn. The fourth to Myllon dangler. The fift was giuen vnto Sampson of Orleauce that bare in his baner a bere of siluer. Thus ordeined the Emperour his batayles. And whan it came to the breking of this dai the yssued out of the cyte for to go assayll the sarazyns So whan they were vpon the felde they made to blow vp trumpettes and clarons, where the noyse was soo great that the sarazyns at that houre cryed alarme ad lept out of theyr tentes. At that houre the paynyms & sarazins were sore assaylled by the chrysten men. The batayll was peteous for the chrystens that daye, and for the painimes and sarazins cruell discomfiture, for at that assaute was slaine fifti thousand sarazins and panims. There was the kinge Pepin that in giuinge courage vnto his men cried with a highe voyce monte ioye saint Denis. Than there was a sarazin that with a high voyce cried saienge vnto the Sowdan. Ha sirre rule abacke ad thinke for to saue our liues. For to nyght we haue loste our two prisoners, and also we haue sene cominge against vs a greate armye. Mi mahoune saide the Soudan I knowe well we are betraied, but for all that haue good truste in our goddes, and thinke we for to defende vs. At that houre the sarazins toke soo greate courage for to fight, that bi force of armes thei constreined ye christen men for to go abacke again but lytell auayled theyr pryde, for there came smyting vpon them the duke of Acquytaine & Orson, ye which assayled them so asperly that without any remissione they fynysshed their dayes, soo that of all their hooste there escaped but .xxxiii. And soo by the wyll of Ihesu christ, and by the great prowesse of the valyaunt prynces the cursed sarazyns were dyscomfyted. ¶Howe the Emperour receiued his sone Orson with great ioye, and his wyfe Bellyssant. And when the battayll had taken an ende & that the christen men were gathered together agayne. Ualentyne & his brother Orson that knewe eche other came before the Emperoure in muche great reuerence. Father sayd Ualetyne here may you se my brother Orso the whiche you neuer sawe, by whome you haue bene sucoured in this iourney. Then the Emperour embraced his son Orson pyteously wepyng, and also did the kyng Pepyn. Fayre sonne sayd the Emperoure wel be you come, for by you my ioye is dublede and my hope fortefyed. Orson sayd the kyng Pepyn doo you not remembre howe ye smote mee downe of my horse in the wodde whe I chased you. Fayre vncle of this I ought well to be remembred on and of diuers other thynges done bi me. But at this preset tim we ought to thinke none other thynge but to thanke god of the vyctory yt he hath geuen vs agaynst the enemies of the fayth, for with all our puyssaunce we ought to study in our hartes howe we myght auenge Iesu Chryst. For to heare those wordes all the companye was greatly reioysed, and praysed muche the wysdome of Orson. Then assebled the Emperoure and kynge Pepyn. Ualentyn and Orson and the grene knyght, Blandymayn and Guydarde the marchaunte that had vanquysshed the false Archebysshop. And in greate honoure and tryumphe wente for to se the tentes of the noble Empresse Bellyssant and of the fayre Fezonne, the which in a biding the dyscomfiture of the sarazyns were in a fayre pauilion honestely accompanied, and there they prayed deuoutly vnto God that it would please him to kepe the Emperoure and his men from the daunger of the paynyms. whan the Empresse bellyssante knewe that the batayle was wone she sayd vnto Fezonne. My doughter make good chere for you shal se the Emperour and noe the whiche is Orsons father that hath take you vnto wife. Mother said Fezoyne god be thanked, for to se suche a thynge I haue great desyre. In sayenge these wordes the Emperour arryued before the pauilion of the ladies and all his companye. And whan the ladies apperceyued hym they went out agaynste hym. Than whan the Emperour apperceiued his wyfe Bellysat he lepte of his horse in wepynge and syghinge tenderly And without that he might speke ony word he enbraced the lady the whych set her vpon both her knees. In that place assembled ye Emperoure and the good lady that by the space of twenty yere and more hadde be separat in sondre. Now it is not to be demaunded yf for to find the one the other they were Ioyous, and if that by profounde pyte they had theyr hartes touched & oppressed so that by natural loue they fel vnto the earth in armes togyther in a swowne. And whan valentyne and Orson sawe the great pyte of their father and mother moche tenderly and pyteously they begane for to wepe, and harde besyde them they fel both in a swowne. The kinge Pepyn and dyuers other barons & knyghtes that behelde that thynge begane moche tenderly for to wepe. And after that the Emperoure and his wyfe Bellissant had aswaged theyr dolours, and that they wer a wakened out of theyr swowne ye emperour sayd vnto his wife. Alas my loue much ought it to dysplease me at the heart ye doloure and payne that your body hath suffred sith your exyle. But and yf it please you I praye you pardon me for my great faute, for wt greate payne maye ony kepe them from treason. My lorde said the good lady of the tribulacion that I haue bene in, haue you no thought. For sithe ye hour that I sawe you of all my dolours I haue had aledgement & comforte. But of one thyng I praie you that is that it wyl please you to shewe me the good marchaunt by ye whyche the treason hath ben knowen, and the false archebysshop ouer comen. My loue sayd the Emperour here may you se him, for it is the good guydarde by the which the thynge hath ben knowen and your honour saued. Frende sayd the lady vnto the marchaunt well are you worthy to be byloued and holden dere among all the other, for the great proffite that you haue done to the Emperour of Grece and to the noble bloode of Fraunce, wherfore from hens forward I reteyne you for my chamberlayn, & with that I wyl that you haue for your payne a thousand marke of fyne golde. Ladie sayd the marchaut I thanke you and al my lyfe I shal serue you truely. Than spake Ualentine vnto his moder and sayd. My lady mother please it you to speke to me and tell me tydynges of my good loue Clerimond. Ha fayre son sayd the lady take comfort vnto you For Clerymond hathe ben falsly stolen awaye in the cite of Acquitaine and deliuyred vnto kyng Trompart that was comen for to socoure the paynyms before ye cyte. whan Ualentine herd those wordes he beheld pacolet thynkynge that by hym he had ben deceyued, and by a dyspytefull courage wolde haue smytten hym with a glayue. And than pacolet that knewe his furour keste hym selfe vpon his knes and sayd that for god he wold not be hangrye with hym. For I my selfe haue ben betrayed by a false enchauntour, and my hors stolen, but yt not withstandinge I haue cut of his head, when Ualentyne vnderstod yt he had lost the faire Clerimond by treason, and than Pacolet and all the other were innocentes. he caste out a crye so pyteous and soo great that all they that behelde hym were constrayned for to wepe, At that houre both prynces barons and knyghtes toke their waye for to go in to Costantinoble. And the priestes and clerkes in greate deuocion wente in a generall procession, in the which they made to goo wyues and chyldren agaynste the valyaunt prynces that had destroyed the paynymes in syngynge hymnes and laudes vnto God tyll that they came vnto the greate church of saynt Sophye accompanyeng them, and for great ioye and pytye wepte tenderly. And after yt they had made their prayers in the sayd churche, and geuen thankes vnto god, the Emperoure and kynge Pepyn entred into the Palays, the whiche demened so greate Ioye the .vi. dayes the kepte table rounde. Soo it nedeth not to be demaunded of if there was great triumphe and noble seruyce, for euery body was Iocunde & made great chere and feaste, for the gracious vyctory that god had geuen them agaynst theyr enemyes. And after certayne dayes dyuers prynces and barons toke leue of the Emperour for to retourne into their countreys, of whome I thynke not to make youe any more mencion saue alonely of kyng Pepyn. ¶Howe the kyng Pepyn toke leue of the Emperour of Grece for to retourne into Fraunce. After the destruction of the enemyes of the chrysten fayth, the whiche for to demynyshe the fayth & destroye the christen men had besyeged Constantynoble, the kynge Pepyne toke leue of the Emperoure for to returne into Fraunce. When Orson sawe that the kyng dyd retourne he said vnto him. Syr I haue great desire to go with you into Fraunce, and to passe and vse my dayes in your seruyce without euer for to chaung you for to serue any other. ¶Orson sayd kynge Pepyn of that I am contente. And syth that you haue so good courage for to serue me loyally know that I shal leode you into Fraunce, and aboue al for to gouern my realme I shal make you my constable. And if it happened that bi the wyll of God my lytell sone Charles fynyshed his dayes durynge my tyme I shall make you kynge of Fraunce Syr sayd Orson I thanke you a thousande tymes for syth that it is your wyll for to receyue me into youre seruyce I wyl lede with me my wyfe Fezonne, & vnto you be euer true and loyal, and with my sharpe swearde defende your good right. So they departed fro Constantinoble with muche great chiualry. For the departynge of kynge Pepin the Emperoure & the Empresse Bellyssaunt wept bitterly, and also dydde al the other as well lytell as greate. Orson kyssed his broder Ualetine in recomaundynge hym vnto God, and wepynge bitter teres, Of his moder Bellissant he might not take leue for the great sorow that he hade to leue her saue alonely that he enbraced her and kyssed her swetlye After the leue taken of lytle and grete the kyng mounted vpon the see with his compani. And the Emperoure and them of his courte retorned in to ye cyte of Constantynoble wepinge haboundauntly. But with ye departinge of kyng Pepin more than ony other the child Ualetine was dispealsaunte. And for the loue of Clerimonde the whiche he had loste he sayd vnto the Emperoure of Grece wepinge piteously. Dere and redouted fader please it you pardon me if I take leue of you for I shall neuer in my lyfe haue Ioye nor rest tyl that I knowe certayne tidinges where my loue is become For in dauger of my body I haue conquered and won her, for the whiche I ought well for too desyre her and bewayle her. Whan the Empresse his mother vndestode that hyr chylde wolde go hes way, she fel in a swoun Mother sayde Ualentine leaue your weping, for vnto the deathe I wyll seeke her that I loue so muche. And if it happen that I can note fynde here, neuer the dais of my lyfe shall I haue Ioye, but shall desire the death for to a bredge my dayes, and my dolorous dyscomfortes. Than he called Pacolet and sayd to hym. Frend if it please the to serue me, in this necessitie, & come with me thou shall neuer haue worse than I, Sir saide Pacolet as for that it shall not stycke, for I am ready and apparaylled for to go with you and folowe you in eueri place, and do your good pleasure, thus was Pacolet delybered for to go with Ualentine. ¶And Ualentine was so taken with ye loue of the fayre lady clerymonde that he lefte father and Mother, and withoute soiourninge he made him ready and so departed out of Constantinoble with thre seruauntes alonelye, for to find her that his heart was so sorowful fore. Of the sorow of ye Emperoure and of the Empresse Bellissant it ca not be recounted. For the were in suche paine that wt out spekinge ony worde they entred into theyr chambre piteously discomforted. And Ualentyne that hade his courage constaut for to acheue his enterprise mouted on horsebacke for to go toward the haue, and ther entred into a ship and his company. ¶Nowe I shall leue to speke of him and wil speke of king Pepin, that whiche arriued in Paris and was receiued honourably. For out of euery churche issued processyons & prestes and clarkes and men of euerie estate went a great waye out of the citye againste him. And amonge the other there was the quene Berthe ye which kissed hym moche sweteli. Charles his lytel sonne that was wise & wel taught salued his father ye which tooke him in his armes and kyssed hym, and after entered in to the palays with great honoure muche rychlye accompanied And for the loue of his cominge there was made a grete feest, and diuers grete offices was gyuen that daye but aboue all the other the valiaut knight Urson was mounted in honoure, so much and in suche maner that al that the which he wolde saye and commaund it was done and holden. He was so prudente and so wyse that by hym was all the court gouerned, the malefactours punysshed, and the good eleuate in honoure. ¶Howe Haufray and Henry ymagined great tresone against Orson by the ayde and consentynge of twayne of their neues. There was none that hade to doo wythe the kinge that sought other meane than Orson for the whiche thynge Haufray and Henrye that I haue made mencyon of to fore hadde so gret enuye agaynst ye good orson, so gret yt they ymagyned mortall treasone against him with all their puyssaunce. And sayd the one to the other it was to great a reproch vnto them and to greuous whan yt Orson was eleuat more in honoure then thei. By god sayd Haufray vnto his brother Henry, well ought we to praise our puyssaunce litell whan we cane not take vengeaunce of Orson for if he reygne longe we shal se the tyme that by him we shalbe caste out of the realm of Fraunce, brother sayd Henry you haue sayd truth. Now we be but two brethren germaines and now to comforte the one the other and helpe agaynst our enemies, but vpo this mater I can not tel what to thinke Henry sayd Haufray vnderstande my reason, we haue two neuewes that are the sonnes of our eldeste syster, that is for to wyte Florence and Garniere, the whiche are muche hardye and fyerse, And me thinketh that bi them twayne a treasone should be sone conspyred and made soner then by vs, for they knewe wel for a truth that the kyng loued them not, and that he would geue soner credece vnto other then them. On the other part the one is botyller of the kynge, and the other is vssher of ye chambre that he slepeth in. And by the means of theym twayn we may entre in to the chambre of kyng Pepyn oure father and slee hym in hys bedde, and euery bode wyl saye that it hath bene Orson, for aboue al thy other he is the chiefe gard of his bodi, and trusteth moost in hym. And by this meane the sayd Orson shall be condampned to death, and the realme shal be holly in our handes, for our brother Charles is not yet puissaunt ynough for to gouerne vs. Haufray sayd Henry you haue ryght well deuysed, but for to accomplysshe this thyng it is expedient to make great dylegence in this wyse ymagyned the two false traytours the deth of the noble and puyssaunte kyng Pepyn, the whyche was their naturall father. And in soo euyl an hour hee had engendred them that for the sauynge of theyr soules they cared full lyttell. They sente for ther two cursed traytours, that is for to wyte Florent and Garniere the whiche were ryght valiaunt & hardy. And whan they were come before them Haufray toke the words and sayd in this maner. Lordes vnderstonde our entencyon for we are delybered my brother and I for to do a thynge that we may haue all proffyte by, & shall reyse you and moute you in honour more than euer you were, the whiche thynge I desyre because that you ar my propre neuewes and of my propre bloed, and owe more to desyre your good tha ony other ma for to come to an ende I wyll tel you myne entecio, you knowe that the kynge Pepyn howe well that he is oure father neuer loued vs in his lyfe with good hert. Euer with his puyssaunce he hath reysed vp the straungers and exalted them in honoure and in all offyces and dygnytyes, more than vs, wherefore all these thynges consydered my brother Henry and I that are youre vncles legytymes (wyll and consent) and are delybered for to make kyng Pepyn dye. And after his death we foure shall governe & holde his londe at our owne wyll. But it behoued that the thynge be accomplisshed by one of you twayne. And me thinketh that you Garnyere are the most proprest for to vnder take this thing for you haue a couenable offyce for to do it more than ony other seynge that you are mayster vssher and pryncypall garde of the kynges chambre. And maye knowe bothe nyghte and daye who entreth in to the sayd chambre, for the whiche thynge you maye hyde you in some secrete place, and when the kynge shal be in his bedde on slepe you shall slee hym without makynge any noyse. And on the morowe in the mornyng when the tidinges shal be that the kyng is dead, the charge and the blam shall be gyuen vnto Orson, because that euery nyght he slepeth and resteth moost nerest his bodye, and so he shall be iudged & condempned vnto death. And aftere these thynges we shall take the lyfe sone from the lytel Charles. And by this meane the realme shall abide vnto vs for to departe it after our pleasures. Uncle sayd Garnyere of this feate dought you nothynge, for kyng Pepyn your father shall lese his lyfe. Now was the treason ordeyned agaynst kyng Pepyn that thought none yll, by ye two cursed children that had no pite to make their father dye. In an euill houre is the chylde borne that wolde purchase suche a death agaynst his father And in an euill houre was euer engendred Haufray & Henry when by them treason was done, & many countreys marred, By theym was thyir neuewe Garnier full of so euil wil that sone after that the treason was made he espyed a nyght as the kyng souped and tooke a sharpe poynted knyfe & subtylly entred into the chabre ryall, and behynd the hangyng he hydde hym soo secretely that he myght not be apperceyued of nobody. And when the houre was come that the kyng shoulde go vnto reste, by the gardes and chaberlaynes he was brought vnto bedde as the custome was. The king entred into the bedde, the whiche recommenden hym vnto God muche deuoutly, and all yssued out of ye chambre saue Orson that deuysed with the kyng to slepinge tyme. And when Orson sawe that ye king would slepe without makyng any more noyse he left hym, and the nereste hym that he myght he layde him downe vpon a couche bedde, ¶Howe Garnyere entred into kynge Pepyns chambre for to accomplysshe his cursed enterpryse, and how he left the knyfe within the kynges bedstrawe. When it came towarde mydnyght the traytoure Graniere yssued out of this place, and in bering the knyfe in his hande he went vnto the bedde of king Pepyn for to acheue his enterpryse, but when he was besyde hym, and that he lifte vp his arme for too haue put hym to death, hym thoughte that the king would haue wakened, wherfore so great feare toke him that he let hymselfe slyde downe by the bedde syde, wher as he was a great whyle and durste not remeue hym. After he woulde haue smyten secondly, but so great fere toke hym as he would haue smytted hym, that all hys body fayled, and began for too tremble in suche wyse that he myght not acheue his enterpryse, and put the knyfe within the bedde. After he retourned into hys place all tremblynge for to hyde hym in abydynge the day, so strongly afraid that he would haue bene a thousand mile beyond the sea. And Orson was in his bedde that of that dede doubted nothyng, & dreamed a marueilous dreame. For it semeth him in sleping that the would haue taken awaye the honoure of his wyfe Fezonne. And that besyde her was two theues that conspyred treason agaynst him. After him thought that besyde a ponde he sawe two great herones that foughte with a hawke, and with all their puyssaunce enforced them for to slee hym. But the hawke defended hym so valiauntly that he trauayled the two herons in such wyse that they had ben both dead if it hade not bene a great multytud of lytel byrdes that descended vpon ye hawke, and would haue slayne hym anone yf ther had not come an Egle that succoured hym. In this dream Orson a wakened yt of this dreame was much a marueyled and began for too saye. Ha veray God kepe me from treason, and comforte my brother Ualentyne in suche maner that of ye noble lady Clerymonde he may haue certayne tydinges. At that houre the daye appered and Orson issued softly out of the chambre for wakenynge of the kynge. whan Garnyere sawe that Orson was gon out of the chambre, also sone as he might he yssued out and wente vnto hys lodgynge rennynge full faste And ther he found the two brethren Haufray and Henry & wyth them Florent the whyche had great desyre and lust to knowe some tidinges of theyr cursed and dysloyall treason. Beware Garnyere that you tel vs the trouthe howe our enterpryse gothe. Lords said Granyere by the god almyghty that hath created al ye worlde for all the rychesse of Fraunce I wold not doo so muche agayne as I haue done. And as to the regard of kynge Pepyn knowe that he is yet on lyue, for euen so as I thought for to haue slayne hym I was soo afrayed that my hearte faylled me, and wolde not haue had the courage for to haue domaged his body for all the golde in the world. But of another treason I aduysed me, for I haue left the knyfe yt I bare in the kinges bedde. Si I haue thought that we shall accuse Orson of treason and shall tell the kynge that they are .iiii. of one appoyntment that are delibered for to sle ye kynge of whome Orson is the pryncypall, and shall saye also that they wyl make ye lytle Charles to dye for to haue bytwene them foure the realme of Fraunce with the appertenauntes. And for to proue oure feate ye better and be byleued of thys thynge we shall tel how Orson hath made redy hys geare, and lefte the knyfe wyth in the bedde. And yf ony body demaunde vs howe we do knowe it, we shal say that they wer in the chambre spekynge of thys matter. & how one of vs was besyde the dore and vnderstode there secrete. Garnyere sayd Haufray you are muche subtyl and speketh wysely. And if it happened that Orson would saye ye contrary, you & your brother shall take batayll agaynst hym, & I know wel for a certainete that he hath not the power for too vanquyshed you. And if that it happened by a ventur that the worst turned vpon you, my brother Henri & I shall be wel garnished of men for to succour you. Lordes sayd Garnyere and florente youre delyberacion is right good, and we haue wel the courage for to acheue the enterprise. Thus was the treason the second time conspired agynst the noble knyght Orsone the whiche of all this dede was pure and innocent. The day was clere and the houre was come after that the kyng had herde masse that he entred into the halle ryal and was sette at dyner. Ther was Haufray and Henry that serued at the table, the which shewed good semblaunt vnto Orson, but wt their harts thei purchaced him mortall treason with all their puyssaunce. And whan Garniere sawe that it was tyme for to speake, he entred in to the halle and came before the kyng, the which he salued wt great reuerence & sayd to him. Redoubted syr it is true yt of youre beninge grace you haue made me knyght and geuen me office in your courte more honester than vnto me apartayneth. And because that you haue done me so muche honour to vpholde me in your seruyce I ought not to be in place by treason wher as your dommage is purchased or mortall treason conspired. Wherfore I am come towarde youre noble grace as a true seruaunt ought for to do for to declare vnto you a treason that of late hath bene conspyred against your ryal maieste. And to the end that you maye kepe your persone out of the daunger I aduertyse you, and that you may punyshe the malefactoues as reason is, Garnyere sayde the kyng tel on your courage for with a good wyll I shall here you. ¶Howe Garnyer accused Orson fasley of treason vnto kynge Pepyn, and how the knyfe was founde in the kynges bedde. Syr sayd Garnyere make Oorson to be holde least that he renne awaye, for vpon him shal tourne the losse and dommage. He is ye traitoure by whome the thinge is begonne and ought to be brought vnto an ende. And if that you wil knowe the maner, wyte that they are foure of ye moost greatest of your courte that are delybered for to make you dye, of the whiche Orsone is the pryncypall that ought to make you dye in your bedde, & smyte you to the harte with a knyfe whan you shall be on slepe, and to the ende that you beleue me ye better today as thei made their accorde together I was in a certaine place where as they knewe me not, and haue vnderstanden how Orson sayd vnto the other that ye knyfe that you shall be slayne withall is hydde with in your bedde, ad if it please you for to goo, or for to sende any body you shall finde the thyng veritable. Syr sayd Florent that was on the other syde, my brother sayeth trouth wher of I am ryght sorowful that they to whome you haue done so much goud will purchause your death. ¶The kyng was muche amarueyled of those wordes, and in dyuers maners and coutenaunces beheld Orsone in sayeng, False and dysloyall man haue you had suche a thoughte for to desyre my death I that all the tyme of my lyue haue holded you more derer than the chyldre that I haue engendred. Ha syr saide Orson beleue not so lyghtly againste me, for I thought neuer treason in my daies, but am accused of this dede by their false enuye. Nowe speake no more said the kyng, for & ye knife be founde in the bedde I holde you culpable of ye dede and demaunde none other profe. Then he called baros and sayde to them. Lordes by Ihesus christe I was neuer soo muche amarueiled as I am of this treason. Syr sayd Myllon dangler I can not tell howe it goeth but with payne may I beleue that Orson woulde enterpryse suche a thynge agaynste your royall mayestie seynge that he is your neuewe. yea sayde the kynge but and we fynde a knyfe within the bedde it is an euedent sygne that the thyng ought to be beleued. Nowe for god sayd Myllon dangler let vs go and se this experience. Then the kyng went into the chambre with dyuers of his barons and knightes. And as they were before the bedde they founde the knyfe as the traytoure Garnyere had tolde the. Alas sayd the kyng in whome may one haue truste, when my propre neuewe that I haue holde dere is couethus of my death and of my lyfe enuyous But syth that the dedes is suche I swar and promes vnto you that ther shall neuer be a daye of respyte tell that he be hanged and strangled. Than a valyaunt knyght the wyche was called Symond, ran towarde Orson for he loued hym much & sayd to hym Alas fayre syr flye anone from hense and thynke for to escape, for the kyng hath founde the knyfe within the bedde as Garnyere hath tolde hym wherefore the kyng hath sworne that he shall make youe be hanhed & strangled also sonne as he shall be come. Care you not sayde Orson for I haue good troust in god that he wil kepe my good ryght. Then the kynge entred in to the halle where as Orson was kepte strayghtly with fyftene stroung knyghtes. syth he mayd to call lordes and aduocates for to iudge Orson. But God that forgetteh not his good frendes, sayued him from the false trayturs and gaue hym the victory agaynst them. ¶Howe Orson when they would haue iuged hym, put opposycion and demaunded batayll agaynste hys accusers, the wiche was vttred hym by the twelue peres of Fraunce. When Orson was before the kyng and before thei Iudges of hys palays, he sayde before theym all thus. Ryght redoubted ser, and you my lordes and barons. that be here assembled, you knowe that no man can kepe hym from treason nor flee the fortune when it cometh. And sith that it is so that I am accused of cryme against the meiestie ryall, yt is of the kinges death, and that you be here assempled for to iudge me and me wordes may not be harde nor beleued agaynste myne enemyes I demaund ryght before euery body, & ye law of your londe that is suche that whan a knight is accused of murdre and treason, & he wyll defende hym in batayl he ought to be receiued. Now I am a knight that holdeth my selfe without reproche and innocent of the dede, so I wyll by the ordenaunce aboue sayd be receyued in my defences, yf by the assystens of your courte it be ordeyned and iudged me. And for to make my self clere lo here my gloue that I present before you all to abyde batayl. And yf yt he ouer comen in batayl do Iustyce with my body euen as much a case requyreth. Orson sayd Garnyere of suche a thynge you may wel holde your peace, for neuer pleaseth it god that for a thig proued I take batayll agaynst you. Ha traytoure sayd Orson it is nothyng proued, yf it be not som man that doubteth not his dampnynge, and loueth his honour that for suche a case maye not Iudge to death whan I wyll haue the felde in denying the case without confessinge it, he ought nat to be condened. Upon these wordes the twelue peres of Fraunce made to haue Orso out of the place wyth his two aduersaries for to dispute the reasons of both parties. Soo it was Iudged by them that the demaunded of Orson was resonable, & that he ought to be herde and receyued in his reasons And than they made Garnyere and his brother to com before the kynges presence. And the duke Myllon dangler demaunded Graynere which were the foure perparsones that were concentyng to ye kings death. Lordes sayd Granyere of that enquyre no more, For I wil not tel it you for all the golde of Frauce. Garnyer said the Iudge that was ordeyned, therfore I condempne you and your brother to receiue Orsons gloue, & fight agaynst hym, for sythe that you wyll not declare them that are culpable of ye thing, it is lightly to be beleued that in your feate is malyce. Ioyous was Orsone of that appoyntement, and keste his gloue vnto the two traytours saying. Lordes se here my gloue that I delyuer vnto the two traytours Garnyere and Florent in suche a couenaut that if I may not conquere them. I offre my body to be hanged shamfully. Now auaunce sayd the kyng the thyng is accorded and ye Iudgement is geuen. But for to bryng vnto an ende ye enterpryse it behoueth you too geue hostage and surete, for to be forth comyng at the daye assigned. Then Haufray ad Henrye abode and offred their bodyes Florente and Garnyere. And the duke Myllon, and the duke Sampson Galeram and Geruays offred their bodyes and abode for Orso. And promised to yelde hym agayne at ye monethes ende that was assygned. Soo when the end of the monethe was come, and the day that they shold fyght, the duke Myllon dangler, Sampson Galeram, and Geruays brought forthe Orson, for he was well beloued of them. And whan he was armed and mounted one horsebacke, he rode throughe the cytye muche noblye accompanyed towarde the place ordeyned. So he hadde not longe ben there when Haufray and Henry entred into the fielde with their twoo neuewes rychely armed. Muche redoubted Garnyer and Florent theyr aduersarie Orson. But Haufray & Henrye euer comforted them, and promised the succour. And euen so as they were entred into the fielde for to do their deuoure, the bysshop of Parys went towarde theim and made them all thre for to swere vpon a boke as the custome is. And after the bysshop wente out of the fielde After came the heraudes and ye kepers of ye fyeld that made al to yssue out that were within saue the .iii. chapions. Now Haufray had appointed thre hondred me that he had put within a great place the nerest ye field that he myght, and sayd and commaunded vnto them that also sone as they should here them blow his horn that they should come toward hym. Well thought the traitours to haue ben succoured and defeded in their necessitte, but lytell auayled all their enterpryse, for al so sone as the gardes commaunded the champeons to do their deuoure Orson couched his speare and smote his horse with the sporres & came against his enemies by muche great courage and he gaue garnier so great a stroke that he persed his shelde & his harneis through out. And Florent was on the other syde that gaue Orson a muche marueilous stroke, but he set as much bi it as if it had smytten agaynst a towre. False cursed traytour and disloyal thau hast accused me with wrog but to daye I shall shewe the where loyalte doth reste. ¶At these woordes with his bryght swoorde he gaue Garniere so great a stroke that he smot him out of his sadle vnto the earth, and subtylly there wytall he pulled his helme of his head, and after would haue cut of his head if it had not ben his brother Florent yt smote Orson muche rudely. Then Orson retourned & smot Garnyere in suche wise that he cut of his left eare, and syth said vnto him, fayre maister that purchaceth treason you ought not to lose by the bergayne. There bga a strong batayll betwene the thre champions. Garniere conquered his helme againe and put it on his head and came towarde Orso for to dammage him with all his might. But he had ben discomfited anone if it had not bene Florent that oftentymes socoured hym. ¶How Orson slewe Florent in the fielde, and vanquyshed Granyere, and howe Haufray cut of hys head as he would haue confessed the treason. Orson had muche payne and trauayll for to confounde the two traytours for thei wer stronglye armed and also toke courage, for Haufray and Henry that hadde promysed them succoure and helpe, and Orson dydde so about Granier that he wounded him right sore. So whan he felt him self wouded he desceded to the earthe & habandoned his horse. After he came agaynst Orson and smote his horse in suche maner that he cut of one of his legges and felled hym vnto the earthe. But Orson was dyligent and strong, for when he felt the horse fall he auoyded the styropes and lept vpon the earthe And syth came vnto Garnyere and toke hym betwen his armes so mightely that he toke his sheld from him & threwe him to the earth, but as he would haue gyue hym a foyne in the belly. Florente sporred his horse for to succour his brother, & gaue Orson so great a stroke vpon ye helme that he made hym for too rele. Orsone ran vnto hym that had dispyte and smote hym with so great a courage that he ouerthrewe the horse dead to the earth, and toke of Florentes helme from his head, of the whyche he was sore abasshed. and founde none other remedy saue for to fle and renne about the field in coueryng his head with his shelde. And Orson rane after hym with a fyerse courage that for to se hym flee had great pleasure. Ha Florent sayde Garnyere wherfore flee you so muche, retoren you agayne and thynke for to defend you, for yf you haue good courage to day he shall be vanquyshed, At there wordes the two traytours assayled the valiaunt Orson much asperly, and with their trenchyng swordes gaue hym so many strokes that through his harneys the strokes entred, and made the bloud to yssue out by great haboundaunce Then Orson that felte hymselfe wounded reclaymed god and the virgin Mary muche deuoutely, and gaue Florent so great a stroke that he smote of hys arme wt the sword. During this batail Fezone was in a church in prayinge god deuotuly that it wolde pleyse him for to kepe her good loue Orson & defende hem in geuyng him victorye agaynste his enemyes. The people was moch abashede of ye great dedes of armes that Orson dyde. Dolente and sorowfull was Florent wha he had loste his arme, and not for that he left not for to assayll Orson with all his puyssaunce. ¶And whan Orson sawe him come he made semblaunte for to smyte Garnyere and after drewe his stroke agayne sodaynly and smote Floret in suche maner that he smote him downe deed to the erthe, after he seyd vnto Garnyere. Traytoure thou muste go after or elles knowledge before euery body ye treaso that you haue braced. ¶Orson said Garnyere it shal go other wyse, for if you haue slayne my brother, to day I shal take vengeauce. ¶Haufray sayd Henry our feate goeth euyll for Orson hath al redy slayne and vndone our neuewe Florent, & you shall se anone yt he wil vaynquysse Garnyere and make him confesse the treason, by the whiche we shall be for euer dyshonured and in daunger of deathe if we fynde not maner for to fle & escape. Brother sayd Haufray that was full of treason. I shall tel you what we shal doo Also soone as we shall se that Garnyere is ouercomen or that he confesse the treason we shall entre in to the felde and in signe to maynteine Orson we shall cut of our neuewes head. And so the treason may neuer be knowen. Be God sayd Henry none can saye nor deuyse better. Thus thoughe the two cursed & desloeall traytours newe treasons for to hyde the olde. And the tow champions are within the felde yt assaylleth eche other muche asprely. Garnyere sayd Orson you se wel that you maye not defende you agaynste me. And therfore thynke for to yelde you & confesse your cursed treason, and I promyse you for to saue your lyfe and make your peas towarde kynge Pepyn, and shall sende you vnto the Emperoure of Grce my father that for the loue of me shall reteyne you of his courte and geue you great wages, Boye sayde Garnyere thy promyse serueth me of nothynge, for syth that I haue lost one of myne eres I shall neuer be praysed nor honoured in no place. So Had I rather dye valyauntly agaynste the, or conquere thy body & delyuered the vnto shameful death then for to defyle mine honoure. By my fayth sayd Orson right gladly I accordeth you. And syth that you haue enuy for to dye, you shall haue founde in me A good master Thynke for to defende you, for here is your laste daye. At these wordes he went towarde Garnyere and wyth strenghe of armes threwe hym vnder hym and pulled hys helme from hys head. And Haufray wyche sawe that there was no more remydye, cryed right hye Orson slee him not for we knowe right well yt wyth great wronge he hath accused you, so we wyll do the Iustyce as to the traitour apperteyneth, we wil neuer let hym lyue nor hold hym of our parentage. He entred into the felde and sayde vnto Garnyere. Fayre master confesse your dede and the maner of the treason, and we shal do so muche to the kyng that of your fautes ye shal haue pardon. Lordes sayde the traytour Garnyere I haue done treason and put the knyfe in the kinges bed In sayenge these wordes Haufray that was subtyll and cautelous drew hys sworde & to the end that he shuld speke no ferther forthe of that thynge he slewe hym in the same place, and after sayde. Lordes nowe let thys traytour be taken and hanged on the galowes, for he hath well deserued it. Then he sayde vnto Orson. Cosyn I am ryght Ioyous of the vyctory that you haue had, for God hath wel shewed that you are true and loyal. And for al that Garnyer was my neuewe, yet shal I neuer clame hym for my bloud syth he hath wylled to medle wyth treason. Anone cam thether the fayre lady Fezonne that colled and kessed Orson ryght swetely. And then kyng Pepyn demandede hym. Fayre neuewe haue you any daungerous wound vpon your body. Uncle sayd Orson no thanked be God. I haue vanquyshed the tow traytours & Haufray as a good man hath made Garnyere confesse the treason and take his lyfe from him. Hafraye neuewe beleue it not to lightly for what semblaut that euer he make you he is partiysypyng of the treason, but for this present tyme I wyll holde my peace. The kyng and the barons retourned in to the sytie of Parys and made great ioye for the vectory that Orson had wonne and the honoure. And Haufraye and Henry that same day said muche good of him with their mouthes, and with their hartes desyred his death. But anon after came the tyme that their cursed treason was knowen, and that they were punished for their euylles as they had wel deserued. So I shal leue to speake of this mater and will tell you of the knyght Ualentyne that rode through the countrey right sorowful for his loue the fayre Clerimonde, the which was in Inde the more where the kyng made her to be kept for to wedde her and take her vnto wyfe by the waye of mariage as I haue made mencion vnto you here before. ¶How Ualentyne in sekyng the fayre Clerymonde aryued in Antioche and how he fought with a marueylous dragon. Ualentine that was mounted vpo the sea for to seke the fayre clerymonde his loue he dyd so much by the grace of god that he arriued in the citie of Antioche. So when he was within Pacolet that spake their language toke lodges in a great and a ryche house. But the hoost of the house was right cautellous, for when thei were in their chambre he went and herkened them, so he vnderstode by their language that they were christen men wherfore he went to the kyng of Antyoche and sayde. Dere syr, knowe that there is in my house foure christen men that are entred into your lande without payinge any tribute, wherfore I am come to you for to aduertyse it herof. Frende sayde the kyng thou haste done well, Nowe goo sayde the kyng and fetche them vnto me. Then departed dyuers offycers with the hoost for to go and feche Ualentine the whiche thei brought wt his seruauntes befor the kyng of Antioche. And when Ualentine sawe the kyng he salued him highly saying. ¶Syr kynge mahoune in whom you beleue kepe you with suche power as he hath, And that same God that dyed for vs on the crosse succour and helpe me in mine aduersyte. Christian sayde the kyng thou sheweste thy selfe weil hardy, when before my presence thou makest memorye of thy Ihesus that I neuer loued nor neuer shall. So I let the wyte that of two thynges it behoueth the to chose one or els suffere death. Kyng said Ualentyne saye on your wyll, for I would do dyuers thinges or I suffre deathe, not withstandyng that I haue heard say that the chrysten men should be safe in youre realme for paying of theyr trybute. By my fayth sayde the kyng the cotrary is true. For you are entred without my lycence, wherfore if you wyll escape death it behoueth you to renounce your God Ihesus, and yf that you wyll not do it you must fyght with an horryble serpente, that by the space of seuen yeare hath bene before the cytie and deuoured so manye men that the nombre is in estymable and vnknowen, aduyse you of the two thynges whyche you wyll do, for you can not saue your lyfe by none other waye, and valentyne sayd to hym. whan I must do it by force the playe is euyll for me at departynge. Not for that tell me yf it please you yf you haue sene the beest, and of what fourme and stature she is of, and what is her maners and facyons. Chrystyen sayd the kyng of Antyoche I tell the that I haue sene the beest and wyte that she is much hedyous and more gretter of body then a horse, and she hath also wynges ryght great, and fethered lyke a Gryffon, and hath the head of a serpent, wyth a maruaylous loke, the skyn couered wyth scales muche harde & thycke as fysshe that swymme in the see. And she hath also the fete of a lyon muche great and sharper then any knyfe of stele. ¶By my god sayd valentyne by this that you tel me the best is muche ferefull and horryble, but not wythstandyng all her force and strengthe yf you wyll byleue in Ihesu chryst that for vs suffred death vpon the crosse, and promyse me for to receyue baptim in suche case that I conquere the beest and put her vnto death I shall goo and assaye me agaynst her, & put my body in daunger wyth out ledynge any erthely creature wyth me by the grace of Ihesu christ, Chrysten sayd the kyng I swere the by my lawe that yf thou mayst dystroye her I and all my men shall renounce mahoune and doo all thy pleasure, but so much dare I saye that thou shalt haue no puyssaunce therto, for there wente neuer none thether yet yt escaped deuourynge. ¶Syr sayd valentyne lette me dele wyth her. For I truste me so muche in the swete Iesus that he shall be my sworde and defence agaynst the false beest, vpon suche a couenaunt that you shall holde me promesse. yes sayde the kyng thynke for to worke well, for and thou mayste delyuer vs from the beast I swere to the by my God mahoune that we shall take thy lawe and leue our, well sayde Ualentyne I shall do my besy payne. Then he demaunded the worke men of the cytie and made them make a shelde ryght subtylly composed. And in the same shelde he made to fasten a great sorte of longe pryckes of fyne stele more sharper then nedles, strong and surely put in, and they were of a fote length. And when the shelde was thus made Ualentyne put on his harneis and his helme also bokeled to his head, after he toke his sworde and in the honoure of Iesu christe kyssed the hyltes many tymes. And he toke his leue of his men and mounted on horsebacke, & for to go fyght with the beast yssued of the cytie. Lytell and great mounted vpon the walles toures & garettes for to beholde valentyne. And when he was out of the cytie the porters shytte the gates after hym, for they wende well for a truthe that he shoulde neuer haue retourned. Nowe the beast is of suche a condycion that it behoueth them to dyliuer to her euery daye for her pray a beast or a manne, and if they fayled for to geue it her, there durst no body yssue out of the cytie. And also sone as they had delyuered hym his praye out of the cytie she returned into her place and there kept her wythout doyng any harme to any body. And therfore it was of custome through all the countrey thereaboute that theues and murderers and all euyll folkes that by sentence and iudgemente were condempned to deth, they were yelded and brought into the cytie of Antyoche, for to be geuen and delyuered vnto the cursed and vengeable beast to be deuoured as the custom of the said city was And with this there was certayne men that rode and wente vnto the portes and hauens of the sea for to get and seke good christe men, and brought them vnto the forsayd cytie of Antyoche for to make them be deuored of the serpent. And when the serpent apperceued Ualentyne commyng towarde hym he closed his wenges muche fyersly in castyng out of his mouth by great haboundaunce smoke and fyre. Ha God sayde Ualentyne helpe me and preserue me from entring into that foule passage, and gyue me strengthe and puyssaunce for too exalte and encrease youre lawe. Then he dessended of his horse and left his sharpe axe at his sadle bowe: and went towarde the serpent that was muche proud, and also soone as he approched nere him for to smyte him the serpent lyfte vp hir pawe that was great and large and marueilously sharpe for to smyte Ualentyne, but he cast his shelde before it, in suche maner that the beast smote vpon the broches that were sharpe, and dyd her selfe great hurte, in castyng out a hydeous crye and drawyng hymselfe abacke, And Ualentyne pursued her yt had a harde courage, but when the beast sawe hym approche she rose streight vp vpon her hinder fete and wt her fore fete wende for to haue beten downe Ualentyne vnder her the whiche was couered with the shelde and for the doute of the shelde she withdrewe her abacke. ¶By mahowne and tarmagant sayde the kyng of Antyoche that was within his palays vpon a greate and a hie toure, se yonder a knyght that is muche valiaunt and hardy, the whiche ought wel to be praysed and honoured. And vpon the other syde was the quene that hadde to name Rozemode that for the loue of Ualentyne and his hardynes was profoundly smyten to the harte with an ardaunt desyre of loue. ¶Howe the serpente toke of Ualentynes helme, and howe Pacolet armed hym and brought hym another helme and of the complayntes that the Quene Rozemonde made for Ualentyne. The batayll was ryght fyrse without the cytie betwene Ualentyne and the serpent, for if it had not ben ye prycked sheld yt the beast douted he would haue casten Ualentyne vpon the earth moche quickely, but he helde his shelde with the which he could well helpe hym selfe. And in the other hande he helde his sworde wherewith he gaue the serpente a marueylous stroke vnder the eare, but the stroke was soo harde that he brake his sworde. Ueray God sayde Ualentine helpe me and succoure me agaynst this fende that is so horryble and fyerse. Ualentyne was in greate dought when his sworde was broken, for the beast began for to chaufe her, and smote Ualetine in suche maner with one of her pawes that she all to rente his harneis with her nayles. Then Ualentyne drewe out a sharpe glaue and kaste it soo euen at the beaste that it entred halfe a fote in to her throte but she set not therby. Ualentine seyng that, ranne vnto his horse and tooke the axe that hanged at his sadle bowe, and retourned vnto the beast in makyng the sygne of the crosse before hym, and demaundyng comforte of God, so he approched nere the beaste that watchede hym strongly and with his cuttyng axe smote her vpon the tayle so rudely that he cut the skinne vnto the bone, and made the bloude to yssue out by the greate stremes. The sarazyns and paynims were muche abasshed that were vpon the walles of the great prowesse of valentyne. And the quene Rozemonde that behelde hym muche gladly sayde vnto herselfe all alone. Ha knyght fayre syr mahoune helpe the and brynge the agayne with Ioye, for by mahoune in whome I beleue, of all the knyghtes that euer I sawe my harte is moost taken with thy loue. Thus sayd the quene Rozemonde that loued hym ardauntly. And valentyne fyghteth with the dragon that caste her heuy tayle oftentymes at hym and trauayled hym so sore that she had all moost smyten him downe, but he helde his axe surely, with the whiche he coulde well playe, & he gaue the serpent suche a stroke that he cut of a quarter of her tayle, and then she made so great a crie that al the cytie sowned therof, after she flewe ouer valentines heade and pulled of his helme and smote hym too the groude, but by his deligence he rose vp quickely sorowfull and displeasunt that his head was bare He began for to reclayme God and the virgyn Marye in bewaylyng oftentymes the fayre Clerymonde. when they of the cytie sawe that he had lost his helme they thought well that he should neuer escape. By my God saide the kyng nowe may we well saye that the christen knyght shall neuer come hether agayne. Then was Pacolet muche sorowfull & pyteously began for to wepe for the loue of valentyne. Halas said he make the gates to be opened to me, and delyuer me a harneys, for I will this daye leue and dye with my maister, and also make me to be delyuered a helme, for I will bere it hym for to couer his head. Pacolet was armed anone and a helme geuen him, and and also the gates opened. He recomauded hym vnto god and went rennynge vnto the fielde. valentyne sawe hym come well but he knewe hym not, & Pacolet cryed vnto him saying, syr I am your seruaut that by long tyme hath serued you, and that for to succoure your body agaynste the false enemy am come hether. Alas frende sayd valentyne, here it behoueth me for to dye, for of all my fortunes and aduentures I haue today the moost daungerous, for God salue my father and mi mother, with my brother Orson that I haue loued so derelye, and the fayre Clerymounde also yf euer thou mayst se her. And for Goddes sake my frend go thy waye hence & come no more agayne. For when you shold dye with me I should haue neuer more profit Euen so as Pacolet approched to Ualetyne for to giue hym hys helme the serpente apperceyued well that he bare not the shelde as the other dyd, she cam to Pacolet and toke hym by the lyfte legge and pulled hym vnder hym gyuynge hym so greate a stroke wyth hys sharpe pawe that he wounded him through hys harneys much rudely. And there wolde haue slayne hym if it had not bene Ualentyne that with hys axe smote her so muche that he smote of her nose and putte out one of her eyen The serpente cryed and brayed lyke a madde beest, he opened hys wynges and arose vp in the ayre and flewe vp vnto a highe roche. Than Ualentyne came vnto his helme for to haue put it vpon hys head, but as he thoughte for to haue taken it he sawe the beeste comynge, soo he toke hys shelde for to couer hys head and the dragon returned agayne vnto the roche. Than Pacolet put the helme vpon Ualentynes head. ¶Syr sayd Pacolet I am ryght sore wounded on my body, wherfore I muste returne into the cyte for to hele my wounde, for I haue loste so muche bloode that my heart fayleth me. Thus they toke leue, but also soone as the serpente sawe hym a good way of she opened her greate wynges and flewe towarde hym. And Pacolet that appercyeued her commynge returned anone vnto hys master & the dragon went and assaylled valentyne, and in fleyng ouer hym went for to haue catched hym by the head. But valentyne threwe hys axe so well in poynt that he cut of one of her wynges, for the whyche the beest cast out so horryble a cry that all they that herde it were sore abasshed Soroful was the serpent whan she had loste her wynge for she myght not then flye valentyne smote of the other wynge also, & the batayl was great betwen the that Ualentyne myght not tourne him about ye beaste nor lyft vp his axe he was so wery and so trauaylled. He did so muche that he mounted vpon a tre for to rest hem. And the beast that myght not flee no more, beheld hym moche cruelly in castynge out at his mouthe the horrible stynkyng venym and great smoke. ¶How Ualantine slew the dragon through the grace of God almyghty. And howe the kyng of Antioche receyued hym with great honoure. Syr sayd Pacolet lende me your shelde and I shall go towarde the beast and aduenture me. Frend sayd Ualentine retorne into the citie & hele your woundes. ¶For if it please God the beast shall not be ouercom by none other but by me so I requyre God by hys grace that he will geue me the puyssauyce shortlye for to conquere her. And that I may doo so moch that the kyng of Antioche and all the people incredule leue the lawe dampnable of mahowne, & take the lawe catholyke of Ihesu christe. After that he had sayde these wordes he dessended of the tree in makyng the sygne of the crosse, and went towarde the serpente that ran against hym in castyng fyre and flambe muche dyspyteouslye. Ualentyne put the shelde before hym that the serpente doubted & with the axe of stele somte her in suche wyse that he cut of her lefte thygh and felled it to the earthe. The serpent cryed more hydeously then before and valentyne that was hardy to pursue his stroke came too her, and thurste his axe so far forthe within her throte yt at that houre he smote her downe dead, in castyng oute suche a smoke that all they that behelde it were muche amarueyled. And at the houre yt the serpente was dead fell downe within Antioche a great squared toure, and the turrettes a bowe shot about it fel downe also. The paynyms were abasshed of that greate aduenture and sayde the on to the other that it was the soule of the deuyl that was passed that waye ¶when the kyng was besyde hym he collde him muche swetely in saying vnto hym. Free knyght of all the other moste valyaunte and hardye wyll hath your God shewed that he wyll loue you whan by yonr great prowesse you haue deliuered vs from the enemy that dommaged oure lande soo muche. At these wordes they entred in to the cytie, and mounted in to the pallays ryall where as all the nyght and all the daye folowyng they made great feaste and chere bothe paynems and sarazyns for the victory of the serpente. The kynge made Ualentyne to bee kepte ryght derely and heale his woundes lytell and greate, and the quene Rozemonde bare hym geate hononure & reuerence, and had ryght great affeccion for to speake vnto hym, for she was so enamoured on hym from the fyrst houre that she sawe hym that he hadde her harte entyerly. And for the brennyng of her loue would purchace the death of the kyng of Antyoche her husbonde as you shall heare afterwarde. ¶Howe Ualentyne after that he had dyscomfyted the dragon made the kyng of Antyoche to be baptyzed and all they of his lande, and of the quene Roezmonde that was enamoured on hym, When the good knyght Ualantine had rested hym a litel wythin the citie of Antioche, & healed his woundes, he went toward the kyng & sayde to hym. Sir you knowe that you haue promysed me to beleue in Iesu christe and your people also if it happened soo that I myght deliuer you from the serpente. Nowe God hath geuen me the grace that I haue slayne hym, and therefore syr kepe me your promyse, for the myrecle is gret and euident that my God hath shewed byfore euerybody, for you knowe that by corporall strenght I conquered her not but hath bene by the vertue of Iesu christe knyght sayd the kynge knowe that I wyll holde that wiche I haue promysed you, and my wyl is to renounce mahounde and to beleue in Iesu Christ. Then he mayde to crie throughe all his land that litle & great shoulde beleue in Iesu christ, and leue the lawe of mahommet vpon payne of death. Than was paynyms & sarazyns baptised and couarted through the noble Ualentyne. And also soone as the quene myght, she sente for Ualetyne into her secrete chambre, the which went towarde her incontinent. Lady sayd Ualentine that was well taught you haue sente for me, and I am comen towarde you as he that is redy and apparayled for to accomplyshe your good wyll. Ha said the lady ye honoure, the wysdome, the strengthe, the valyauntnes the beaute and ye hardines than is in you maketh your great noblenes to be praysed and honoured aboue al ye lyuinge creatures, and for the vertues that are in you the lady that sholde be beloued of you myght well saye that of all the knyghtes she had the moste valyaunt ye moost noble, and the moost fayrest. Now pleased it god that I myght do my wyll, and that I were not subiect to no bodye, for I take it vpon my soule that my herte should neuer loue other tha you, yf it pleased you to do me so muche grace as to accepte my loue. ¶Lady said Ualentine of as much I thanke you, for you haue wedded a kynge muche valyaunt and hardy, the whiche aboue al other you ought to loue, and holde der. Knight sayd the lady I haue loued hym longe tyme, but sythe the daye that I sawe you my heart departed not from you. Whan Ualentyne apperceyued that the lady had suche a courage, the moost swetest that he myght he excused hym toward the quene of his loue. ¶Ladye sayd Ualentyne yf the kynge knewe it he wolde neuer rest a daye tyll that he had put me vnto death, now he is olde and auncyent and you are a fayre younge lady moche Iocunde, soo you muste abyde a lytel vnto the returne of my vyage that I haue enterprysed to go vnto the holy cyte of Iherusalem for to vysyte the sepulcre of our lorde Iesu chryst that was put vpon the tre of the crosse for vs. And at my retornynge yf it happen that the kynge be deed than shall I accomplysshe all youre wyll The Quene Rozemonde answered neuer a word, but was smitten at the heart so profoudly with the loue of valentyne that she was couetous of the deth of ye king and of hys lyfe enemye, as it happeneth oftentymes that by folysshe loue one man murdreth another, and dyuers wiues purchaseth the deth of theyr husbandes for to acheue theyr wyll. And therfore there is a great daunger to loue a thynge so folysshly by the whiche so many euilles maye procede, as the Quene Rozemond dyd whiche for to haue valentyne at her pleasure, the nyght whan the kynge should go to bedde and that the wyne was brought hym, the ladye toke the cuppe and put suche venym within it that who someuer dyd drinke of it shuld not escape deth, after in signe of loue she presented it vnto the kynge that was muche deuoute, and in makyng a crosse vpon the wyne he apperceiued the poyson. By my fayth sayd the kinge lady you haue faylled but I promyse to god that hath formed all the worlde that suche drynke as youe haue brewed I shall make you drynke at this houre, or you shall tell me the reason wherfore you haue enterprysed suche a thynge. Alas syr sayd the lady that kneled downe vpon her knees. I requyre you of pardon, knowe that valentyne for to haue mi loue hath made me to enterprise this thing By god lady sayd the kynge I byleue you well, but by my cepter ryall syth that you haue done thys thyng by euyll councell I pardon you. That nyghte the kynge slepte wyth Rozemonde, the which in kyssynge and collynge hym all the nyght sayd vnto hym. Syr I require you that you wyl put valentine vnto death that thus wolde haue betrayed me. Doubte you not sayd ye king for I haue wel thought it. Whan the quene herde that she was muche sorowfull and dyd so muche that night that she spake to a secret maiden, and sent her vnto valentyne, for to tell hym her wyll, and the courage yt the kynge had agaynst him for her dede. And whan valentine herde the tydynges that he was accused of ye thing that he was innocent of, he blyssed hym dyuers tymes sayenge. Swete ladye what is it of the courage of women, nowe muste I for the loue of the Quene departe from hence lyke a traytour yf I wyll not dyscouer her honour before euery body, yet loue I better to depart out of this coutre & leue al than her dishonoure should be knowen by me. ¶At that hour he made his men to make them redy, and before the daye made to open the gates. So incontenent he yssued out of the cyte & rode so muche that he arryued at a porte of the see, and foude there a marchauntes shyp that wolde passe ouer ye see. He entred into it and put hym amonge the other, in prayenge god deuoutly that he wolde sende hym some tydynges of the fayre Clerimonde eyther by water or by londe. ¶Upon the morowe be tymes whan the kynge of Antyoche was rysen vp he entred into his palays and made hys barons to be assembled and knightes, and sayd vnto them in this maner. Lordes I am muche dyspleasant in my hearte whan by ye man that I moost trusted in all the worlde, and that I helde the derest I fynde me betrayed & deceyued, that is the fals Ualentyne the whiche by hys malyce and dysordynate wyll hathe requyred the quene my wyfe of dishonoure And hath put her in courage for to poysone me vyllaynously & make me to dye. Wherfore I pray you to counsayll me in this matter, and what Iustyce I shal do on hym, and also what death I shall make hym dye. Syr sayd a muche wise baron yt was ther for to condempne hym in his absence it is noo reason nor true Iustyce. Nor there is no maner of man be he neuer soo euyl nor vycyous but that oughte to be herde in hys reasons, who that wolde do good & true Iustyce to euery body. Then the kynge of Antyoche commaunded that valentine sholde be brought before him. Then his hoost cam in to the palays the whiche tolde hym that valentyne was departed before the breakynge of the daye frome his house whereof the kynge was ryght sorowfull and made his men to be armed for too pursue hym, but of asmuche they lost their payne, for he was mounted vpan the sea as you haue hearde. ¶Howe the kynge of Antyoche was put vnto deathe for the renouncynge of mahowne by Brandyffere hys wyues father. And howe the Emperoure of Grece ad the Grene knyght were taken prysoners by Brandyffer before the cytie of Cretophe. Sone after that the kyng of Anteoch was couerted to the holye faythe, the father of his wyfe Rosamonde a paynym, that was called Blandyffer, and amonge the other princes of Turkay, the most expert in warre, and was also right hardye. So he had great dispite of the kyng, that had left theyr lawe. And sent him worde that he should sende hym hys daughter Rozamonde. Of the whiche thynge, the kynge of Anteoche gaynesayde him verely. And for that same refuse, Brandyffer that was lorde of Falyzer with a hundred thousande Panyms came and assieged the kynge of Anteoche within his Citye. And he dyd so moche by hys armes, that within foure monethes the citye was deliuered vnto hym by a false traitour, and there was the kyng taken of his enemies the whiche made him to be put vnto death in the myddes of the citie, because that he would not renouce the faith of Iesu Christ: after he sent his doughter Rozemonde into his countrey, and of the realme of Antyoche, made hymselfe to be crowned kyng: After these thynges doone, he put himselfe vpon the sea for to retorne into his relme, but by orage & tempest he descended into the lad of grece beside a citie named Cretophe the which was a great & a large citie. Now it happened that for certayn thinges, the Emperour of Grece was newly arriued there, and fortune was so peruerse, that he which knewe no thyng of the commynge of the Paynyms yssued out of the citie, accompanied of the grene knyght and dyuers other lordes strong and valiaunte, for to take their disporte, but in an euyll houre yssued they without garde & watche: for by the men of Brandiffer, that no body knew of the Emperrur & the grene knyght were taken, and all they of their company were taken & discomforted. And at that same houre the Panymmes ranne vnto the gates of Cretophe, where as they loste their payne, for the citie was stronge and garnished with such men that it behoued them to returne sodainly agayne. Angrye and sorowfull were they of Cretophe, for the losse of the Emperour and the grene knyght, for the whiche they made a letter, and sente it by a Heraude to the Empresse Bellysant, in demaundyng her tidyngs of the takyng of the Emperour, and demaundyng succour agaynst their enmyes, to the end that the Panyms shulde not lede the Emperour in to their countrey. ¶Sorowful was the Lady for the takyng of her husband and wepte without cessyng. She sent for her captaines and made to assemble men of Armes throughe all the Empyre of Grece, in great diligence. And on the other side she sent Heraudes toward the realme of Fraunce, for to haue succour of her brother kyng Pepyn and of her sonne Orson, & comforte in her aduersitie. Within a short time yssued out of the citie of Constantinoble a great host of them of the countrey of Grece, for to go vnto Cretophe, to succour the Emperour agaynst Brandiffer. But that same Brandiffer that was subtyll and malicious, had put ryders in the countrey about, by the which he knew the enterprise of the Grekes. And for feare of theyr puyssaunce & to lese his prisoners, with all his hoast entred in to the sea, and they rowed and sayled so moche, that they arriued within a lytell while in Lize, and in that place they toke grounde and went vnto a strong castell that was called so, in the which he made to be kepte preciouslye his two daughters Rozemonde and Galyze, that passed all other creatures in beutie. And for the gret beutie of her, she had ben demaunded of her father Brandiffer that same yere by fourtene kynges strong & puissaunt. And because that Brandiffer would not marry her, yet he made her to be kepte sumptuously in that castell, because that it was the strongest of all his londe. That same castell was hyghe, and hadde manye greate thick square toures, and well fortified, in the myddes of the castell was a dongeon of latyn, which had a double gate of yron strong and thycke. The castell was enuironed with deepe dyches full of ronnyng water, and in the myddes of the castell and of the dyche there was a brydge composed so subtelly, that there myght passe but one man at once. For & if twayne woulde haue passed they shoulde fall bothe into the ronyng water, and there be drowned. And at the ende of that same bridge there were two horrible Lions and stronge, that kepte the entre of the castell. In the dongeon was the mayden Galayze kepte. And vnder the sayde dongeon was a caue ryght profounde & deepe, in the which the Emperour and the grene knyght was put, with ten other christen men, the which remayned there in captiuitye by the space of many yeares, in great anguysh. So I shall leaue you to speke of this matier, and shal tyel ou hereafter ensuyng of the fayre Lady Clerymonde, the which the kyng of Inde the great helde in his house as I haue made you mencion of before. ¶How the faire Clerymonde, after that the yere was complete, did counterfeit the sicke woman, to the ende that the kyng of Inde shoulde not wed her. And of the kyng Lucar that woulde auenge the death of Tromparte his father, agaynst the kynge of Inde. Nowe you haue well hearde recited & tolde howe the kyng of Inde, after that he hadd put king Tromparte vnto death, that on the horse of Pacolet hadde ledde away the fayre Clerymonde, the same kyng of Inde woulde take vnto wyfe the foresayde Clerymondet she which as subtyll and wyse and well taught, made hym beleue that she had made an othe and a vowe vnto the goddes that she shuld neuer haue habitacion with ma tyl a yere were finished. And that same terme the kyng gaue her, duryng the whiche tyme the kynge made her to be sumptuously kepte in great honour. Nowe the lady had prepensed this thyng by dissimulacion, for to prolonge the tyme, trustyng that she shoulde haue succoure in that time of her dolorous fortune & misadueture. But of her hope she was right farre and deceiued for durynge that tyme she had no conforte of no bodye. And so the terme was fayled and the yeare finished. I shall tel you whereon she aduised her for to keepe her fayth and her promyse vnto the Noble knyght Ualentyne. ¶When the fayre lady Cleremonde saw and apperceiued that the terme was passed, & that she could fynde no more excusacion to the kyng of ynde, she was ryght sorowfull and displesaunt in herte. Euer she desyred Ualentine in bewailyng him with piteous sighes and bitter teares. And when she hadde thought and consydered her piteous fortune for to mayntayne her honoure the more honestlyer, and flee and eschewe shame and blame, one mornyng she obode in her bedd, and rose not, and sayde that she was sycke, in complainyng her head moch piteously. The tidynges came vnto the kyng of Inde anone, that the fayre Cleremonde was sycke, wherof he was right displesaunte, and incontynent came into the chaumbre for to visite her. But so as he woulde haue sett his hande vpon her heade for to haue comforted her, she tooke his arme and lift vp her head a hye, makyng signes that she woulde bite him: of the which he was moche ameruailed. After the Ladye tourned her eyen in her head, in frouncyng her face, demeanyng a foule lyfe, in suche wyse, that the kynge of Inde was to moche abashed for to beholde her, and yssued out of the chambry with great fere, and made the Ladyes to go and visit the fayre Lady Clerimonde saiyng vnto them: For god kepe wel my loue Clerimonde For by Mahoune I dout me sore that she wyll be mad and out of her wytte. In this wyse dyd the ladye abyde long tyme, and she made it so well, that within fyftene dayes she seemed more lykely a beast then a reasonable woman. She was of so cruell and folysh maners, that all the seruauntes lytle and great, ladyes and dameyselles habandoned her, and abode without companye. With her teeth & nayles she bote ad scratched all them that woulde aproche nere her. And by her great crudelytie she was locked all alone in her chambre, and by a wyndowe they gaue her meat and drinke as to a beast. On the daye she made the semblaunt that her malady encreased, ad al to rent her clothes, she put here smock vpon her gowne somtyme ad another time that aboue bynethe she rubbed her handes in a chymneye and after stryked her face wythall in suche manere that her pleasaunt face well coloured was becomn blackee and smoked. In that estate the kynge came and sawe her, the whiche was right soroful at hys hearte for her demeanour. Halas lady sayd he it goeth to euyl wyth me whan I se you in thys case, for nowe was comen the tyme that I should haue had all solace and al pleasure of you. Lady take vnto you some comforte and be not soo vnpacyent in your aduercyte. ¶whan the fayre Clerymonde vnderstode hys language she made to semblaute for to here him, but, more than be fore counterfet the madde woman, in lepynge a gaynst the chymney, and with her handes made her face blacke, one time she laughed gracyously, & another tyme made pyteous syghes Thus wyth laughynge, wepynge, & syghynge her coutenaunce was medled, for to kepe her enterpryce moost secretly and her honoure. By mayhoune sayd the kyng of ynde of al the thynges that euer I sawe thys passeth Now I shall tell you what you shall do. I wyl that the lady be ledde into the mahommerye before our goddes and that wee make all prayers for her, that they wyll helpe her and socour her of her maledy. Euen so as the kynge had sayd the thyng was don, and the lady ledde vnto the temple, but the more nerer that thei set her to the ymage of mayhoune and of hys auter, soo muche ye more she made semblaunt that her maledy encreased. And whan the kynge sawe that ther was no remedye for to aswage her maladye, he made her to be ledde in to her chambre againe as she was before, where as she contynued her enterpryse vpon a stedfast hope to fynde valentyne of the whiche I wyl speke to you. That same knyght valentyne wyth an ardaunt desyre rode in the countre wyth Pacolet for to seke the fayre lady clerymonde, the whyche wolde not habandone him no dai nowe they rode soo muche that they arreued in Esclardee, whyche was the londe of kynge Tromparte, yt had caryed awaye the fayre Clerymonde vpon the hors of wodde that was Pacolettes as saide is. Thei demaunded in that same cyte tydynges of kynge Trompart, & they retorned vnto them the maner how he was slayne before ynde the great. And how hys sone Lucar wolde auenge hys death vpon the kynge of ynde the greter and howe that for to accomplyshe it he had assembled fiftene kynges with many knyghtes and sodiours that wolde serue him for money and go in the warre. Then spake Pacolet that could wel the langage of the countrey, and demaunded his hoaste more plainly tidynges of the estate of that same kynge Lucar. And his hoast recounted vnto him howe he hadd handfast and promysed & take vnto wyfe the doughter of Brandyffer, that hadde ben wedded before to the kyng of Antyoche, the which had ben discomforted by the said Brandiffer because that he dyd renounce the law of Mahounde. For to here such tidyngs Ualentyne was to moch abashed. And vpon the fortunes of the world he began strongly to thynke by hymselfe, consideryng the great inconueniences and debates that had befallen, and continually doo from daye to daye. When he had studyed a lytell vpon that thyng he sayde vnto his hoast. Hoast tell me what is become of a lady right fayre that kyng Tromparde brought with him. By Mahoune sayd the hoast we haue hadde therof no tidynges here. Nowe tell me sayde Ualentine: where is kyng Lucar at this present tyme, for I haue great courage for to goe and take wages vnder hym because that my money is fayled, and on the other syde I haue great desyre for to folowe the warre. Lorde saide the hoast, the kyng Lucar is in Esclardie, & there you shall fynde him accompanyed with a hundred thousande Sarazins. For he abideth Brandiffer that shuld bryng his doughter into the same place for to wed her to hym. When Ualentine vnderstode all these thynges that he tolde hym, he had right great truste for to heare some tidynges of the fayre Clerymonde. Then he departed from the citye and roade toward Esclardye. fainynge for to haue greot desyre to serue kyng Lucar, but more greatly touched hym ye maner at the harte howe he myght haue the fayre Clerymonde vnto wyfe. ¶Howe the kyng Lucar in the fayre and greate cytye of Esclardie wedded and toke vnto wyfe the fayre and gracyous Rozemonde. Ryght so as the kynge Lucar highly and puisauntly accompanied in great and sumptuous estate in the citie of Esclardy, Blandyffer arriued that brought his doughter with hym. And when kynge Lucar knewe the tydynges hee yssued out of the cytie with a tryumphaunt company agaynste hym. For to se Rozemonde kyng Lucar was muche ioyous, put of as muche as he was ioyous the Ladye was dyspleasaunt, for of all the other she wolde his moost euyll, and loued hym not, but euer bewailed Ualentyne. The ladye was ledde into the halle ryall conueyed with dyuers greate kynges. And before the ymage of mahoune she was wedded vnto the kyng Lucar. Nowe it nedeth not to demaunde of the feaste nor of the estates that was there, nor of the riche gyftes yt was geuen. ¶Ualentyne roode in the fildes ardaunte for to come vnto his intencion. It happened soo as he arryued at the entre of a wodde that was ryght grene and plesaunt. he harde and vnderstoode the voyce of a pleasaunt lady ryght fayre and gracious, the whiche a sarazyn helde by force vnder a tree, & would haue done his pleasure. And when Ualentyne vnderstoode it, hee sayd vnto Pacolet. Frende ryde we faste and make dilygence, for I haue heard a woman in this wodde that cryed ryght hyghe and demeaneth great sorowe, so we shall do great almesse for to succour her. Syr sayd Pacolet leue the lady and medle not so muche of her feat for you wote not what it is, parauentur she doth it for a gyle, and it may turne you soner vnto euil than good Pacolet sayde Ualentyne, you speake folyshely, for ye man is not noble that helpeth not ye ladyes in their necessities, and putteth his body in auenture for to saue their honoure. Than he sporred his horse and entred in to the wodde, so he apperceyued the lady that the sarazyn helde vnder hym. Syr sayd Ualentine leue your enterpryse, for if you wyll haue the lady at your wyl it behoueth you to proue your body against mine, you may wel knowe that she setteth not by your loue, so it behoueth you to leue her or els to haue warre agaynst me. By mahoune sayd the paynym I vtter you the warre at your owne wil. But I tell ye hyghly and let the wyt that in an euyl houre art thou arryued here for to com and let me of my pleasure without hauyng anye occasion. At these wordes he left the lady and mounted vpo his horse that was besyde hym tyed vnto a tree, & with his shelde couered hym, and tooke his spere, after they fetched their course, but the noble & valiaunt knighte valentyne came with so great a courage agaynste the paynyme & sarazyn that he passed hym clene throughe out halfe a yerd, so that he fell downe dead to the earth And when he had done soo he wente vnto the mayden and sayde vnto her. Damoysell nowe are you auenged of your enemye at this presente houre, soo I pray you that youe wyll tell me howe and in what maner this coursed man hath brought you into the wodde. Alas syr sayd she I shall tel you all the truthe. Knowe that yester night lat he came into my fathers house for to lodge him, and for to haue my body the better at his will and leade me at his pleasure, this nyghte he went in to the chambre of my father and there slew him and murdred hi falsly. After he hath brought me hether by force for to deflore me of myne honoure vytuperablye from the whiche thyng by your valiauntnes & prowes I am deliuered and kept to daye, & saued mine honour so maye you at this tyme doo and accomplysshe youre good pleasure, for as a hardy champion in the daunger of your body you haue conquered me & wonne the Damoysell sayd the valyaunt knyghte Ualentyne by me your gentyl body shall haue no dommage nor vylany. Retorne into your house and thynke to dwel and kepe well your honour. Than Ualentine lefte the mayden and toke his way towarde Esclardye, and the men of the sarazyn cam towarde their mayster, but also soone as they founde him deed vpon the grasse, without ony soiourninge they smote theyr horses with the sporres, for to go vnto Esclardy to tell the tydinges. They entred into the cyte and wente vnto kynge Lucar much discomforted, and sayd vnto him. Redoubted syr ryght euyll goeth our feate, for our good mayster the Marshall that you haue loued so muche hath ben presently slayne in a wodde by theues. The kynge was ryght sorowfull therfore and wyth a great compayne of men issued out of the cite. And whan they were without thei sawe valentyne comynge and sayde to the kynge. Syr se hym here that hath slayne and murdred your Marshall. Than valentyne was taken and all they of hys company by the sarazins, and were straytely bounden in betyng and strykynge them by the comaundemente of the kynge. Nowe Rozemonde was in the same castel the which knewe valentyne incontinent, for the which thynge she was ryghte sore taken at the harte, and for the great loue that she loued hym she wente anone towarde the kynge and sayd to hym. Alas syr kepe you well from makyng thys valyount knyght dye that for your prysoner hath ben brought hether, for I swere ad promise you that of all the valiaunt courages he is the moost hardy, he is the souerayne & ought to bere away the excellence. Syr it is the same knyght Ualentyne of the countre of Fraunce that by his valyautnes before the cytie of Antyoche slewe the horryble dragon, keepe hym derely and retayne hym in your wages, for in the worlde there is not so vyctorious a man, yf you keepe hym and haue some great batall against your enemyes by hym you maye haue vyctory. Lady sayde the kynge dyuers tymes I haue heard speake of his great prowesse, and I haue desyred muche to se him in my court Syth he called Ualentyne and sayd to him. Knyght haue no feare for to dye, for knowe that aboue all other I wyll loue you and holde you dere, and all your men receyue vnto my wages, but there is so muche that you muste do a message for me that is that you shall goo in to ynde the great and saye vnto the kyng that I defye him and that I am redy and apperyeled with my puyssaunce for to go and auenge the death of my father the kyng Trompart, the whiche he hath made to dye cruelly. And tell hym that I somone hym to come towarde me within my palays before all the baronnye with ye corde about his necke, redy and apparayled for to receiue suche death as by the assystentes of my courte ryal shall be Iudged and condampned. And if he wyll not come you shall tell hym that within shorte tyme I shall go and see hym and vysyte with so greate a companye yt there shall not be left hym castell towne nor cytie but yt I shall destroye theym. And I shall neyther leue man woman nor chylde on lyue. ¶Syr sayde Ualentyne I shall do the message well and sufficiently soo that you shall be contente. I knowe well sayde Ualentyne that you wyll sende me in a daungerous place, but I haue truste in Ihesu chryste and in the blessed vyrgyn Mary the whyche haue kepte me from diuers greate periles to spede ryght well. ¶How the noble knyght Ualentyn departed from Esclardye for to go into the myghty and puyssaunt cytye of ynde the great for to bere the def\yaunce of the king Lucar. As the quene Rozemonde sawe that Ualetine was redy for to go into ynde the more for to defye the kynge, she entred into her chambre, and by a damoysell she sente for Ualentyne secrytly, the whych cam gladly towarde her, and salued her in great reuerence. Knight sayd the lady you ar welcome, for aboue al other I had great desyre vnto you Lady said Ualentyn yf you had great affeccyon for to se me, so hadde I to se you, Sith that I sawe you the thynge is well chaunged, for I haue vnderstaden that your husband the king of Antyoche is dead syth my departyng, and of late you ar maryed vnto another, Now ye myght wel know that for the loue of you within Antyoche I was charged with dishonoure in peryll ad daunger to lose my lyfe. It is true sayd the lady of that I knowledge my selfe gyltie for ye great loue that I hadde vnto you made me to do that thynge, but knowe that to day I shall recompece you of the faute that I dyd to you than. For how well that my father and my mother haue gyuen me vnto ye kyng Lucar the which is pleasaunte and ryche aboue all other yet shall my heart neuer loue hym (and not wt out a cause) for not wythstandyng his rychesse & great parintage, knowe that of all the other he is the mooste false traytoure. And yet I tel you that sythe you haue ben in thys palays, he is entred into so great a Ialousy that he may not endure it, nor wyth good heart behold you, And to the end that he maye be the more honestly rydde of you he sendeth youe into ynde trustynge that you shall neuer retorne, for he hadde neuer tydinges of none yet that he hath sent thether, for the kynge of ynd hath put them all to death. But of his entencio by me he shall be deceyued and begyled, for frome that same daunger and great perill I shal kepe you and saue you and I shall tell you by what maner of wyse. Free knyghte knowe that it is not longe ago sythe that thys same kynge of ynde made me to be demaunded for wyfe. And that it is true I loued hym muche more derer then the kyng Lucar that is a traytour, and of vgly facyon and dysplasaunt for to beholde and in speking vngracious and lytell curtesy. But with the wil of my father that was vnto myne contrary I was refused vnto the kyng ynde, and gyuen vnto the kyng Lucar. Nowe it is true that the same kyng of ynde for acquayntaunce of loue sende me a rynge right ryche that which I haue derely kept with all my harte for the loue of hym, and knowe that I neuer tolde it to no man lyuyng saue too you: But for asmuche as I haue sene the falsnes & maladiccion of Lucar the whiche sendeth you in to ynde for to be delyuered of you I shall geue you comforte wt all my puyssauynce that shall kepe you from perill, and shall acheue your message and retourne hether agayne as a hardy and a valyaunt knyght. And howe well that I wote and knowe for certayn that of my loue you haue no nede, and that you are promysed vnto another lady more hyghe more fayrer, and more excellenter then I am, yet wyll I not forget the loue that my harte was taken with for you when I sawe you within the cytie of Antyoche as you conquered and vanquished the horryble dragon. And for the thynges aboue sayd for to encrease your honoure I shall tell you what you shall do when you shall be afore the kyng of ynde arryued after the reuerence made and the salute geuen fro the kynge Lucar that sendeth you towarde hym without longe abydynge greate hym from me as my loue and secrete frende and saye vnto him that how be it that my father gaue me vnto kyng Lucar yet haue I nat put his loue out of mynde but haue stedfast purpose and good wyll that once in my lyfe I shall drawe me towarde hym, and of me he may do hys wyll and good pleasure. And tell hym also that I shall fynde the meanes to go with the kynge Lucar when he ledeth his hooste in to ynde, and then maye he haue me yf he haue any prowesse in him and leade me a way. And to the ende that the kyng of ynde thynke not that your woordes is fayned you shall bere him this rynge. Lady sayd Ualentyne of the good wyl that you haue for to succoure me and giue alegemente I thanke you humble, and haue you noo doubte of the remnaunte, for I shall do your message so wel by the grace of God to the kyng of ynde, that in shorte space you shall haue tydynges. At these wordes Ualentyne toke leue of the lady Rozemonde and went towarde kyng Lucar that for too conduyte hym, gaue him ten maryners, the whiche passed him ouer a great arme of the sea that is betwene Esclardye and ynde, & also they mounted vpon the sea and had wynde agreable, so good that they departed from Esclardie at none and vpon the morowe they arryued at a porte that is but two myle from the cytie of ynde ye great. In that same place descended Ualentyne & drewe his horse out of the shyppe, after he mounted vpon him and said vnto the maryners. Lordes abyde me here til that I com agayne and mi message be accomplysshed, for if it please God I shal not make long soiourning or I retourne agayne. By mahoune sayde a maryner to the other all alowe you shall neuer retourne but if the deuyl bryng you. for of fyfty mesengers that the kynge of Esclardy hath sent thether, there is not one retourned agayne. Ualentyne harde him ryght well but he made no semblaunt but he sayd vnto himselfe, suche speaketh of ye affayres that can not tell howe they go. So he toke his waye and is was not long but that he arryued within ynde, for he was nere the gate. And when he was passed a bridge he wende for to haue bene within the citie, but or euer that he entred it behoued hi for to passe fiue gates, whereof he was muche amarueylled. And bi himselfe he began for to consyder the fortification of that same place, iudgynge by estymacion in his vnderstandyng that the same cytie was the moost strongeste place that euer he hadde sene. And when he was in the market place he sawe a great toure muche hye & fayre vpon the whiche stode a crosse, so valentyne marueyled muche what it myght sygnifie, for he knewe well yt the paynims vsed not suche sygne nor suffred none. In that place the noble valentyne founde a Sarazyn too whome he demaunded the cause and the reason wherfore that crosse stode vpon that hye toure. Frende said the sarazin knowe that the same toure that you se yonder is named the toure of saynt Thomas, & is the tour that he was stoned and put to death in. Nowe it is tru that the christen me in the honour of ye same that they name to be a saint in this same place did foud a church by the lycence of the kyng, in the which church is a patriarke and a hondred christen men, that in the maner of their lawe singe their seruice euery day. and celebre masse. And this wyse they are suffred to doo suche thinges, for they paye great trybute euery yeare vnto the kinge of ynde. ¶When Ualentyne vnderstod that in that toure there was mynister and habytacione of christen men, he descended of his horse for to go into it and say his prayers. So Ualentyne demaunded after the Patryarke the whiche came too hym incontynent and demaunded hym of whence he was, and on whom he beleue. Syr sayd Ualentyne I beleue in Iesu chryst Alas syr said the patriarke, how haue you taken yt hardynes for to come hether, for and the kyng of ynde had knowledge of you he would make you dye shamefuly. Father sayde Ualentine of yt haue you no doubte for I brynge hym suche tydinges and sygnes that he wyll not doo nor thynke me no harme, but of one thynge I praie you, that is that you declare vnto me how and in what maner you abyde in this place and be founded. Certes said the patriarke we are fouded in the honour of god & of the haly saint Thomas the martyr, of whoe the body is in this churche. And there may no chrysten men com hether but if thei be pilgrims, but such folke may come surely, because that the offrynges and oblacions that they gyue are the kynges. And more ouer it behoueth eche of vs to paye a great trybute. And the Ualentyne demaunded and required to se the holy bydi glorious, and it was shewed him in great reuerence and solempnite. ¶Ualentyne kneled downe vpon his knees and made his praiers muche deuoutly vnto god & vnto the holy martir saint Thomas after the whiche thynge done he mounted on horsebacke and wente towarde the palays, in the whiche the kyng of ynde kept resydence for to accomplyshe his message, in takynge leue of the good patryarke, and demaunded hym yf he had heard any tydinges of a christen woman that was come thether of late. By my fayth sayde the patriarke I haue hearde no tydinges of none. Then Ualentyne departed and enquyred no more for without makynge any noyse he would fynde some maner to heare tydynges of the fayre Clerymonde. Nowe it was not longe after that the noble valentyne descended, and came before the gate of the Palays and dyd his message in ye maner that you shall here recounted. ¶Howe Ualentyne dyde his message to the kynge of ynde from the kynge Lucar, and of the aunswere that was geuen hym. After that ye noble Ualentyne was ariued before that palays of ye kynge of ynde. and that he was descended of his horse, with a hardy harte and without any fere he went towarde the kynge, the whiche was in a hall muche ryche hanged and apparaylled accompanyed with thre kynges strong and puyssaunt, and also of diuers knightes and barons. And euen so as Ualentyne entred in to the halle the kyng yf ynde beheld him muche fyersly, & he thought well that he was of kynge Lucars, and sayde to hym all on hyghe. By mahowne the deuyll hath well made you for to come hether so sone, arte thou not seruaunt of the kynge of ynde hide it not from me. ¶Syr sayd Ualentine the truthe shall not be hydde for me. And wyte from hym I bringe you tydynges, wherof you shal be ryght angry at the hart. And on the other syde I brynge you certayne sygnes from the fayre Rozemonde wherof you shall be ryght Ioyous and contente with me. ¶Messenger sayd the kyng I lette the for to wyte that in despyte of king Lucar that is so fyerse and proude I was delybered for to haue put you vnto deathe, but for the loue of the lady that you haue spoken to me of, you shall haue no hurt nor villanye no more then my propre bodye, if it be soo that you can shewe me some token or sygne frome her. Syr sayde Ualentyne that shall I do well and shall tel you my message in suche manere that I shall not lye one worde for to dye for it. It is true certayne that I belonge vnto kyng Lucar the whiche hath sent me towarde you and by me sendeth you worde that for retribucion and vengeaunce of ye death of his father kynge Tromparte you go and yelde you in his palays of Esclardye all naked with a roppe about youre necke, as an vntrue thefe and traytour, and ope murderer. And in this estate he wyll that you come before his ryal maiestie and all baronage of his courte, and as a man culpable yeld you to suffre suche deathe as shal be geuen and Iudged by his counsaill. And if that you be not cotente with suche thynge and wyll refuse me, as a messeeger therto commysed and sent by him I defie you & let you wete that within shorte tyme he wyl come ad waste your lande. Suche is his entencion and hath vowed and sworne vnto god Iupin & mahoune that in all your lande shall not abyde cytie, towne, nor Castell boroughe nor vyllage. but that they shall be all set on fyre and destroyed, men women & children shall be put vnto death so that you shall knowe ryght well that in an euyll houre you put the kyng Trompart to dyath, the whiche was his propre father naturall. Messeger sayde the kyng of ynde I haue ryght well vnderstande and herde you, and knowe that I set lytell store by the menaces of the kyng Lucar, nor by his proude diffrauce, for it is sayd comonly that suche menaceth that haue great drede. And for to geue an aunswere vpon his mater I shall make a letter to bee made that you shal bere to hym, and in the letter shall be conteyned how I haue bene defyed by hym. To yt regarde of you messenger your message is accomplysshed. And also I shall maunde him what good wil I haue for to receiue him and al his puissaunce also often as he will destroye my lad. But as for the surplus of thine enterprise that is of the fayre Rozemonde declare me all that whiche she maundeth me, For amonge the other thynges I haue an ardaunt desyre to here tydinges from her. Syr said the knyght Ualentyne vpon the feate of the lady I salue you from her as her perfite ad secret loue. And she sendeth you worde that she is maried of late vnto the kyng Lucar, but knowe that it is agaynst her will and agaynst her courage. For she neuer loued the kyng Lucar nor neuer wyll. And the free lady that hath so beauteous a body is so smeten to the harte with your loue, that she wyl neuer haue other tha you, yf it be so that you wyll receyue her for lady. For to come vnto ye ende of thys enterpryse she hath tolde me that she wyl come hether in the company of Kynge Lucar her husbande whan he departeth from Esclardye for to come hether in armes agaynst you. And by thys meanes you maye soone fynde the maner for to haue the fayre lady Rozemonde and led her awaye at your owne wyll and pleasure. By mahowne sayde the kynge of ynde these tydynges pleaseth me ryght well and am muche Ioyous yf the thyng be suche as you haue made relacyon of. Syr sayd Ualentine if the thyng be true or fals I can not saye, but for certayne sygnes & tokens verytable here is the rynge that was gyuen vnto her by you, the whiche she sendeth you. And not withstanding that women be of ryght lyght courage, and abyde lytell in one purpose, yet me thynketh well that she aboue al other desyreth your loue, & that her enterpryse is not fayned, Frende sayd the kynge of ynde that knewe the rynge, of thy comynge I am ryght Ioyous. Now go eate and drynke & take thy repaste, and the meane whyle I shall make a letter to be wryte that you shal bere vnto king Lucar for the answere of your dyfyaunce. Ualentine by the commaundemente of the kinge of ynde was at that hour hyghly feested of diuers knightes that kept hym companye. He demaunded dyuers secretely for the fayre lady Clerymonde, in requiryng yf theyr were any tydynges of any christen woman that were in ye countree, And it was answered hym naye soo he helde hym contente. Now the kyng of ynde came anone and gaue hym the letter. And Ualentyne receyued it in takynge leue of hym. He knewe not yt his loue was ther, the whiche lady lyued ryght poorely in the cytie for the loue of hym, in prayinge God deuoutly that it woulde please hym to deliuer her out of that place, and to send her tydinges shortly of her loue Ualentyne, Nowe approcheth the tyme that she shall fynde hym, but the noble knight Ualentyne shall fyrst suffre & endure much pyteous aduentures, the which shall be recounted vnto you here afterwarde. ¶How Ualentyne retourned into the cytie of Esclardye. And of the aunswere that he hadde of the kinge of ynde to bere to kyng Lucar. Greate Ioye and great solace mad the free knyght Ualentine for too departe out of ynde, and to be out of the hades of the felo kyng of ynde that had slayne so many messengers. He mounted on horsbacke & anon arryued at the hauen wher as the mariners abode hym, the whiche were muche abasshed of hys comynge and thought betwene them selfe that he had not done hys message. Lordes sayde Ualentyne returne we into Esclardy for I haue accomplysshed myn enterpryse, wherof I ought well to thanke god. By my faythe sayd one of the maryners we are muche amaruayled, for neuer the dayes of our lyues we sawe onne returne agayne, Frende sayde Ualentyne who that god wyll helpe none can hurte them. At these wordes Ualentyne mounted vpon the see and they rowed so muche that anone they aryued in Esclardy. Valentyne made no soiournynge but also soone as he was descended of hys hors he mouted vp into the palays and founde there the kynge Lucar accompanyed of kyng Brandyffer and of fourtene stronge and puyssaunt kynges, that were all comen in to Esclardy for to socoure the kyng Lucar agaynst the kynge of ynde. Of the returnynge of Ualentyne they were muche abasshed, & amonge the other the traytour kynge Lucar, for wende that he shoulde neuer haue returned agayne. He made Ualentyne to come before al the barons and sayde to hym, Frende tell me tydynges, and saye vnto me yf the kynge of ynde wyll come vnto me or not in the estate that I haue sente hym worde. Syr sayde valentyne in that haue you noo truste, for he setteth not a strawe by you nor yours. He is fyers and proude, and knowe yf you haue wyl for to goo thether, yet hath he more gretter desyre for to receiue you, & to the ende that you make no doubte that ther is falsnes in my message I present vnto you thys letter, the whiche he sendeth you, by the whyche you may know hys courage and hys wyll. The kynge Lucar receyued it & made it to be redde before all the assystences on hyghe. And than they founde that the thyng was true as valentyne had sayd. And whan kynge Brandyffer vnderstode the answere of the kyng of ynde, and that he knewe and apperceiued his fiers courage, he swore by mahown and Appolyn that he would neuir returne in to hys countree tyll that quyke or dead he had conquered the kyng of ynde. ¶How kynge Lucar with fyftene kynges wente and assyeged the kynge of ynde. Upon the morowe he mounted vpone the see wyth two hundred thousand sarazins. And the quene Rozemonde vnderstode that thei wente in to ynde she prayed here husbande so muche that she went with hym. So they had good wynde and arryued there anone. Than they dyscended and pyght theyr tentes in a pleasaunt felde afore ynde. They of the cyte shytte the gates faste, and the kynge mounted vpon a hyghe toure for to se his enmyes. So he aduised vpon the ryuer syde thre riche pauylyons hanged about wyth stremes tryumphauntly and for to haue knowledge what they were he called a heraute of armes to hym, and asked him whose tentes they were. Syr sayd he the fyrst is Brandyffers, the seconde is Lucar your enemyes, and the thyrde is Rozemonde wyth her ladyes. Whan the kynge vnderstode that Rozemonde was there hys heart lepte in his bely for Ioye, and toke hardynes vnto hym sayenge to hym selfe. It is no tyme for to slepe who wyll haue a fayre lady must put hym in aduenture body ad goodes. And he is not worthe for to haue a fayre lady that wyll not take payne for to conquere her. For thys thynge he made to arme hys men and wyth a greate puysaunce essued out of the cyte vpon his enemyes, ye which wt paine had space for to put them in ordinaunce & arme them. For they thought not that the king yf ynde wold haue assaylled them so soone, but loue made hym to doo yt the whych maketh many thynges to be enterprysed sodaynly. Than was the assaute muche greate and ye batayll ryght aspre on bothe sydes. And whan the kyng of ynde sawe that Brandyffer was medled in the batayll for to set his men in ordenaunce and to conduite them he left his company and in muche great diligence rode towarde the pauylion of the ladies. And Rozemonde sawe him well come and by his armoures knewe hym so she essued out of the tente al alone without any company, and went rennyng towarde hym. ¶Howe the kynge of ynde caryed awaye the fayre Rozemonde behynde him, and howe Ualentyne rescowed her and brought her agayne. So as the kyng of ynde apperceyued her ardaut desyre he smote hys horse with the sporres & rode towarde the lady, and without any soiournyng set her on his horse as she that was lyght and hadde good will to accomplishe the thynge. And after that she was mounted she sayd vnto the kynge of ynde. My perfyte and secrete loue you are ryght well founden, for youe are he that I haue desyred so muche, and that I haue abyden of longe tyme. And howe well that syth the time that you demaunded me my father hathe maryed me, not withstandynge it hath bene againste my will and againste my corage, for I neuer hated man so muche as I do the kynge Lucar that is my husbande, but nowe may he well saye that he hath had al the pleasure of me that euer he shall haue. And seth that God hath geuen me the grace for to haue found you I requyre to haue none other and nowe is myne amerous wyl accomplyshed entierly. Lady sayde the kynge of this doubte you not for I shall neuer fayle you, and here I swer to you that or it be thre dayes passed I shall make you quene of ynde the grete, and maistresse of all my tenementes In saying these wordes the kynge of ynde rode forthe leadyng awaye the pleasaunt lady Rozemonde. Then the gardes and maydens of the pauylion in great haste ranne vnto the kynge Lucar and sayde too hym. Syr there is euyll tydinges, for too daye youe haue loste so great a losse, for the kynge of ynde your enemy leadeth awaye the pleasaunt lady Rozemonde vpon his horse, and presently hath stolne and taken her awaye. Wherfore make your men folowe hym for to saue the ladyes honoure. Nowe holde your peace said the king Lucar and tell me no more therof, for who that hathe an euyll wyfe & leseth her, he ought to be lytell sorowful. Thus aunswered the kynge Lucar that had a ful sory hart, & not without a cause. And after wente towarde kynge Brandyffer and sayd to hym in this maner. Syr sayde he I ought to haue lytell Ioye of your doughter whan she hath accorded her to folowe myne enemye for to leue me & geue me a reprochable blame. Fayre sone sayde Brandyffer be not euyll content agaynst me, for to day I shall auenge you on the traytour that had lede away my doughter. Than the kynge Brandyffer smote hys horsee with the sporres for too ryde after hym withe a great companye of men and among the other Ualentyne was there that would shewe his great prowisse at that nede, and sayde vnto Pacolet it is time for to play with thyne arte and shewe thy scyence. Then Pacolet made suche a charme that it was aduyse vnto the kyng of ynde that there was before hys horse a fyelde full of thycke wodde and husshes, & great ryuers. Soo he had so great feare for to be taken that he made the lady for to desende for to flee the lyghtlier. And when the quene was on the earth she wende for to haue found the meanes to haue saued her with the kynge, but Ualentyne was nere that escryed vnto her. Lady abyde for it behoueth you to come with me, for of longe tyme you haue promysed me for to geue me your loue. Ha Ualentyne I oughte lytell for to loue you & holde you dere whan I requyred you of loue you refused me. So it hath be wel force to sike and purchase another then you, but sythe that fortune hath bene so contrarious to me that I haue fayled of mine enterprise I yelde me vnto your mercy as your poore subiecte and seruaunt for euer if it be so that by your meanes I maye make my peace toward the kynge Lucar. Lady sayde Ualentyne I shall doo my besy payne so well that you shall knowe that I haue serued you truely. Then he ledde her towarde kyng Lucar and sayd to hym. Syr see here the fayre lady Rozemonde your wyfe that the false traytoure kynge of ynde led awaye agaynste her wyll, the whyche is ryghte dyspleasaunt at her heart therfore. Ha syr sayd the lady he telleth you trouth, for euen so as the batayll was begon I sawe hym come towarde me, soo I wende that had bene one of your barons that had come for to socoure me. So I wente agaynst hym thynkynge for too saue my selfe and without enquyrynge of any thyng I mouted vpon hys hors but alas syr I knew anone hys euell wyll, and apperceyued well that I was betrayed Than I pulled hym by the here and scratched hys face in suche wyse that the blode yssued out, and that it was force to hym to let me go downe, and so by the helpe of thys good knyght I haue saued me and escaped frome hym. Lady sayd kynge Lucar you haue wrought well, and at this present tyme it behoueth to speake no more therof, for we haue the assaute by our enemyes that giueth vs to muche to doo, So he left the lady wythoute any more arguynge and returned into the batayll. And at that houre they of ynde returned in to the cytie, the whiche had loste dyuers valyaunt chapions, but aboue all the losses the kynge of ynde complayned the losse of the fayre Rozemonde. ¶Alas lady sayd he I haue well fayled at mine enterpryse but eue so helpe me mahoun I knowe clerely that I was enchaunted, for me thought that I foude ryuers and wodde before me, but also soone as I hadde sette you downe I founde but fayre and playne way. Ualentine had great honoure of euery body because that he had delyuered the fayre Rozemod and recouered her of the kynge of ynde. And she made hym fayre semblaunt because that he had socoured her but what someuer sygne of loue that she shewed hym, aboue all other she hated hym and would him euil, for she had well would that the thing had bene otherwyse but not for al that she helde her not contente with the firste faute, but wached and laboured soo muche that she brought her entencion vnto ane ende, and her wyll vnto execution. ¶Howe Rozemonde founde the maner and the facyo to make her selfe be ledde vnto the kynge of ynde the more, the which she loued perfytely, and howe he ledde her in to hys cyte of ynde. Nowe it is said comenly and it is true that yf a woman do not chastise her selfe of her owne propre wyll wyth payne maye any other chastise her. For some wolde rather dye tha fayle of theyr enterpryse, as well shewed rozemonde the wyfe of kyng Lucar, for it was not foure dayes after that she yssued out of her tente & in the leest companye that she myght mounted vpon a hakeney, and sayd that she wolde go sporte her a lyttell in the feldes for to take the good ayre. In thys manere the quene Rozemonde wente toward the cytie of ynde Nowe she had done the kynge of ynde to wyte secretly that he should be redy and apparaylled that same daye for to come and take her and lede her away (and he faylled not) for ryght soon as he sawe her and apperceyued her he yssued out at a posterne mounted at a vauntage and ran toward the lady and tooke the hakeney by the reyne in sayenge vnto her. My lady nowe maye I at thys houre lede you surely at tour owne wyll. In this maner he lede her into the cytie of ynde with great ioy Nowe was the crye amonge the hoost of kynge Lucar that the kynge of ynde ledde away Rozemonde Dyuers mounted on horspacke for to socour the lady, but they were anone entred into the cytie of ynde. By mahowne sayd kynge Lucar who that maye bryng me the lady agayne I shall make hym my greate Seneshall and aboue al them of me court mayster & gouernoure Syr sayd Pacolet vnto Ualentyne if it be your pleasure to haue the lady I shall fynde an enchautement anono wherby you shall take the lady. Frende sayd Ualentyne let her go ones I rendred her vnto her husbande Lucar, trustynge that she wolde chastyse herselfe of her great faute, and syth that she wyll not it is but greate foly to go about it. On that same daye that the kynge of ynde led awaye Rozemonde, he wedded her and laye with her, and engendred a sonne on her that was called Rabastre, the which posseded Iherusalem in his dayes To sorowfull was kynge Lucar when he had loste his wyfe soo. And Brandyffer recomforted hym sayenge, Fayre sone sayd he take courage vnto you, for I swere you mahowne and all my godes that I shall auenge you or I departe hence. Soo swore Brandyffer but it wente otherwyse, for on that propre daye there came a messenger vnto hym whiche sayd. Syre I brynge you tydynges whiche are ryghte displeasuant to you. Syr knowe that kyng Pypen with the emperours sonne of grece is arryued in your lande and hath dystroyed castelles and townes, and hath besyeged your fayre cytie of Angorye, in the whiche your wyfe is newly delyuered of a fayre sonne. And I am comen hether for to demaunde you socoure, or elles it behoueth to yelde your fayre cyte of Angorye vnto the vnhappy christen men. when Brandyffer harde these tidynges he was muche sorowfull in his harte. Then he wente towarde kynge Lucar and sayd vnto him. Faire sonne here is a messenger that hathe broughte me euyll tydynges out of my lande, for the Frenchemen is entred in it with a greate puyssaunce and wasteth and dystroyeth my countree wherfore it is force vnto me that I go and defende my countree, so I shall tel you what I shall doo, you shall sende some knyght vnto the kynge of ynde and bydde hym that he send you agayne my doughter Rozemond youre wyfe vppon suche a condycion that shall pardon hym the death of your father, and make your hoost to departe out of his countrey without doynge it any dammage or hurt. By mahowne sayde the kyng Lucar I had thought the same, and I can not se a better remedy nor a wyser counsail. At these wordes he called Ualentyne and sayd vnto hym. Knyght it behoueth you to go towarde the kynge of ynde on my behalfe and saye vnto hym in this maner, that he sende me agayne the fayre Rozemonde that he hath taken frome me, vpon such a couenaunt that I shall pardon him the death of my father without euer to haue any queston therfore, and I shal make also my men & al mine hoost to auoide out of his lande without doyng him any dammage. Syr sayd Ualentine for you I would auenture my body more then for any other, so I shall do your message the beste wese that I may, and within shorte space you shall haue tydinges agayne, Then he mounted one horsbacke and went toward ynde, and entred in to the cytie lyke a messenger, and went vnto the palis where as he found the kyng of ynde & the quene Rozemonde syttyng besyde hym, the which knewe Ualentine right will, so she sayde to the kyng, Syr se you hym yender, it is the same that toke me from you the fyrste tyme that you would haue ledde me awaye. Lady sayde the king of ynde at this houre I shall auenge me for he shall neuer in his lyfe escape me. That shall he sayde the lady, for I knowe him of so muche that yet you maye haue good seruice of hym. Than Ualentyne approched with a hardy harte and salued the kyng and the quene righte hyghely. Syr sayde Ualentyne, I am messenger vnto kynge Lucar that sendeth me too you. And maundeth you by me that you sende hym his Lady Rozemonde agayne shortely that you tooke from hym that is here And if thou wyll do it he will pardon you the deathe of his father, and shall make his armye to go out of your lande without any soiournyng, but not witstandynge yt I am charged for to do you this message, if you wyll beleue me you shal neuer consent therto, but shal kep the lady that is so fayre and that loueth you so well. And knowe that neuer the dayes of my lyfe I shall bee in no place where as I shall suffer you to be blamed & dishonoured for the loue of the lady. And all the terme of my lyfe I shall serue you truley. Knyght sayde the kyng of ynde you speake as valiaunt, ad your wordes pleaseth me muche. But for a conclusion you shal say vnto kyng lucar that and he haue to do with wyues yt he seke other then my loue Rozemonde, for he shall neuer the dayes of his lyfe sleepe by here sydes, nor haue pleasure of her body. Knyght sayd the lady salue my father and tell hym that of this dede he is the cause, for I had tolde him self that I would not be geuen vnto Lucar, now my father hath done agaynste my wyll, and I haue done agaynst his, so tell vnto Lucar that he haue no more truste in me. Lady sayd Ualentyne I shall doo your message with good hart. Thus he toke leue right ioyous to be escaped from the kyng of ynde and retorned vnto kyng Lucar and tolde him his aunswere saying. Syr purchace you another wyfe, for Rozemonde is wedded vnto the kyng of ynde that slepeth with her euery nyght and doeth his pleasure. When Lucar vnderstode those wordes, he wrong his handes and pulled his heere saying. Ha my loue for you it behoueth that I dye when I haue loste the mooste fayrest, the mooste noble, and the moost louing that is in the worlde. Alas what hadde I done to you that hath purchased me soo great displeasure. False kyng of ynde I shall neuer loue the, for thou haste slayne my father fasly, and taken my wyfe by treason from me. Then Brandiffer sayde vnto hym, My fayre sonne I am ryght sory for your displeasure but at this tyme I cannot amend it, for it behoueth me to go into my lande to chase away the Frenchemen as you haue harde the messenger saye, or elles my londe shall be destroyed. Syr sayde Lucar let vs assayle the citye or you depart By mahoune sayd Brandyffer none assaute can take it, for it must be wonne by famyne, wherfore abyde you here vnto my retourne. ¶Howe kynge Lucar dyd so muche that kynge Brandyffer abode with him and sente Ualentyne in to Angorye agaynst kyng Pepyn. When the kynge Lucar vnderstode that king Brandyffer woulde leue hym he was ryght sorowfull and sayde to hym. Syr it is true that you haue promised me to auenge me one the kinge of ynde that hathe done vs so great an iniurye. ¶That is true sayd Bradiffer, but I am sorie that I maie not accomplysh my promise for the goinge to kepe my lande. Nowe I shall tell you saide kinge Lucar howe you maye do for to saue youre honour and mine. I haue here a knyght named Ualentine aboue all other the moost valyaunt so you may geue hym youre men, for I haue founde him true in all thynges. ¶And moreouer you haue in this hoost your vncle Murgalant that of longe tyme hathe folowed the warre and knoweth much. And me thinke that it shold be good that these twaine made the viage and you abyde here, To these wordes Brandiffer accorded, and sent for them both saying to them. Lordes you are chosen of vs twayne to goo in to Angorye too reyse vp the syege that kyng Pypen hath set. So I pray you that you do so that my land maye be defended and kepte. And you fayre vncle thynke for to doo well and it shall be rendred you. Fayre neuewe take no more thought for sythe that I leade with me the noble Ualentyne I make no doubte but that all shall be wel. After these thynges dyuysed and ordayned there war geuen vnto Ualentyne and Murgalant a hondred thousande paynyms, and also manye abode in the hoost of king Lucar. Ualentine and Murgalant mounted vpo the sea and rowed soo muche that they arryued at the hauen of Angory. But a lytell wyle afore they arryued Ualentyne aduysed a toure couered with fine laten, so he demaunded the maryners what place it was. Syr sayde they it is the stronge castell, and wyte that it is a strong place and so subtylly composed at the entre that there can but one man passe at ones, for and if twayne woulde passe at ones they should fall into the seay that beteth agaynst the walles. And in that same castel king Brandiffer hath kept his doughter Galazye long time to the ende that she should not be stolen nor taken away of nobody. For in the worlde is not memorye of a fayrer then she, but there is so muche that he wyll not geue her to no liuynge creature. When Ualentyne harde those wordes, there toke hym a ryght great desire for to go se the lady, and sayde to hym selfe that he shoulde neuer be Ioyous tell that he had sene her. Nowe are they aryued besyde Angorye and hath taken lande and sette forth their hoost in a short tyme. They sawe ryght well the tentes and pauilyons of kynge Pepyn that were muche glystering and pleasaunt for to beholde. Great dyligence made the christen men for to assayl the citye. But within was an admyrall named Bruhans the which yssued out euery day vpon king Pepyn and did great prowesse with his men. when Murgalant aduysed the hoost of the christe men that helde a great groud he called Ualentyne and sayde to hym. Knyght counsayll vs vpo this feate, for I se & know that the christe men are strong and a great nombre. Murgalant sayde Ualentyne I shall tell you myne opynion. I counsayll that you sende a messanger anone into the cytie of Angorye to specyfy to our men that we are aryued, & that they fayle not to morowe in the mornyng to yssue oute vpon the christen men and assaile them fyersly. And we shall assayll them vpon this syde towarde the sea, so me thinketh yt thee can not escape vs by no maner of wyse By my god sayd Murgalante you haue well aduysed. Now we muste fynde a messenger for to accomplysshe thys thynge. Syr sayd Pacolet yt was subtyl seke none other messanger then me for I can speke all languages Frende sayd Murgalant thou spekest as valyut. Now go thy way mahoune conduyte the. Pacolet departed that was muche Ioyous for to do that massage, & sayd to him self. Murgalant you sende me to do your message. but by the god almyghty I shall doo it in suche maner that or to morowe at nighte you shall knowe with what charme Pacolet can playe. thus he went wyth out any hors toward the cytie of angory. Wha the cristen men sawe hym come soo they thought wel that he was a spye, soo they came agaynst hym hastilly and demaunded hym sayenge. Galant whether go you thus, it semeth by your maners that you are a spye. Lordes sayd Pacalet you say trouthe, but I am not a spye for to bere you domage. Now lede me anone into the hoost of kyng Pepyn, and make me to speke wyth my Lorde Orson and I shall tell hym a thynge wherof he shall be muche abasshed, then the crysten me toke the letle Pocolet and ledde hym towarde Orson, the whyche was ryght Ioyous for to se hym and made hym great chere Frende sayd Orson howe doth my brother Ualentyne, than Pacolet tolde hym all the aduentures that was happened them syth they had sene the one the other, and tolde hem of the serpent yt Ualentyne had slaine before Antyoche. And of ye greate payne, and trauayll that he had or euer he myght ouer come the serpente, and also how he might here no tydynge of the fayre Clerymonde. And syth tolde hym and declared vnto him how that they were aryued there for to fyght agaynst them Syr sayd Pacolet it is true that we are aryued her besyde a hondred thousande paynims, of whome Ualentyne and Murgalant are conductours. And are come hether for to chace you out of this countrey be ye commaundement of kyng Lucar & kynge Brandiffer, but and you wyll beleue me, there shall not one of them returne agayne. Frende sayde Orsone for God haue regarde therto, for and you wyll do it neuer the dayes of your lyfe gate you so muche honoure, and shall acquyre mercye toward God. Syr sayde Pacolet, here me speake a lytell if it please you. ¶How Pacolet by his charme and crafte made all the sarazyns to be put vnto death. And howe kyng Murgalant was slayne. Syr sayde Pacolet to Orson I am and shall be all my lyfe subyecte to your brother Ualentyne and youe. But and euer I dyd you seruyce that pleased you I shall do one nowe Nowe herken how. It behoueth first that you kepe you vpon your garde, and that this nyght you make youre men to be armed and put in point. And to the ende that none thynke that Ualentyne hath wrought the treason I shall make hym to abyde in his tente, and shall make a greate nombre of Sarazyns to goo vnto the watche, and when this shall be thus done, I shall caste my charme in suche maner that they shall all sleepe, soo hardee that you maye passe them and enter in to the hooste surely in puttynge theym vnto death without anye marcye, By God sayde Orson you speake ryghte well and subtylly, and shewe well that you haue a good wyl and deuocion for to sustene and defende oure lawe. At these wordes Orson ledde hym towarde kyng Pepyn for to recounte hym the enterpryse, Ioyous and well content was kyng Pepyn to heare suche a thynge, and made Pacolet to be ryght hyghly feasted, Pacolet eate and dronke and after toke leue and wente in to the citye of Angorye to acheue hys message, too the ende that none toke hede of his dede, and tolde to kyng Murgalant certayne sygnes. He entred in to the cytie and wente in to the palays where as he founde the admyrall bruhans and salued hym heghly in great reuerence. After he dyd his message as he had in charge and commaundement by Murgalant. Syr sayd Pacolet know that of Brandyffers parte we are arryued a hondred thousand paynyms. So kynge Murgalant sendeth you worde that hath charge of all the paynyms that to morowe be tymes you make your men for to be armed and that you assayle the christen men on the syde of the cytie of Angorye, and Murgalant shall assayll theim on the other syde so that they shall not escape, Ioyous was the admyrall Bruhans to here suche tydynges, but he knewe not how it should happen him. Then Pacolet toke leue of hym in great reuerence and retourned vnto Murgalant, the whiche he salued from the Admerall Bruhans in the maner as appertained. Frende sayd Murgalant you are worthy for to be praised when you can do your message so well. After Pacolet wente towarde Ualentyne and sayd to him secretly, your brother Orson and your vncle the kynge Pepyn salueth you. to whome I haue lette wyte the enterpryse of your comynge, to the end that they be not taken vnware, for it shold be great pytie and dammage. Frende sayd Ualentyne thou hast wrought ryght well. Nowe Pacolet tolde hym not the dede of the enterpryse, for he knew well that neuer the dayes of his lyfe he woulde do nor consente to treason. The night approched and behoued the watche to be set and the gardes of the hoost to be chosen & establysshed, well Ualentyne would haue had the charge of the watche but Pacolet that knew well how the thing woulde go founde the meanes for to let him and made hym for to abyde in the tente. And when the nyght was come and the watche set Pacolet entred amog the paynyms and caste his charme in such maner that he made them all fall vnto the earthe onslepe, soo strongly that noo lyuynge creatures myghte not awake them: Nowe the good kyng Pepyn slepte not nor his armye. for when it came towarde midnight hee entred into the hoost with threscore thousand fighting men and the noble Orson and amonge the tentes and pauylions sete the fyre on euery syde, and all the paynyms put vnto death without sparing litle or great. They entred so ferre within the hoost or the panyms awakened that they came to the tente of Murgalant that slepte in his bede and he was so surprysed that as he lepte out of his bedde he was smyten through the body with a darte and so fell downe dead to the earthe. ¶Howe the Sarazyns were discomfyted and howe kyng Pepyn toke the cytie of Angorye. At the hour of this assaute Pacolet cam vnto Ualentyne and toke him by ye hand saying. My lord thinke for to saue you for it goeth to euyll with vs, knowe that the christen men are passed the watche ad are entred into our hoost, and haue also enuyroned our folkes on all sydes and putteth all vnto fyre and bloude, wherfore thinke we for to escape. ¶Alas Pacolet sayd Ualentyne, I know wel that thou hast wrought here and hathe enchaunted the paynyms, soo I wote neuer what to do for to saue myne honour. For at my departyng from Brandyffer I promysed him and swore vnto hym yt I shoule retourne to him againe if I mighte escape with my life, nowe am I sure that he wyl make me dye if he haue tydinges of this thynge. Syr sayde Pacolet of yt haue you no doubte, for youe shall neuer haue euill nor displeasure in no place where as I shall be but shall delyuer you and if kyng Brandiffer hadde Iudged you vnto death and had ye corde aboute your necke standing vpon the laddre ready for to be hanged yet knowe I the maner for too delyuer youe and saue your lyfe. ¶By my fayth sayd Ualentyne suche a varlet ought for to be derely loued. Thus were the paynyms by the arte of Pacolet dyscomfyted and put vnto death. ¶Upon the morowe the admyral Bruhans yssued out of Angorye with a great multytude of painyms for to renne vpon king Pepyn and his hoost, the whiche knewe nothyng of the mysauenture. Within a shorte space the two parties were assembled. Tho began the batayl ryght fyersly, muche great was the noise and pyteous for to heare. Ther was speres and dartes broken, & many champions smyten vnto the earth wyth swerdes and glayues of stele many harneys broken, and membres cut, horses renne thorowe the feld many baners and standardes dyscouered, and smitte to the grounde. And whan the Admyrall bruhans saw that the chrysten men fared so with hys men as all out of hys wytte he put hym selfe in the prese. He couched his spere and ranne agaynst a knyght of Brye in suche maner that he persed him throughe out, and smot him downe dead to the earth. After he drewe out his swerd and smote another knyght that was called Gyrard of Parys, soo myghtelye that he slewe hym in that place. Than he came to a valiaunt knight named Robert of Normandye that greued his men muche, soo he gaue hym so great a stroke with his swerd that he cut of his lefte legge. The Admyrall fought so valyautly that or euer he rested he made ten chrysten knyghtes to dye of his handes. Now the kynge Pepyn apperceyued hym well and sawe that he made great slaughter of the cristen men. Than the valyaunt kynge toke a great spere in his hande & smote the hors wyth hys sporres and came agaynst the Admyrall with so greate a myght that the spere went throughe hys lyuer and his longes, and he smote him downe dead so softli that he spake neuer a worde, nor remeued neuer a membre. And whan the paynims sawe that the Admyral was dead it is not to be demaunded yf they were sorowfull, and had no hardynes for to holde the felde, for they withdrewe theym in to Angorye and mounted vpon the walles for to defende the cyte. Than the christen men were dilygent & folowed them nere, but thei of the cite defended thim so valyauntly as well with stones as with shotte that they ledde the christen me to euil. Than the captaines made the dytches to be filled wt fagottes & logges & bi that means wan the gates & ye barres. And at ye houre the assaute was ryght great & dyed many men as wel on the one syde as on the other. But not withstanding the defence of the painims it profyted the but litel, for at ye same assaute the cytie was taken & al the sarazis put vnto death without any mercy. Then the christen men entred in, yt founde ther much great richesse & it was on a fryday. Kynge Pepyn made his tentes for to be brought into the cytie. Here will I leue to speake of kyng Pepyn and shall tell you of Ualentyne, ¶How Ualentine retourned into ynde after ye batail and bare wt him the body of king Murgalat. After that ye cyte of Angory was taken by the chrysten men, & the paynyms deade as wel wythout as within. Ualentyne that found the body of kyng Murgalant dead vpon ye felde called Pacolet & sayd to him. Frende I wyl yt we bere this body with vs, so maiking Brandyffer sooner beleue that we were in batayll togyther. Syr sayd pacolet you saye well & it shall be honour to you. Than Ualentyne made the body to be taken and put in a cofre muche honourabli, and couered it with blacke. After they went vnto the porte where as theyr shyppes lay and mounted, vpon the see. But of a hundred thousand painims that were comen out there returned not ten thousaunde, and all through ye subtyle of Pacolet. Now they are vpon ye see spreding thyr saylles and rowynge so muche that they arryued streyght at the hauen where as Brandiffer and Lucar had set theyr hoost. They toke londe and dyscended the body and chaurged it vpon two horses, and in making pyteous chere bare it vnto the pauylyon of kyng Bradyffer, the whyche played at the chesse with kynge Lucar accompanyed of fyftene kynges that behelde the play, and also soone as he sawe Ualentine he said vnto hym. Knyght well be you comen now tell me of the batayll how it gothe, & yf you haue slayne oll the chrysten men and taken the kynge Pepyn and his neuewe Orson. Alas syr sayd Ualentyne it gothe well otherwyse, for we haue loste the felde, and all oure men is slayne. For the kynge Farin that had the charge of the watch lette his men slepe, so the christen men passed forth and put the fyre in the pauylyons in sleynge bothe lytle & great wythout any remyssyon. And whan I sawe that the thynge wente so euyll I wakened also many men as I myght for to saue the. And in this batayll is dead your vncle kinge Murgalant, of whome I haue made the body to be brought to ye end that it may be buried as it appertayneth. And yf you wyl not beleue me you maye demaund the other that be here howe the thing wente ¶Syr sayd the other he telleth you trouthe. Than arose the kynge Brandyffer, and as all in a rage hurled the chesse vnto the erthe, and was so sorowful yt with payne he myght speke a worde. Ha Ualentyne I knowe well that thou haste made my men to dye. By god sayd valentyne it is euyll spoken, for I was neuer in my lyfe suche as you saye. And yf ony wyll mainteyne it I wyl fyght with hym for it in a felde. By mahoune sayd king Lucar of him it nedeth not to dought for and he hadde wylled for to haue done treason he wolde not haue returned to you againe. Tha brandiffer was styll and made the body of hys vncle to be honourablie buryed. And anone they of the cytie knew the tidings wherof thee were muche Ioyous. Than the kynge of ynde made hys men to be armed lyghtly and with forty thousand men yssued out of the cytie of ynde. Wha Brandyffer knewe that they came agaynst hym he made his men to arme them. So it was not long but that the batailles assembled that was much fyerse on eche syde. Ualentine was amongest the prese that on euery syde smote and cast downe folkes, so that none durste abyde afore hym. His hardines was so redoubted that no knyght woulde approche nere hym, he entred into ye batayll holdyng his good swerde so ferre that he came to the king of ynde and gaue him so great a stroke that he smote hym of his hors downe to the earth, so rudly that he had no streyngth nor force for to ryse vp. Whan Pacolet sawe that he was downe he went anone with dyuers other and toke the kynge of ynde & yelded hym vnto Ualentyne the whiche ledde hym vnto the pauylyon of kynge Brandyffer. And whan he knewe the tydynges that Ualentyne had taken the kynge of ynde, he cryed vpon his men sayinge. Now to it lordes there is but to do well, for to day we shall haue victorye vpon our enemyes. So I swere my God mahowne that neuer the dayes of my lyfe I shal fayle the knyght Ualentyne neither wyth body nor wyth goodes. For these tydynges kyng Lucar and al hys men toke great courage, and put them in the batayl more fyersly than before, in suche maner that there abode mo than thyrty thousande vpon the feeld. When the marshal of ynnde knew the losse that they had, he made anone to blowe the retrette to wythdraw them and assemble his men. Whan Brandiffer and kynge Lucar sawe yt they wythdrew them they pursued them so nere that at ye entree of the cyte there dyed ten thousand. Pacolet was moche Ioyeous for to se so manye paynyms dy. For he cared not on what syde the losse turned, so that he & Ualentyne myght escap out of theyr handes. The batayl endured so long that the nyght approched, and Brandyffer and kyng Lucar returned into theyr tentes and pauylyons and badde that they should bring them the kynge of ynde, the Which was presented vnto theym anone, Whan kyng Lucar sawe hym he sayd vnto hym all on hye. Ha false traytoure nowe is the tyme comen that thou shal rendre me acounts, thou mayst be well sure that thou shall neuer escape me, for I shall make the dy shamefully. The kynge of ynde vnderstode hym but he answered hym neuer a worde, but yet shal the tyme come that he shal be delyuered by Pacolet, & after his delyueraunce shall yelde vnto him the kynge Brandiffer, to be in his subiecteon as you shall heare afterwarde. ¶How Ualentyne harde tydings of his fathere and how Pacolet delyuered the kynge of ynde by his charme, and delyuered hym Brandiffer at his owne wyll. Ryght so as king Lucar spake vnto the kyng of ynde there aryued a messenger the which after the salute made, sayd vnto king Brandyffer. Ryght dere syr I brynge you heuy tydynges knowe that kinge Pepyn hath taken youre cytie of Angorye, and hathe put all the men and women and children vnto deathe that were in it, wythout hauing any pitie. By mahoune sayd the kynge Brandyffer here is euill tydyngs, for it was the fayrest cytye of all my lande. But sythe that yt is happened so that I haue in my subiection the kynge of ynde, I haue hope that I shal haue vengeance shortely on mine enemyes after he sayd to kyng Lucar. Fayre sonne it behoueth syth that we haue the kyng of ynde in our handes that hath done vs so muche domage that to morow in the mornyng he be condampned vnto a villainous deathe And after we shal go into Angorye agaynste the Frenche men that wasteth my land & shal take vengeaunce. For knowe that within the stronge castel I haue in my pryson the Emperoure of Grece and the grene knyght that hath lefte our lawe, the whiche shall neuer escape me but shall be hanged wythin fyftene dayes. Ualentyne that was there presente, vnderstoode well the tydynges and was ryghte Ioyous to heare speake of hys father so he made sygne vnto Pacolet yt the time shuld be shortlye that he must playe with hys craft. After he sayd softly to hym selfe I pray to God of paradse that he wyll kepe you from daunger for I shall neuer haue ioye tyll that I haue found the meanes for to delyuer you out of pryson. The kynge of ynde behelde Ualentyne and sayd to hym selfe softely. Cursed be the houre that euer thou escaped fro my hands yt I made the not dye, for than shoulde I not haue bene in suche danger as I am nowe in. After these thinges done king Lucar made to come a hundred sarazyns al armed and sayde to them. Felowes I geue you this false traytour king of ynde, so thinke for to kepe hym well vpon the payne to lose your lyues. And to morowe in the mornynge I shall make hym be hanged and strangled when you geue me hym agayne. The paynims toke anone the king of ynde and put hym in a pauilion, & there they bound hym faste by the myddle vnto a pooste, and after they bendeth hys eyen. He myghte well heare the playes, solace, and disportes, but he had but sorow and discomfort in his hart, as he that thought neuer to escape the death. ¶Then Ualentyne called Pacolet and sayd vnto hym. Freende I thynke not that the kyng Brandyffer holdeth my father in his prison, for if I had knowe it I would not haue put my body in so great aduentures for to serue him as I haue done. I haue bene tru to him in all his workes. but sythe that it is so I wyll neuer serue him more but would gladly fynde the maner how I might dammage him. For I am littel beholden for to do him pleasure that hath kepte my father in so greate distresse in hys darke pryson so longe. Syr sayde Pacolet you haue good reson to bere him dammage & if you wil I shall fynde well the meanes to delyuer the kyng of ynde, & yet he shall lede Brandiffer wyth hym, And me thinketh that when he shall haue hym in ynde he wil make him dye shamefully. And by thys meanes you shal be avenged on him. So may youre vncle king Pepyn holde Angorye surely. By my faythe sayde Ualentyne suche a thynge would I well. And I praye thee hartely that thou do some thynge at this houre wheryf I may helpe king Pepin, and deliuer my father the Emperoure of Grece. When it came after souper the hundred sarazins that had the king of ynde in kepyng made a great fyre before ye pauilion. And Pacolet that slept not at that houre entred into the pauilion as one that would watche with them. So it was not long after that he caste a charme in suche maner by the art of Nygromancye that he made them fall to the earth ad slept as dead men. After he wente to the kyng of ynde and vnbounde his eyen, and sayd to him. Noble kynge of ynds take ioye and comfort in me, for I am thy god mahowne that is descended from heuen for to succour the. And because that thou haste serued and honoured me longe I wyll delyuer thee. Thou shalt go surely in to my palays and leade with the king Brandiffer that shall knowe nothynge therof. Alas my God sayde the kynge of ynde I haue well serued the when thou haste wylled to descende out of thy holy paradyse for to kepe me from my mortall enemy. Now I knowe well that thou art God almyghty. King said Pacolet haue trust in me, and beleue the counsayll of thy wife. ¶At these wordes Pacolet ledde hym towarde Brandiffer, and made all his watche to slepe and enchaunted Brandyffer in suche maner that he made him ryse & clothe him sayinge to the kynge, God is come, for I wyll goo with you in to your palays and accomplyshe all your wyll. Howe kynge Lucar made all the hundrede sarazyns to be drawen at horse tayles. And howe Ualentyne and Pacolet departed out of his host secretly for to go vnto Angorye. Then the king of ynde kneled down saying. Soueraine God I thanke you for this great myracle. So pacolet broght him a fayre horse & made him to mout vpon hym with the kyng Brandiffer, & so they rode vnto ynde, & Pacolet toke his leue. Mahowne said the king of ynde I thanke you with all my harte & recomaud my soule vnto you whe it shall depart fro my body. Kyng sayd Pacolet I shall not fayle you, for if it come into my handes it shall not fayle of a good maister. And so Pacolet departed, & the kyng of ynde called the porters that let him in wt gret ioye. When Rozemonde apperceiued hym she sayd vnto hym. Ha ryght dere syr well be you come. Nowe tell me howe you haue broughte my father hether, is the peace made betwene you and him. No sayd the king it hath bene mine God mahoun that hath apered to me The which by his diuinine puyssaunce hath deliuered me from the hades of myne enemyes and hether hath brought me and geuen me your father. And there fayled the charme, and kyng Brandyffer did awaken and begane to loke much ferefully, & after sayd to the king of ynde. Frome whence may come this thynge, and howe am I come hether. I thinke that the deuyll hath brought me in to thys place. Nay sayd the king of ynd but it hath ben the puissaunt god mahoune that hath appeared this night and brought you and me hether. So I beleue that it is his wil that you & I make good peace and be frendes together. By my lawe said Brandiffer I had rather dye, for of your acquantauce I wyl none, let me goo towarde myne hoost as I was before that you brought me hether. Brandiffer sayd the king of ynde that shall I not doo for sythe that mahowne hath brought you hether, I trust me in his grace to perfourme the thing. Thus is Brandiffer within the cytie of ynde in greate sorowe because yt he sawe hym selfe taken, and might not retourne at his wil into his hoost. And the hundred sarazyns that shold haue kept him, be yet slepyng vpon the earth. Now when it was daye kyng Lucar came into the pauilyon where as he hadde lefte the kynge of ynde in kepynge. And when the paynems sawe hym they cryed hym mercy sayinge that they had loste the kyng of ynde that nyght by enchauntement. ¶Ha false harlottes sayde Lucar I knowe wel how it goeth, you were al dronke and layde you downe to slepe. But I swer by mahowne that the wyne that you haue dronken shall bee derely bought. Then he made them all to be drawen at horses tayles & after hanged, for the whiche thyng Pacolet laughed And Ualentine called Pacolet and saide to him. Frend my harte wyl neuer haue ioye tyll that I haue founde my father the Emperoure of Grece that Brandyffer holdeth in his pryson, so I wyll not abyde here but am delybered for to leue this cursed folke that I haue serued so long in trusting to haue hade tidinges of ye faire Clerymonde, and I beleue that she is dead, wherefore I wil go towarde kyng Pepyne that is in Angorye for to tell hym howe kynge Brandyffer holdeth my father and the grene knyght in pryson. It is well sayde quod Pacolet, for we shall goo vnto the stronge castell afterwarde and delyuer your father. Thus was the counsayl taken and the thing done. for Ualentyne with his men mounted vpon the sea without taking any leue. ¶Of the vision of kynge Pepyn. And howe he wente in to the holy lande with the twelue peres. Nowe you haue heard say how kyng Pepyn toke Angorye, so I wyll tell you and declare vnto you the maner and ye facion wherfore the great treason was made by the two fals brethren Haufray and Henry. It happened one nyght as the kynge was in Angorye lienge in his bedde, he dreamed a meruailous dreame. In this slepinge him thought that he sawe the thre nayles that our lorde was nayled on the crosse with, & the spere that he hadde his syde perced with. And hym thought that he sawe a preest that songe masse besyde the holy sepulcre afore hym. And thys aduisyon happened to him thryes, wherof he was muche ameruailled whan it came toward the mornynge that ye kyng for ye same dreame and for that auysio assembled his baros and right so as he had dreamed declared it to them, ad after sayd to them. Lordes I wote neuer what shal befall, but syth that suche a vysyon is happened me thre tymes I thynke not that it is a dreme of abusion, and am delibered afore that I returne into Fraunce to go and vysyte the holy sepulcre of our sauyour and redeptoure Iesu chryst, wyth the other holy places as well wythout the cyte of Ierusalem as within. ¶How kynge Pepyn put hym vpon the way in the habyte of a pilgrim with the twelue peres of Fraunce, & howe the kynge Pepyn spake vnto Haufray and Hery before all the lorddes of hys courte. Dere syr sayd Orson I wyll go with you yf it please you and also sayde Myllone dangler. Then in like wise the twelue peres of Fraunce promysed him to go with hym, & the kynge thanked them hartely. And then he called Haufray & Henry and sayd to them. Haufray you know that you are my natural sonne, but in such maner you wer engendred that you and your brother haue not one fote of lande in Fraunce. So I will that you abyde here for to kepe this countrey and defend it and shewe that you are valyaunt and true. For & you bere you well I am belybered for to geue you the realme of Angorye that I haue wone so truely. And I shal coquere you Brandiffers doughter to be your wyfe, & I shall wynne Henry a nother Syr sayd Haufray gramercy. Then he sayd alowe you wyll disheryte vs ther But and I should renounce God and his holy mother I shall do in suche maner that the thyng shall happen contrary to your wyll. ¶Howe Haufray and Henry betrayed the kynge Pepyn their father and the twelue peres of Fraunce. Then he called Henry and sayde to hym Fayre brother you haue well harde ad vnderstande the wordes of kynge Pepyn. He wyll geue vs and assygne vs our liues vpo straunge realmes after his appetyte as they that are not worthy to be his chyldren. Nowe I knowe well that he hath entencyon that Charles shall bee onely kynge of Fraunce, and that we shall haue nothynge. And therfore yf you wyll beleue me Pepyn shal neuer returne into Fraunce tyll that we haue made hym dye by the handes of the paynyms. Than shall we be kynges of Fraunce and emperoures of Rome wythout contradyccyon, for there is nothing in thys world that I desyre so muche. Brother sayd henry you speke wysely, but it must be wel aduised howe such a thyng may be accomplyshed and performed. Henry sayd Haufrey I shal tel you how. I muste go towarde the kyng Brandyffer and accord thys thyng with hym, by thus that he shal geue me his doughter Galazy, and I shall tell hym the tydynges how king Pepin and the twelue peres of Fraunce go into the holy sepulcre and how thei may be lyghtly taken, for they go withouten armour and wyth a smale company. And I am wel certayne yt the painyms shal be ryght Ioyous of these tydynges And if that they be not thus taken they shal neuer be taken. By god Haufrey sayd henry you say trouth. Now you muste go towarde ynde the maynor & there you shal fynd kynge Lucar and the kynge Brandyffer the which holdeth the cytye assyeged, so you may say & tel them your courage, and I shall go with the kynge on vyage, to the ende that our feat be the more secretly couered and that they apperceyue nor deme no treason. It is wel sayd quod Haufray so let me accomplisshe it. For I shal neuer haue good rest tyll that I haue adcomplished this thinge. And thus was the treason made and conspired by the two fals brethren Haufray and Henry against theyr propre father kynge Pepyn Alas they shewed wel that they were euilly begoten and engendred, and comen of an vntrue generacyon, whan they wold make hym dye that was theyr father and that with al his puissaunce toke payne for to conquere them realmes. Now the kynge Pepyn and the twelue peres of fraunce are entrede into the sea yt doubted of no treason for to accomplishe their pylgrimage. Henry is entred in with theim for to hyde theyr treason the better. And his brother Haufray went towarde ynde for to fynde kynge Brandiffer that hadde set the syege afore the cytie of ynde wyth kynge Lucar for hys doughter Rozemonde. ¶Howe the Caliphe of Bendas arryued in the hooste of kynge Brandiffer, and howe he gatte trewes for a moneth during the whiche trewes he made the peace betwene the kyng of ynde and kyng Lucar and Brandyffer. True it is that the Calyph of Bendas ariued in the host of kyng Brandyffer & Lucar and made the to make trews for a moneth, & he that broke it sholde lese the halfe of hys landes. Durynge the whiche time the Calyphe assebled kynge Brandiffer, Lucar and the kynge of ynde. And when they were assembled the Calyphe spake in thys maner and sayd. Lordes you knowe that the christen men haue wonne the realme of Angory, and that you cannot go thether during this warre. Wherfore if you wyl beleue my counsel I shall tell you what you shall do. It is true that the kynge of ynde slew your father Tromparte for sleinge of his vncle nowe take it that it is death for deathe, and the kynge of ynde shall delyuer Brandyffer. And as to the regarde of youre wyfe Rozemond she shall be set betwene you and hym that she wil go to, shall haue her wyth out contradiccion. Unto this appointment accordeth bothe the kynges, and Rozemonde was brought before king Lucar, and before the kynge of ynde and the thynge was declared vnto her by the Calyphe of Bendas. Then wyth out takynge any aduyse she wente vnto the kyng of ynde, Wherefore kynge Lucar was righte sorowful. So I wyll leue you to speke of thys matter and shal tel you of Haufray that went toward ynde. ¶How Haufray for to accomplisshe his treason arriued before Lucar and Brandyffer and howe he him selfe was deceiued by treason. On that same propre day, that the pece was made by the Calyphe of Bendas as you haue heard before Haufraye perceueringe in his malyce arryued in the hooste of Kynge Lucar and of Brandyffer and came anone towardes their pauilions and demaunded the gardes whyche was kynge Lucar and whyche was Brandyffer. And they shewed them hym anone and than he salued them hyghly, and after Brandyffer spake sayinge what demaund you and what dryueth you hether. Syr sayde Haufrey the thing that bringeth me hether is not to be sayd before so many men. Then they drew them a syde bothe Brandiffer, Lucar, and Haufray, & with them the Caliphe of Bendas than Haufray said vnto them. Lordes harken if it please you, for I am come for your great profyte and honour. Wyte that I am son vnto the myghty kyng Pepyn of Fraunce, soo I haue hearde say that you haue a doughter that surmounteth all other in beuty corporall wherefore I let you wyte that and you wyl geue me her vnto wyfe, I shal shewe you the maner how that you may haue in your subiection the king Pepin and the twelue peres of Fraunce that haue done you so much domage. For knowe that they are departed in habyte of pylgryms poorely arayd and accompanied for to go into Ierusalem to visite the holy sepulcre, and there you shall find them without gret cumpany. Be mahoune said Bradiffer you speke notably, and for your good enterprise I am content for to geue you my doughter Galazye, the whiche I would neuer promise vnto no body, but there is one thyng that I shal tel you that is that you renounce Iesus. yes sayd Haufray Iesus I renounce for I neuer loued hym to much. When the kyng knew the falsnes and the treason of Haufray that wold sell his father, and renounce his lawe, he wente a lyttell a syde in counsaile and called Lucar and the Calyphe of Bendas and sayd to them. Lordes nowe maye you knowe clerely the greate treason of this disloyall man that demaundeth my daughter. Wel ought I to trust me lytel in him when he will betraye his propre father that begate hym with the twelue peres of fraunce, so I loue better to make my doughter dye, than to geue her vnto suche a traytoure not for that we muste find the meanes to go into Ierusalem and too maynteine thys man, so may we haue lyghtly the kynge Pepyn & the twelue peres of Fraunce. ¶Howe kynge Brandyffer wrote a letter vnto his doughter Galazie and gaue it Haufray for to bere vnto the stronge castell. At these wordes he called Haufray & sayd to hym. fayre syr I am ryght glad of your comyng, now vnderstande what you shall de, you shall go toward my doughter and bere her this letter from me, and ther you shal passe the tyme tyl that we houe more euident tydynges of your dede. Syr sayd Haufray it is right wel aduysed so he toke the letter of the kyng and put hym on the way wyth a hundred sarazins that Brandiffer had geuen hym to conduit him. And they mounted on the sea and drewe vp the sayle and rowed so wel that wythin short tyme they sawe the stronge castel where as Galazye was in, that aboue all castelles was fayre strong and pleasaunt for to behold, they aryued at the hauen and toke land nere the castell. Whan they were dyscended they put them vpon the way for to go vnto the castel. And also sone as they were before the gates the porter cryed to them on hygh sayinge Lordes you shal not enter more ferther for here mai none enter wt out certaine sygnes. Porter sayd Haufray say vnto ye ladye that we shal tel her so good sygnes, that she shall know vs anone. The porter mounted vp in to the castel and found the lady at table and the Seneshal that serued her. Lady sayd the porter yonder wythout is I can not tel what men, and wil entre herein, me thinke they be of youre fathers, Seneshal sayde the lady goo anone for I haue great desyre to heare tydinges of my father. The Seneshall dyscended and also soone as he knewe that they came from Brandiffer he bounde vp the lyons and opened the gate, and Haufray entred in that wend wel that it had ben for his honour and profyte, but it had ben better for him that he hadde kept the land of Angory as kyng Pepyn bad him. For with his treason he found him selfe betrayed as it was reason, for a thyng euyl begon can not haue a good ende. ¶How the fayre Galazy, after that she knew the falsenesse and treason of Haufray she made hym to be put in a dark pryson much strayghtly. As Haufraye was entred into the castel, he wente and presented him anone before the fayre Galazie But when he saw her greate beauty and her ruddy chekes in fygures coloured her gentel bodye streyghte and compassed, her eyen amyable and laughing, her nose streiyght and the mouthe lytle the brestes white as snowe the armes smal and the handes whyte & fyngers long his harte was so embraced with her loue that he loste the speche and countenaunce. And anone after that he had taken his reseccyon he salued the lady and sayd to her. My sayd souerayn aboue al the other mahoun the whych made the fyrmamente gyue you grace and strengthe to performe al youre noble desyres. Knowe ryght honoured lady that for the gret renowne that I haue hard of youre excelent beuty I haue left my contree that I am of, and for your loue haue passed the se Now I haue spoken to the puissaunt kyng Brandyffer youre father to whome I haue told such tydynges that he and al paynnye shal be the better. And for to haue the more certaynte therof lo here a leter that he sendeth you by me. The lady toke the letter that coud rede ful wel. And whan she had aduysed the letter, she beheld Haufray muche hardely and after sayd to him hyghly. Uassaile I haue sene your letter the which saieth that you that are christen men haue solde to the of our law the twelue peres of Fraunce, and that more is youre father the kyng Pepyn to my father sendeth me word that I do my wil with you, and because that I knowe that aboue all other, you be the moste traytoure, and that there is in you neyther fayth nor troth nor gentilnesse whanne you wil betraye youre father, Well ought other to haue lytle trust in you. So I swere to you by the law that I holde, that I shal haue no pyte nor mercy on you. For who that purchaseth treason and is comforted in his treason they are wors than he. After these wordes for to saue her othe she made hi be put in a darke prison. Alas lady said haufraye here is a pyteous mariage for me. Syr said Galazy for wyfe you shal wedde my pryson, for you shall neuer haue me. ¶Now it is true that in the same pryson wherein Haufray was put with the Emperour of Grece & the grene knight and hearde that they put a prisoner in to them tha the Emperour sayd what are you. alas said Haufray care you not what I am. I am the vnhappy Haufray bastarde of kynge Pepyn of all dolorous the moost euil fortuned. Ah said the Emperour and I am the Emperour of Grece. I pray you tel me how my sones do and kyng Pepyn with al the lordes of Fraunce Syr sayd haufray they are dyscended into thys contre and haue wonne the realme of Angory. Thus deuised the prisoners. So I wyl leue you to speke of this matter and wil tel you of Ualentine and Pacolet. ¶How Ualentyne and Pacolet arryued before the strong castel and howe Pacolet reysed vp the Deuyl to know if he might take it. Valentine ad Pacolet rowed soo much on the see that they ariued at ye strong castel Ueray god said Ualentin how this place is stronge I beleue yt it is vnpossible for to wynne it by force. Syr sayd Pacolet I shall tel you anone. Than he wente a syde and began a charme of Nygromancye, and incontynent there cam a deuyl vnto hym that said. Leue this interpryse for yu lesest thy payne this castell can neuer be taken with encauntement nor assaute, for it is made of such mater that it can neuer be take but by treason. At these wordes the deuyl vanysshed awaye. And there rose vp soo great a smoke aboute the castell that Ualentyne saw not Pacolet, of the which thinge he was muche abasshed. After that ye smoke was passed Pacolet cam vnto Ualentyne and sayd vnto him. I praye you that we departe hens for we be her to long, for this castel may not be taken but by treason. Than they mouted on ye see and aryued at Angory anone. So Ualentyne mouted vp into the palays, & demaunded tydynges of king Pepyn. And they tolde hym that he was gone vnto Ierusalem on pylgrymage. whan Ualentyne herde those tydynges, he sayd god be theyr spede. I wyll abide him vnto his retorne for to lede hym vnto the strong castel to helpe me to get my father out of pryson. Alas he abode hym for nought for he was solde and betraied by the false Haufray. How kyng Brandiffer and kyng Lucar toke kyng Pepin and the twelue peres of fraunce with in the cytye of Ierusalem. Now is the kynge Pepyn and the twelue peres of fraunce comen into ierusalem for to visite the holy sepulcre. And for to do the more deuoutly ye holi viages that are in the land of promission, in ye whych our lorde Ihesus christ suffred death and passion, they are aryued at a good patriarkes the whych hadde the keping of the holy sepulcre. And he gaue them guiftes for to conduit them vnto al the holy places, in whyche were the indulgences and pardons. They made a prist to synge masse for them euerye daye, and in greate deuocyon vysited the holy places. Nowe happened piteous thynges to recounte whyles that they were with in Iherusalem, for Brandiffer, the kynge of ynde, and the kyng Lucar the which had bene aduertysed by the traytour Haufray aryued in the cytie of Iherusalem puyssauntly accompanyed, and went vnto the towre of Dauyd towarde the kynge of Surye that helde the countre and there presented them. And whan he sawe the he was much ameruayled of theyr comynge. And after the salutacion made demaunded theym. Lordes what thynge dreueth you hether for I thynk that you are not comen hether wythout great cause, than brandyffer spake and sayd vnto hym. Syr knowe that by a christen man we are aduertised and enformed that wt in this cytie is arriued the twelue peres of Frauce wt the kynge Pepyn. Now they are the principall enmies of our lawe and they that of al the worlde maye greue vs most. And haue alredy taken the citie of Angorye and spylled a great quantyte of my land, my men put vnto death and my contre destroyed. And therfore we are comen hether for to take theym. For whan we shal haue them we may do our wyl wyth al Fraunce. And of al christendome be lordes and maysters. By mahoune sayd the kyng of Surie that helde the temple of salamon you speke ryghte wysely, & of thys thinge I am muche content. Now be it done after your appetyte, for we ought to be curious for to take & destroy suche menne, and for the loue of our goddes we ought to wake vpon that dede. Soo I shall tell you what we shall do for to accomplishe this thinge. I shal send word vnto the patriarke that and he haue any Frenche pylgryms that be, bringe theim to mee anone, for I wyll sende some letters into Fraunce. ¶How the kyng of Sury sent a messenger vnto the Patriarke of Iherusalem, byddynge hym bringe hym kyng Pepin & the twelue peres of Fraunce the which he did. So the messenger of the kyng of Sury wet towarde the patriarke and said vntoe hym The kyng of Sury sendeth you worde that and you haue anye Frenche pylgryms that you bryng them vnto hym. Then he wente vnto theyr lodgyng where as he founde them redye to go vnto theyr souper, for they had accomplished theyr pylgrymage, and sayd vnto them. Frendes you muste come presently vnto the kyng of Sury. Alas said king Pepyn here is piteous tydynges, for I am certayne that he wyll put me to deathe yf he knowe me. But I shal tel you what we shal doo. We wil make Henrye oure mayster & I shal bare his hatte and his staffe. By god syr said Henry that knewe wel treason, that shall I not do, for here is Orson & duke Myllon that ar more worthyer to be it than I. Syr said the duke Millon I shal do al that yt shal please you. Than they departed from theyre lodges to go toward the painym that had sent for them. The duke Myllon was honoured as kynge and Pepyn bare his staffe and his hat poorely clothed. The good patriarke led them that thought none euil, and also sone as he hadde delyuered theym he departed thens. Come hether said the kynge of Surye I am wel enformed of youre case, you are frenshemen that come to espie me, and in youre companye is the king of Fraunce. Syr said one of the twelue peres the kyng of France is not in this company. Peas said the kyng of Sury for by mahoune if the kyng of frauce shewe not him selfe anone, I shal make you al to dy wythout remyssion. ¶Kyng sayd anone the traytour Henry, of me haue no doubt for it is not I. Tha ye duke Myllon aperceued well that there was treason. So he sayd al on hye. Syr I am the kyng of Fraunce, but there is one thing that I wyll saye vnto you yf yt please you to heare me. We are comen vnto the holy sepulcre, & your lawe is suche that all christen men may come and go surely vpon your land without any hurt to the sayde pylgrymage in paying the tribute that is established and dewe vnto you. Now we haue al paied and accomplysshed after the ordinaunce of hys countrey wherefore me thynke ye doo to vs great wronge if you disturbe vs for that cause. By mahowne you may say what you wyl but there is neyther tyme nor season to you that maketh vs war for to come hether to espye our land. Than he called Brandiffer & Lucar and said to them. Lords take these false christias spies and do with them your wyl, for I put them entyrelye into your handes to make them dye of what death yt shall please you. At these wordes the pylgryms were taken and witholden by the paynyms so it is not to be demaunded if they fared foul with them, for they had no more pytie of the noble lordes the of dogges. They were strayghtly holden and bond, and after Brandyffer spake and said. Lordes I wil that these false men be ledde vnto the strong castel, and there be put in my depest pryson. Syth we shall go into Angorye and by forse of armes wynne al the countrey. After we wall go into Fraunce and take the countrey & put it lightli in our obeysaunce for there we shal neyther fynd king lorde nor baron that wyl saye vs the contrarye. And therfore you may go eche of you into youre contre til a certaine day that we shal mete at Faleyze and there departe our prysoners after reason. Lordes sayde the kynge of ynde as to the regarde of the prysoners I demaunde none other thyng for my parte but that you wyll geue me the least so I shall make hym my dwerf. And make hym ryde with me because that he is lytle, and me thynke he is a man sure ynoughe, And I shall do hym good if he will renounce the lawe of Ihesus, To this demaund accorded all the other & gaue kyng Pepyn to the kynge of ynde that ledde hym into ynde with him and loued him much afterwarde not wythstanding he suffered many tribulations. ¶How the kyng of ynde the great ledde kyng Pepyn awaye for the part of his prysoners, but he knew not that he was kyng of Fraunce. So the kyng of ynde ledde with hym ye good kyng Pepyn but he knew it not. The valyaut .xii. peres beheld kyng Pepyn piteously but none durst byd him fare wel for doubte of knowing thus goeth ye king of ynd & king Pepyn rydyth after hym that is not without sorowe. Alas sayde he al alone veraye God healpe me and succoure me, for if you helpe me not of youre grace of all poore I am the most soroweful and vnhappye. Alas Myllon dangler I owe well to loue you whan for mee you put your body in such danger. Henry henry thou haste wel shewed that thou loued me not, whan at my neede thou failed wel owe euyll come vnto the chylde that at great neede leueth his proper father. My loue Berthe I shall neuer see thee more, alas Charles my lyttell sonne, God helpe the for I knowe for a trouthe that the false traytoures shall make thee suffer payne ynough and thou arte yonge and lyttell and maye not resiste against them. Thus complaineth kyng Pepyn and wepte pyteouslye. Nowe the kynge of ynde hathe done so muche that he is arryued with in ynde. And when the ladye Rozemonde knewe it she ran agaynste hym and in making greate Ioye kyssed hym and after mounted vp in to the palays. The lady behelde kynge Pepin the which not withstandyng that he was lyttel he was wel formed and made of hys members and of regarde ryght pleasaunt, so the lady demauded ye king of ynde. My loue tel me who hath gyuen you this litel man, for he semeth much honeste and gratious and yt may be to se his semblaunce that he is extraught out of a hyghe place. Lady sayd the kynge, he hath bene geuen me, for he was come wyth the kyng of Fraunce & the twelue peres in to Ierusalem wherefore he hathe beene taken, and if he will renounce hys God Ihesus, I shal do him muche good. Pepyn answered nothyng which had wel another entencion. So the houre was come that the kyng shoulde go to supper. Pepin entred in to the keching, and the kynge demaunded hym if he could any thyng of Cokerye, and that he shoulde make hym the sauce for a pecock that rosted. And Pepyn dyd yt so well that afterwarde the kynge woulde haue no meat nor sauce but of hys dressing. Wherof al the other of the kechin rial hadde great dispite at him and vpon Pepyn hadde suche enuye that it happened one time that the king commaunded him for to make redy a pecock, so he went toward the coke by the commaundement of the kynge. And as he entred into the kechin bothe litel and greate began for to mocke hym and some smote hym behind, and he as verteous toke al in pacyence. After he wente towarde the fyre for to haue put the pecock on the spyt. And the master coke that had great enuye on hym aproched nere hym and caste a gret brenninge cole in his lappe and brent hym shrewedlye. And than Pepyn swore that he woulde auenge hym and came vnto the sarazyn and gaue hym so gret a stroke betwene the forhead and the eare that he smote hym down and after gaue him another strok so great that he made his braynes flee out. When the varlettes and scolyons sawe theyr master so outraged they assailed al Pepyn with staues and knyues. And he that was hardye and valyaunt reculed not backe, but swore Ihesu christ that he loued better to die tha to suffer iniurye of suche rascalles. So he wente towarde a boy that would haue smyten him with a pestel and gaue hym so greate a stroke that he felled hym downe dead to the earthe. The noise and crye was so great that the king harde it. So he badde anone that Pepin shoulde be taken and brought before him and whan he was before hym he sayd vnto hym euyll boye How hast thou bene so hardy to slea my mayster coke within my palais. Now tel me anone how the thynge goeth or by my God mahoune thou shal dye. Syr sayd kyng Pepin I shall tell you the truthe. It is true that I was in the kechin for to make redy a pecock for your supper as you commaunded me & than your coke cast a hote cole vpon me and brent me shrewdly wythoute any cause. And therefore I slew hym. When the kynge knew the truth by the other he pardoned him. ¶How the kyng Pepin beinge with the kyng of ynde had knowledge of the fayre Clerymond. Hera wyl I make you metion of the fayr Clerimond the which as ye haue hearde before was kept in the kyng of yndes palays. Now the kynge of ynde had a Custum yt he wold send her of the best meat that was on his table. So it hapened that at a souper he called Pepen and gaue hym the meat that was before hym and sayd vnto hym. Go in to ye chamber where as is a windowne, & there you shall fynde a folyshe woman pyteously arayed, bere her thys from me. Pepin toke the meate and bare it to the lady. But whan he saw her so porely araied he had greate pytie & sayed vnto her. Loue, Iesus that suffered for vs death & passyon helpe you. Alas haue trust in him and serue hym with good harte, and if you do so, know for a certaynte that you shal haue aledgement of your dolour and therefore beleue stedfastly in him & receiue the holy sacrament of baptim. When the ladi vnderstode that he spake of god she aproched nere hym and said. Freende haue no doubt of me. But tel me if thou be a christen man or if you say these wordes by gyle. Lady said Pepyn for a trouthe I am a christen man, and am comen out of the realm of Fraunce. Tha the lady said al smilynge you ought well to knowe the good kyng Pepyn and his neuew Ualentine. It is true said Pepin and I knowe well his brother Orson & his father the Emperour of Grece also whan the ladie herd that she began for to wepe and said vnto him. Alas frend may I haue truste in you. ye sayd Pepyn as much as in youre propre father of al that it shal please you for to say for neuer shal you be accused by me. ¶Frende sayd the lady knowe for certaynte that I counterfet the foole, and the sicke woman, but I am also wyse & hole as I was euer, for I am a chrysten woman and had the fayr Ualentyne vnto loue, and vnto him I was gyuen for wyfe but by the false traitour kyng Trompart I was taken from him. Than the lady toulde him al the maner of her estate and how she had bene stolen and wherfore she made her selfe syck. When kyng pepyn herd the pyteous aduenture of the lady he began to wepe much tenderly. After in consydering the fortunes and great aduentures that cometh vpon the creature in casting out great teares he sayd softly to him selfe. Ha veray god almyghty what is it of the tenebres of this world now se I this poore soroweful for to kepe her trouthe myserably adorned, and in greate pacience vsinge her dayes. Alas Ualentyne my fayre neuew at this tyme it nedeth not to demaunde if for this fayr lady you ar and haue bene sith in languishing pacyence and great thoughte. Nowe pleased yt God that you knewe at this hour how I fynde her that for your hart languisheth. And after these wordes he behelde the lady sayinge. Lady I know certainly what you are & you wote not what I am but sythe that you haue hadde so mu- trust in me that you haue tolde me your secret I wyll tell you what I am. Knowe that suche as you see me I am Pepyn the kinge of Fraunce to whome fortune hath ben so contraryous that she hath made me to fal into such pouerty and seruytude as you see. Nowe I knowe well that my neuewe Ualentine in greate trauayl of his body without rest sercheth you continually. But and it please god he shal haue tydynges of you shortly, and in ioy and solace you shal assemble agayne togyther. At these wordes the lady swowned and king Pepyn lefte her for too retourne towarde the kyng of ynde the whiche was at souper. Now wyl I leaue this mater and shall tell you of kynge Brandyffer and Lucar that lede the twelue peres of Fraunce and Henry and Orson prysoners. ¶Howe Brandyffer brought vnto the stronge castell the twelue peares of Fraunce and put them in pryson prysoners and Haufray and Henry so he did so much that he came vnto the strong castell. Brandyffer founde there hys doughter Galazye, that he loued so muche. And recounted vnto here the enterpryse and maner,  & after put the all in a depe caue, whereas the Emperour of Grece was and the Grene knyght, so the traytoure Haufray has bene put vnto them. Much sorowful was Henry when he might not tell his courage vnto Brandiffer, but he was the first that was letten downe into the prison, and after hym the duke Millon that fel vpon Haufray, wherof Haufray complained sore because that he was hurt. Hold your peace sayd the duke Myllon and draw you more lower for there is many mo to whome it behaueth to make place. Haufrey vnderstode the duke Millon wel and demauded him what broght him thether but you sayed the duke Myllon, for I had left you within Angorye Ha sayd the traytour I was taken at a stoure ye other day and brought hether So the lordes be in pryson makyng muche sorow the whiche knew eche other When Haufray knew that king Pepyn was not there he made the semblaunt to be right ioyous but he had wel woulde that he had bene hanged by the necke. It is not to be demaunded of the teres and lamentacios that they made for ther was none but that he trusted better to dye then to lyue saue Orsan that comforted them & sayd. Lordes take we it in patience for it pleaseth God that it shal be thus. And that in this manere we do our penaunce. But that notwithstanding discofort you not al out but haue trust in god & in our good frendes, that is my brother Ualentyne and the noble Pacolet that can play so wel with his art. Thys spake Orson, but he knew not that the castel was so stronge that it mighte not be taken by enchauntmente. After that Brandiffer had put the lordes in prison, he called his doughter Galazye and sayed vnto her ¶It is true that I wil go into Falezye for to assemble myne hoste And there I ought to fynde the kynge of ynde and Lucar the whyche come wyth me in to Angorye that the Frenchemen holde. Wherefore gouern you wel, and aboue all take kepe vnto the prisoners Father sayd the mayden of me haue no doubt nor of the prisoners, for you shall here but good tydynges. So Brandiffer departed from the stronge castel and went vnto Falezye where as he assembled his hooste. Theder came kynge Lucar with a great puyssaunce but the kynge of ynde sent his men alonely, for his Wife Rozemonde was sycke and dyed wythin nyne dayes after, wherfore the kinge toke suche sorowe that he laye twelue dayes in hys bedde wythout speche whereof kynge Lucar was ryght gladde. ¶Howe Brandyffer after that he had assembled hys hoost mounted on the sea and wente and besyeged the cytie of Angorye. After that Bradiffer and Lucar hadde assebled their hoost at Faleze, without soiournyng they mounted vpon the sea, and had so good wynde that they arryued anone at the porte. And when they were arryued, they that sawe them take lande ranne towarde Angorye and tolde it to Ualentyne that kepte the citye in abydyng the comyng of kyng Pepyn and of the twelue peres of Fraunce. Alas he knewe not howe the game went. When he sawe the tentes and pauylions reysed vp about Angorye, he bewalled kynge Pepyn muche pyteously and called Pacolet saying to hym. Frend to euyll goeth our feate whan I can haue no tydinges of kyng Pepyn. Nowe let me alone sayde Pacolet for we shall haue tydynges anone. Without saying any other thynge vpon the morowe in the mornyng he departed from Angorye and went thorough the hoost of the paynyms tyll that he came vnto the tente of kyng Lucar. And when kyng Lucar sawe hym he demaunded him. Frende where is your maister that serued me other tymes. Ha syr sayd Pacolet he is dead longe a goo, and I am lefte a lone. I would gladly fynde a master. Uarlet sayde kynge Lucar I wyll well retayne you and guerdone you yf you serue me well. yes sayd Pacolet I demaunde none other thyng. Pacolet abode in the seruice of Lucar, but he serued hym euyll, and euyll was he rewarded. Anone after that it was nyghte he made an enchauntement that caused Lucar to sleepe, & mounted hym vpon a horse, and without wakynge led hym into the cytie of Angorye into the palays. Ualentyne was muche ioyous when he sawe Lucar. ¶Now he was brought in to ye palays before a fayre fyre, and at that houre the charme failed. So Lucar dyd awaken al afrayd for to fynd him there, and Pacolet that was euyl aduised put him before him and sayd. Fayr mayster I am your seruaunt pleaseth it you to comaunde me any thinge. Than he knewe that he was betrayed and tooke a pointed knife and smote Pacolet in suche wyse that he fell downe dead. So it nedeth not to aske the great sorow that Ualentyne made than And sayd frende nowe are you fynyshed. I maye well saye that I shal neuer haue such a frende. Now am I at al pointes sorowful and left alone in distresse, ferre from my frendes and nere my enemyes. Alas free kyng Pepyn wherfore come you not your longe abydinge shal bere you great dommage. Ha false Lucar thou hast slayne hym that was my hope by Iesus thou shalte aby dere By mahoune sayd Lucar I care not for no more sythe that I am auenged on him that hath betray me falsly Than Ualentyne wente towarde Pacolet and tooke hys tables that were in his bosome in which was writen al the secretes of his arte. And Pacolet had tolde hym long before that he shoulde take the tables whan that he was dead yf that he lyued after hym and that al his science was written therein that he playd wyth and so did Ualentine, and putte them vp, the whyche dyd him good seruise afterwarde. At that hour wolde Ualentyne that Lucar hadde bene Iudged vnto deth But it was aduised by the lordes that was with him that he should be put in a toure and kepte surely to ye ende that and any noble man of theyr party were take prysoner by the paynyms, that he mighte be yelded agayne for the change of kyng Lucar. Thus counsayle pleased euery body and so it was accorded entyerely. And when Lucar was in pryson Ualentyne made the body of Pacolet to be buried ryght honorably that of lyttel and great was much bewayled. Howe Brandiffer knew that Lucar was in Angory. And sent vnto Ualentyne for to make the appoyntement to by hym agayne. On the morning be tymes there was greate noyse and crye in the hoost of the paymims for the kyng Lucar that they had loste, and aboue al the other. Brandiffer made great sorowe, and euen soo as hee asked for hym there aryued a spye that tolde hym how he was in Angorye and that he had slayne Pacolet, Brandiffer was ioyous for the death of Pacolet, and sorowfull at hys harte for the taking of Lucar. So he called a messenger and badde hym go vnto Ualentyne and aske hym if he woulde geue hym kynge Lucar for kyng Pepyn, or the Emperour of Grece or hys sone Orson, or some of the other twelue peres of Frauce, which he loueth beste. Syr sayde the messenger I shal do your message well. So he went towarde Angorye and entred in saying that he would speake with Ualentine. And he was brought vnto hym anone. when he was before hym he salued hym highly, and after tolde him his message as Brandiffer had bydden hym all a longe. When Ualentyne harde that he was muche a marueyled & sayd vnto the messenger of Brandiffer. ¶God almighty how maye that be that kyng Braudiffer holdeth in pryson so many valyaunt men, and how maye he haue taken them prisoners. How Ualentyne demaunded the kyng of fraunce for chaunge of kinge Lucar by the consent of the Lordes and barons. Syr sayd the messenger yt is true that the kynge Pepyn not longe a go acompanied with ye twelue peres of fraunce, of Orsan and of henry wente vnto Ierusalem, so the tydynges by a traytour came to the kyng Brandiffer, of the which he was muche Ioyous. And he ledde such a puissaunce thether that they were taken wythin Ierusalem, and hathe sente them into the stronge castell that is the strongest place of all the world. Syr geue me an answere shortly if you wyl chauge kyng Lucar for one of your good frendes. Messenger sayd Ualentine you shal haue an answere anon And than he entred in to a halle and assembled all the lordes & sayd vnto them. Frendes it is true that for ye rendring of Lucar I maye delyuer of the prisoners of Brandiffer my father or my brother Orson or my vncle the kyng Pepyn that are my three prinsypall frendes so to counsel me which I ought to demaund. Syr answered the barons, here auayleth nothing the dreamyng, for you knowe that none maye be more beholden than vnto father and mother, and by right reason and natural loue you ought to demaund your father. Lordes sayd Ualentyne you speak wysely, but sauing your reuerences I am delybered for to doe otherwyse For to speke of this thynge Iustlye and after the true equite you know al that my mother Bellissant by my father with great wronge was banysshed shamefully out of his countre. And in such necessyte & perill chylded me in the forest of Orleaunce, and there I shold haue ben deuoured by wylde beastes, if mine vncle kyng Pepyn hadde not bene, by whom I was founden, and haue ben nourished and brought vp without knowinge me in suche maner that he hathe made me knighte, And al the goodes that I haue are comen by hym, nor neuer of my father I had one only comfort nor socour in my tribulation. And therefore I wil that my vncle kyng Pepin be delyuered for the change of kynge Lucar the which hath brought me vp as hys owne childe without any knowledge of any of my frendes, and my father abide there. And right shortli by the grace of almighty God we shall do so muche that my father shall be delyuered and al the other. When the barons heard the wysedom and the greate vnderstandyng of Ualentyne they meruailed muche al of his greate prudence, and sayd with a comon accorde that he had spoken noblye, so they consented to his wyl because that it was reasonable. Than Ualentine sayde to the messenger Frende thou shalte returne toward the kyng Brandiffer thy mayster and tell hym the aunswere that I shall geue the, that is that I shal yelde hym the kyng Lucar vpon suche a condicion that he shall delyuer me kynge Pepyn of Fraunce for I wyll haue none other for the chaunge of king Lucar Than departed the messenger and tolde his aunswere vnto kyng Brandiffer as Ualentyne hadde bydden hym. By mahoune sayde kynge Brandiffer euermore the most puissaunte is the fyrste honoured, but sithe that he demaundeth that same yt same shal he haue. ¶Howe Myllon dangler that was named the kynge of Fraunce for to saue kyng Pepin, was delyuered oute of the pryson of Brandyffer in chaunge of kyng Lucar. Ryght so as the kynge Brandiffer knew that Ualentyne would haue the kyng of frauce for kynge Lucar he sent a messenger anone vnto the stronge castel towarde hys doughter Galazye, byddyng that she shoulde geue them the kynge of Fraunce al alone. The messengers mounted vpon the sea and rowed so muche that within a shorte space they arryued at the strong castel, and recounted vnto the fayre Galazye their message. When the mayden knewe it she was readye anone to fulfyll the wyll of her father. So she called the gayler and sent hym to the pryson to demaunde the kynge of Fraunce. And whan he came to the dore of the pryson he cryed on hye Nowe come hether the kynge of Fraunce for it behoueth me to delyuer hym. And whan the duke Myllon vnderstod the gailer he answered swetely. Alas frende I am here, wherfore cal you me. If I must dye ye fyrste I praye to God that he will haue mercye on me, for I wyl offer my bodye vnto deathe with a good harte for to sustaine the holy faith. Syr said the gayler haue no doubte, for you shal be delyuered in the chaunge of a paynym kynge that they of your lawe holdeth, Whan henry vnderstode those wordes he repented hym that he had gaynsayd the kyng his father and that he made hym not the kyng of Fraunce when he was requyred. But the vntrue chyld that knew the treson thought not that his father should haue escaped, but he knew wel his vnhappye wil when he sawe the duke Myllon delyuered by such meanes, the whiche in weping toke leue of the other barons. Alas said the Emperoure of Greece, salue me aboue al me childe Ualentyne, and me also sayd Orson and recommaunde me vnto him & tell him howe we are heare in myserable dystresse, and in gret pouerty & if by him we haue not succour shortly it behoueth vs to finyshe oure dayes. Lordes sayed Myllon take comfort vnto you, for if yt please Iesus I shal neuer returne in to Fraunce til that you be delyuered. Then he departed from the pryson and al the other abode weping ful tenderly. When he was oute as wyse and wel taught he went toward the fayre Galazy and toke leue of her in much great reuerence, the lady was curteyse and amiable, & recomaunded hym vnto her god mahoun. So departed the duke Myllon and the messengers that were come for him ledde him to the hauen. After they mounted vpon the sea, and in shorte tyme arryued in the hoost of Brandyffer. Than when Brandyffer saw him he said vnto him. Fre kyng wel may you be come you knowe wel ynoughe wherefore I haue sente for you. Go with my men that haue brought you hether in to the citye of Angory and saye vnto Ualentyne that in change of you he giue me Lucar as we haue appoynted. Sir sayd the duke Millon so wil I do and holde you suche loyaltye that & for me he wil not geue you Lucar I shal come and yeelde me vnto you to do withe me as ye did before By mahoune sayd Brandiffer you speake rially, and I demaund no more of you. Nowe go vnto mahowne the whyche conduyt you. Thus departed Myllon dangler & they that ledde him. So they arryued at Angorye & entred in without any refuse and went into the palays wher as they found Ualentyne. Then he and the duke Millon embraced swetely ech other. And the duke Millon toke him a syde and recounted to him howe they were taken within Ierusalem and howe the kynge of Inde had ledde kyng Pepyn away without knowinge hym, and also how he had chaunged his name at the request of kyng Pepin and told him how that the other wer in pryson in the stronge castel. Whan Ualentyne vnderstoode him he sayed sweetely vnto him. Well haue you wroughte for I knowe that you did it for good, & good is happened you, for to daye you are delyuered from your enemyes by the true seruise yt you did vnto king Pepyn. you shewed you a good freende whan you dyd chaunge your name for to saue kyng Pepyn. And also as sone might you haue had dammage as proffyte for of nature the false paynims desired the death of kyng Pepyn, because that he sustaineth the fayth of Ihesu christ againste them, and destroyeth that of mahoune. when Ualentyne had spoken so he made to bring forth the kyng Lucar and sayd to him, Lucar for this tyme you are delyuered but kepe you from me the tyme to come, and thynke vpon my freende Pacolet that you haue slayne. For by God if euer I recounter you in batail or elles where we shall se which of vs twayne shal be the more valiaunter. At these wordes departed the kyng Lucar that was right ioyous for to escape. And whan he was without the gates sarazins came agaist hym with greate puissaunce makynge greate ioye for his delyueraunce. Thus was the kyng Lucar delyuered and the duke Myllon yeelded vnto Ualentyne. Anone as the duke Myllon was within with valentine they made no great soiourning but ordeined theyr batayles and withe fyftye thousande men issued oute in displayinge theyr banners and standardes. And whan Brandiffer vnderstode those tydings he made to blow his trumpets and clarons, and ordeyned his batayles to the number of foure and twentye. And when they were ordeyned he yed forthe accompayned with foure and twenty kynges al holdyng of him, and the christen men aproched nere for to smyte vppon them, but they were so thicke that they might not enter. ¶How valentyne and the duke Myllon yssued oute of Angorye vpon the sarasyns, and howe the sarazyns lost the batayle and were discomfited. Than Ualentyne toke his spere in his hande and cryed highly chrystians take courage, & than began a hard batayle besyde the standarde of Bradiffer that nere him had kyng Lucar puissantlye accopanied. Christians assayled and sarazyns defended them About their stadarde was fyfty thousand men that held before them great targes wherfore the christen men might not greue them. Than an admyral lorde of cassydoyne sawe a frencheman that put diuers paynims vnto deathe, he went thederwarde & with an axe he gaue him suche a stroke that he smote his head in two, but before hys retourne a squyer of Normandy aryued vpon the Amyral & afore Myllon dangler smote him down deade And for that valyauntnes Myllon made hym knyght And sayed now thinke for to do wel, for there shal not be so pore a man if he beare him valiaunt but that he shal be made knight to day. He made so many that dai that euery bodye toke payne to be made one. And in thys maner the batayl indured so longe that the sune began to darken. But for asmuche as the christe men sawe that the paynims wolde withdrawe them. Ualetyne wolde not withdrawe hym. Well wende the sarazyns to haue returned in to theyr pauilyos but ye christen men were before them wherof Brandyffer & kyng Lucar were much a meruailed. Al the night dured the batyl right mortall, there was greate fyres on euerye syde. And the daye was cleare the stoure begane more stronger then before. There was so manye slayne that the blode ran like chanels. It nedith not to demaunde of the prowesse that Ualentyne dyd for in the thickest of the prese he put hym maugre the sarazyns, and the duke Myllon after. ¶Ualentyne on euery side smote down horses and men, so many that there was no paynym that durst abyde bafore hym. And he entred in so fer that he came nere the standarde of Brandiffer, and there he sawe the admyral of ynde the whiche came agaynst him so rudely that he slewe hys horse vnder hi But Ualentyne that was lyght rose vpon his feete anone and toke hys swerd and slewe sarazyns on euery syde in crying hyghly saynt George, and reclaymynge God. But he had neuer escaped if it had not bene the duke Myllon that departed paynyms as the wolffe dothe the shepe and smote al downe that he founde before hym and so succoured hym and gaue hym a horse, Whan Ualentyne was remounted he withdrewe him out of the batayl for to take ayre and drank ones, and after retourned into the stoure more stronger than before. And whan the Marshal of ynde sawe that theye had the worse the most secretly that he might he made his men to withdrawe them into a lytell valeye for to stele awaye the better. Ualentyne sawe it wel and shewed it vnto duke Myllon. That it was appoynted that Ualentyne and his men should go vpon the sayde Marshal withoute makinge anye noyse and so it Was done. Ualentyne and hys men went thederwarde and smote vpon the Indyans in suche maner that at their first entring they broke their batail. Then Ualentine espied the marshal that thoght for to haue saued hym selfe and gaue him so gret a stroke with his spere that he smote both horse and man to the earth and the christen men smote vpon him, but he was soo well armed they slewe him not at the first brunt. And then Ualentyne toke him and gaue him to kepe to foure knights, and the Indyans were dyscomfyted at that houre by Ualentyne. And it was the fyrst batayle that was dyscomfyted that day. There was many ryche prisoners taken the whych Ualetine sent into Angory commauding that they should be wel kept. Now Brandiffer & Lucar knewe that they had the worse. By mahowne said Brandiffer I can not aduise howe we may resyste so I fere me sore that we must al dye here wherefore I am of the opinion that we holde vs content for this time and retourne into our countreis, and we maye retourne an other time with greater strengthe. By mahoune said Lucar you say truthe, for we haue loste already the most part of our men retourne we without abiding any lenger here. For it is beter to fle be times than to abyde to long and dye. Thus was the cousayl taken by them, and made the standarde and the baner to be wounde vp, and sayd vnto their men saue you & you maye. The paynims toke their flighte towarde ye hauen of the sea. And the christen me went after sleing and killing without any remission, for men that are in flyght are halfe discomfited. And there abode so many paynims vpon the fyelde, that there mounted wythe Brandiffer & Lucar but a hondred at their retorninge And after the dyscomfyture of the paynims and sarazyns the christen men entred into their tentes where as they founde great rychesses, and after they wente into Angory for to reste them, for they were werye and trauayled. Upon the morowe they made the dead bodyes to be buryed. Howe kynge Pepyne was delyuered in chaunge of the kynge of yndies Marshall. After that the christen men that had wonne the batayl before Angorye, had buried the dead bodyes. Ualentyne mounted vp in to the palays and commauded that the prisoners should be brought before hym. Than was brought before him the Marshal of the kynge of ynde to whom he demauded if he would beleue in Iesu. By mahowne sayed the Marshal I had leuer dye. Than Myllon dangler demaunded him of what countrey he was. Lordes sayd the paynym I am the marshal to the kynge of ynde that loueth me wel. Whan the duke Myllo vnderstode him he drew the noble valentyne aside & sayd vnto him. Well haue we wrought sythe that we haue taken this paynim, for by hym we may haue the kyng Pepyn that the king of ynde ledde awaye for a dwarfe when we were taken within Ierusalem. Myllon sayd Ualentyne you say trouth. Than he demaunded the paynym if the kynge of ynde helde not in his prisons a chrysten man of lytell stature. By mahowne said the marshall in the pryson of the kynge of ynde is no chrysten man, but in hys courte there is a lytell one that rydeth with him and is not in pryson. And he brought hym from Ierusalem whan the twelue peres was taken. Marshal said Ualentyne it is the same that we demaunde and if you may do so muche that he be brought vnto me you shal be delyuered for him without raunsome, for he is my page, and hath serued me long tyme. Ha sayde the paynim I am agreed, and was right ioyous of those tydynges. So he wrote a letter anone and sente it vnto the kynge of ynde. Whan the kynge of ynde hadde seene the letter he was much ioyous for to yelde kyng Pepin for his marshall For he knewe not what man was kynge Pepyn, he made him be brought before him and sayd vnto hym. Good frende it behoueth you to departe hence for my marshal shal be delyuered for you the whiche I wolde not leue for suche a hundreth as you. Syr saied kynge Pepin of this I am content and if I haue serued you euyl please it you to pardone me. Frende said the king to mahowne I comaunde the. ¶How kyng Pepyn toke hys leue of the fayre Clerymonde, and how he tolde Ualentyne tydynges where she was. Then Pepyn ranne vnto Clerymonde and sayd vnto her. Ladye take comforte vnto you for I am delyuered and I shal shortlye sende you your loue Ualentyne, and I shall neuer cease tyll that you be delyuered. Thanne he departed from the lady that fel in swowne for Ioye. Pepyn wente wyth the messenger & arryued in Angorye within a shorte space. Nowe it is not to be demauded ye great ioye that than was made Frensshemen wente agaynst hym blowyng trompets and clarons and made greate Ioye. Uncle sayd Ualentyne in a good houre was he taken by whome you are delyuered, for aboue all the gooddes of the world I desyred your bodi. Neuewe said Pepi take vnto you ioy for I brynge you tydynges of the thynge in the world that you loue moost that is the fayre lady Clerymond that you haue sought so longe, now I haue found her and she recommaundeth her vnto you. Than he tolde him how she had ben taken, and how she had gouerned her subtylly. And whan valentyne hearde thse tydynges he had so great Ioie that wt paine might he speake Ha ladye sayde valentyne nowe oughte I to loue you wyth al my heart, whan you haue kepte you so wel for my loue soo I promyse god that I shal neuer faile you and I shall lese my lyfe but yf I deliuer you. Than valentine deliuered the marshal of ynde. After he entred into his secret chambre for to proue the tables of Pacolet, and found that all was true. Whan Ualentyne had sene all those thynges he toke paper and ynke and wrote them all in a byll for feare to lese the tables, and sowed in his doblet, so it stode hym in good stede afterwarde for to saue hys lyfe as you shall here. ¶Howe kynge Pepyn departed from Angory and retorned into Fraunce for to socoure his wyfe. Nowe at that same tyme that I tell you kynge Pepyn was in angory for to fyght with the paynims. So there came a message vnto him from his wyfe Berth, the which after his salute said vnto hi. Syr vnderstande the tydynges that I bringe vnto you fro my ryght dere lady Berthe quene of Fraunce. Know that al thei of those quarters beleue stidfastli that you and al the twelue peres be dead, bicause that thei had tidinges that you were taken within ierusalem of the paynims. So it is true that Arthur kynge of Britain trusting in your death and that the tydinges was tru is entred into youre lande wyth a great puissaunce of men of armes, and will be kynge of Fraunce by force, and wedde the quene Berthe agaynst her will. Nowe I am comen hether for to tell you the tydinges, wherfore think vpon this feat for the case toucheth you to muche. And at this houre the war is so great in frauce that Wyllyam Mountgliue hathe made Geryn to to be slayne. And also the kynge of brytayn hath vnder taken to put my lord Charles your sonne to exyle. Sorowful was kyng Pepyn to here suche wordes & made to assemble hys barons for to holde counsell. So they accorded that he should go and defende his propre coutree, the which he dyd and toke hys leue of Ualentyne that said vnto hym Fayre vncle it behoueth me to abide here for to put all my strength to delyuer my father and my brother and the twelue peres of Frauce Ualetyne said kyng Peyyn you speake wisely and if it please God that I haue vyctorye of myne enemyes I shall sende you helpe and socoure against the fals paynims in such wyse that you may delyuer your father lightli The kynge Pepyn mounted vpon the Sea wyth syxe thousande fyghtyng men. Howe Ualentine wente in to ynde the greate and counterfet the phision for to se the fayre Clerymonde and howe he spake with her. Ualentyne that by the kyng Pepyn had herd tydynges of the fayre Clerymonde put her not oute of mynde, but departed from Angorye accompanied onely of a squier, and dyd clothe hem in the habite of a physicion. He mounted vpon the sea with marchautes that wete into ynde. And they rowed so muche taht theye arryued in ynde. But or Ualentyne entred into the citi he made to make a physycyans gowne, and after made a furred hoode and as a gret doctour entred into the citie and lodged hem in a ryche ynne. Also soone as the hooste sawe him he demaunded him of what crafte he was of. Hooste sayd Ualentine I am a medecyn, & can heale all maner of sycknesses. The host beleued him & his squier serued wel as the clerke of a doctour. ¶In this wyse was Ualentyne thre dayes and then he sayd Myne hoost do me a pleasure if it please you, that is yt you fynde me a man to go about the cytye and cry my scyence that and there be any syck men that I vaunte me for to hele theym. For I haue nede to wynne for to paye you the expences that I haue made here in, but not for that & you haue doubte of me I shal gyue you a gage. By mahowne sayd the hoost a gage will I take gladly for it is euyll trustinge in strangers. Than Ualentyne gaue hym a fyne mantel furred and sayede to hym. Holde hoost and of me haue no doubt, and make the varlet come to me that I spake to you for. ¶The hoost brought hym one that had neither shone, gowne nor bonet and was almoost naked. Ualentyne for the loue of God clothed him al newe and sayd to hym. My frende go through the cytye and crye hyghlye, there is come a medecyne that can hele all maladyes, and also they that haue lost theyr wytte be it man or woman I shal make the haue theyr vnderstanding againe. Tha departed ye varlet that was right ioious to be clothed and cryed al the day thorowe the cytie as Ualentyne had bydden him. Now the tidinges came vnto ye kyng of ynde of that mayster. And because that he vauted to hele mad folkes for the loue of Clerymonde ye kyng of ynde sent for hym, not wythstandyng that ther was alredye, crepylles, blynde, lame, and croked before hys lodging but he lefte them all for to goe to the kynge of ynde, for he knewe well the ende where as hys hearte drewe to. He salued the kynge of ynde by the great god Iupiter. And the kynge sayed to him, mayster you be welcome into my courte, you shall dyne & then I shall tell you wherfore I sent for you, The kynge set him at the table and made valentyne to be serued rychly and than after dinner he sayd vnto him. Mayster I haue a ladye in this palays that is garnished wyth beaute aboue al other. So it is tru that whan I had hir first I wolde haue taken her vnto wyfe, but she made me to vnderstand that she had made auowe vnto mahowne that she should take no man to husbande tyl a yere be passed now I haue her the term that she asked but at the ende of the yere there toke her a pyteous maladie, so that no bodi durst finde them before her. She whistleth and cryeth piteouslie, one time she lagheth and on other time she wepeth so that in her dede there is none ordinaunce, for the whyche my heart is sorowfull, for and she were whole I wolde take her vnto wife for my wife Rozemonde is deade. And therfore and you cane helpe her I shal giue you more than you will demaunde. valentyne sayed I shall do it wel, but the maladye is euil for to heale sythe that she hath had it so longe. I muste be in her chamber al night for to se her condycyons. Mayster sayed the kynge one shal bringe you thether but keepe you from her that she byte not. Than one that serued her ledde valentyne to her, and whan he was at the window he sayd vnto him Behold there and playe with your crafte, the deuill shall make you well hele her. Go thy wyy sayde Ualentyne and let me alone. Then the sarazyn wente his waye and Ualentine behelde her piteously. Alas veray God sayd he how you haue bought me dere, ad I you, By god my swete loue I shall neuer retourne into Fraunce tyll I haue you with me, or I shall lese my lyfe. The lady behelde him muche ferefully, and dyd caste at hym all that she founde in the chambre, of the whiche Ualentyne was muche a marueyled. Alas my God sayd he is it fayned or a thing true of the euyl that I se you suffre. Dere loue alas withoute doynge any more be a lytell still and here my speche. ¶I am your loue Ualetine for whom you haue suffred so muche payne. Do you not thynke no more of the head of brasse that gaue you to me, and of my brother Orson that had the stryng cut, and how you were stolen from me by the enchautour Adramin in the cytie of Acquitaine. Whan the lady heard those wordes for pure ioye she swowned. And when she was reuyued she sayd with a feble voyce much pyteously. Alas my loue Ualentyne how you haue suffred for me many dolours and tribulacions, and I for you behold in what pouerte I haue byden without geuing my loue vnto any man. Lady sayde Ualentyne one louethe gladly the thyng that is dere bought. At these wordes valentine vnderstod that the trompettes and clarons blewe for to set the kyng to super. So he said vnto the faire lady Clerymonde, my loue I goo into the palays but after super I shall retourne vnto you agayne, for I haue made the kyng to vnderstande that I am a phisicyan and a good surgian, so the kynge hath sente for me for to come and hele you of your greuous malady The ladye sayd my righte dere loue goe in gods name the which geue you grace to performe your enterpryse. Thus departed Ualentyne and wente into the palays. And also sone as the kynge sawe him he demaunded him, Maister maye you hele the lady, yes said Ualentyne be ioyous for by the will of mahoune you shal here her speak to morowe also wisely as euer she dyd. The kynge was so ioyous that he gaue him a mantel of beten golde set wyth precyous stones, & after made hym to be serued at the table like his person and after souper Ualentyne said vnto the king. Sir it behoueth me to haue a good fyre all the nyght in the chambre of the patient and also defende that none shewe them before her for shee was neuer soo sycke as she shal be too nyght. Mayster sayde the kynge al shal be done do but aske and you shal be serued. Now goethe Ualentyne toward the fayre Clerymode with a great serge in hys hande, and put it in the chamber, and made to make a great fyre in comaundinge euery bodye to auoid saue his squyer. Than Ualentyne shytte the dores and the wyndowes and sayd vnto Clerymonde. My sweete lady now may you embrace me at youre owne pleasure and then Ualentyne espyed the horse of wodde, and asked her if it was Pacolettes horse, and she sayed yes. Then Ualentyne was right ioyous therof. Alas saied she let vs go hence if it may be. By God sayed Ualentyne I had thought it. ¶How Ualentyne ryde away with Clerymonde, and how the kyng af Britayne was yelded vnto kyng Pepyn by treason. Ualentyne opened the dore at midnight and mounted vp into a great wyndowe where as the mone shon. After he mounted vpon the horse and set the lady before hym & hys squier behinde hym, and turned the pynne and the horse wet ouer the sea roches, townes and castelles, tyl that he was before Angory. And there was not one that durst say a worde, and euen there fayled the charme. Ualentyne made the gates to be opened, for it was day. Great ioye was made through Angory for the commige of Clerimonde. Ualentyne made her to be richly clothed and on the morowe wedded her wt great solempnyte. whan the kyng of ynde knewe that he had lost the ladye he despited his goddes sayinge. Ha false enchauntour thou hast well deceued me, but I shal make the be hanged by ye necke He made valentyne to be pursued ynough, but none could tel him tydynges. So I wyl tel you of kyng Pepyn that returned into Fraunce for to socoure his wife and his land agaynst the kynge of Brytaine. Foor bycause that the kynge of Brytayne herde saye that the kynge Pepyn and the twelue Peres had bene taken in Iherusalem, he thoughte verayly that they hadde bene all dead and sayde that he wolde be kyng of Fraunce and wedde Berthe So he made alyaunce with the erle of Mountfort wt the duke of Bery wyth the duke of Denemours, and wyth the erle of Armingnac. So he made to cry throughe al Brytain that al that might bere weapon shuld goo with hym into Fraunce. Whan the quene Berth knew of that tydynges she was muche sorowfull, but she might not remedy it soo she tooke her sonne Charles and fled vnto Lyon. In that same tyme there was an Erle of Aniou true and of good fayth that for to socoure the quene Berthe made his citie and his casteles to be well garnisshed wythe men and vyttaylles agaynst the Brytons. Whan the quene knewe his good wyll she sent hym foure thousand horsemen to kepe ye passage. The kyng of Brytayn bad the erle gyue hym passage into Fraunce and he answered that he wolde not. So it was not long that seuen Erles and thre dukes came before the cite Angyers and asseiged it. And the Erle yssued not oute but kepte the citie mightely Nowe the kyng Pepyn made so much dylygence that duringe that siege he aryued at Parys, and was receiued worshipfully of all ye burgeyses and for hys commynge made righte greate ioye. All the reliques were borne thorough the citie in procession when the quene knewe that he was at Parys she went vnto hym and sayde to hym al weping. My dere lorde I beseche you to auenge me on the kyng of Brytayne Lady said the kyng take you no thought for by the pleasure of God you shalbe auenged. Than he made to assemble hys men and hys host in great haste, and sente for Pyckardes, henies, brabansons, and normans. Greate was ye assemble of kyng Pepyn agaynst ye kynge of Britaine Now had the enemies tydynges of his coming where of they were muche abashed, and dowted hym muche and not without a cause. So all the alyes of kyng Arthur toke a counsel together that they shuld take the forsayd Arthure and delyuer hym vnto kynge Pepyn for to make theyr peace the better, and couer their defautes, and so they dyd. For vpon a nyghte they tooke him in his hooste in bed and ledde him vnto kynge Pepyn the whiche made his head to be smytten of within Chatelet of Parys. Wel thought the alies yt the warre had bene ceased, but king Pepyn toke from the lands and possessions as it apeareth more plainly in the cronycles vpon those thinges composed. ¶How Ualentyne toke the strong castell, and delyuered his father the Emperoure of grece, and all the prisoners that were with hym. Muche was Ualentyne in greate thought nyghte and day how he might deliuer hys father. ¶For he knew wel that the castell might not be taken by force of armes, nor by enchauntment, but it might wel be taken by treson. So he aduysed a thing that was much subtylly composed. He put in twelue ships two thousande men armed, and laded theim with al ryche marchaundyse as perles, precyous stones and sylkes, and mounted vpon the sea and as marchantes ariued before the stronge castell and toke lande. Ualentyne clothed him in marchaunts wede and set a ryche crowne vpon hys head, and sayed vnto hys men arme you all and take your glaues and hyde you pryuely within ye shyppes so that you be not sene, and if sarazyns come towarde you put them all vnto death, and let none escape. Whan he had sayde this he put him on hys waye and went to the gate of the castell ye crowne vpon hys head. when the porter sawe hym he sayde to him, who bryngeth you hether. Frende sayde valentyne I am a marchaut that goeth in to spaine, so I haue diuers riche marchaundyses in my shyppe, and I haue hearde saye that no marchaunt maye passe here by without paying tribute vpon paine of theyr liues, so I wil not pas without paying it. Syr sayd the porter abyde me. I go vnto my lady for to gyue you aunswere. Soo he went towarde Galazye and tolde it vnto her. ¶How the Seneshall went vnto valentyne shyppes & how he was put to death wt all his men. Whan she vnderstode that there was so manye Iewels, she called the Seneshall and sayd vnto him, Go toward the porte and receiue the trybute of the marchautes yt passe & lede with you so many of my men so that they may take nothinge fro you. ¶The Seneshal thoughte wel to haue wonne & led them towarde the porte vnto theyr euil aduenture for anon as they sawe the riches that was within the shippes they were ardaunt to beholde them and Ualentyne sayd. Lordes enter in and take of the Iewels vnto the nombre of the trybute. The paynyms entred in that wend to haue bene riche, and the christen men that were hid yssued out and slewe them al anone. Now vp saide Ualentyne it behoueth vs to do more for to haue ye castel Than he made his men to put on fyftye gownes of ye sarazyns vpon theyr harneys, and laded the wyth stones and riche sylkes, so they wente towarde the castell And the porter yt wend that they had bene his felows, bound vp the lyons and auayled the bridge, and thinkynge for to haue had some riche Iewel yssued out of the barres and Ualentyne tooke hym and led him towardes the shippes. Than he shewed him the dead me and sayd to hym, fayre sir you shal be such as these be but if you swere by your god to make me enter thys day into the stronge castel & kepe my bodye. Sir sayde the porter I shal do youre wyll and here I swere vnto you by the great god that I shal delyuer vnto you the castel at your owne pleasure. Porter sayd Ualentyne I shal rewarde the wel but kepe the that thou betray me not. No said the porter come with me & make your men that ar in habyte of sarazyns enter in one after another for the daunger of the brydge for the resemble them to the castel. So it was done, & the fyftye crysten men entred in and Ualentyne. And when they were in the porter shewed them a fals posterne. Ualentine made it to be opened anone & then he blew his horne. So they that were in the shippes came thether quicly and Ualentyne wente into Galazyes chamber the whych of his cominge was sore abashed. Ladye sayed Ualentine of me haue no doubt for I haue passed the see for your gentyl body. Than the Lady behelde hys countenauce & of him was touched at the hart, and made hi great chere, Now are the cristen men within the castel the which made great noyse and crye so that the ladye went vnto the windowes and sawe well that she was betrayed. And returned her toward Ualentine & sayd vnto him al wepynge. Free curteise knight saue me my maydenhede, for I se wel that I am betrayed. Lady said Ualentyne haue no fere, for by me nor bi other you shal haue no villany, but as for the surples of the castel it shal be mine, Al the paynims were put vnto deathe. Then Ualentyne went towarde the prisoners and brake the preson dore sayinge on hye. you that are wythin speke and you be a lyue Orson vnderstode wel his brother Ualentine and cried vnto hi. My brother wel be you comen what dryueth you hether into thys place. Lordes said Ualentyne make good chere and be Ioyouse and glad, for at thys presente tyme I shall delyuer you oute of the prisons of Brandiffer. Whan the Emperour of Grece his father hard that for pure Ioye he swoned, and Orson toke him vp bytwene bothe his armes. Thane came al oute of the prison the whyche were porely arayed & ryghte euelly coloured. So it is not to be demaunded the ioy that they made They passed the nyght and dronk good wyne that recomforted them much. The chrysten men were seuen dayes within the strong castel leading a good lyfe, and at that same time Orson acquainted him with ye fayr Galazye, for he knewe not whether Fezon was dead or not, not withstanding it happened that he wedded her after the deathe of Fezonne, and had a Sonne of her that was called Orsayre that helde the Empyre of Constantynoble. ¶How the Emperour Orson and the grene knyghte abode in garnison in the stronge castell. And how Haufray and Henry made their father to dye. After that the strong castell was take and that the prysoners were a lytle refresshed they toke counsayl together that it shuld be good to leue some to kepe the castel for that place might greue the paymims. So there was some that sayd vnder coloure that it shuld be good that Haufray and Henry abode in that place Lordes sayd Haufray speake no more for we are delyuered for to retorne into Fraunce to serue our father by my faith said Orso we ought not to wepe for your departing, for you were neuer yet good, who yt leeseth euil company he ought to thanke god, and I know by experiece that you are me that by nature demaudeth not but treason. Haufray & Henry had gret dispite of those wordes but force constrayned them to haue pacience, for they were not men to saye the contrary. It was appointed at the last that ye Emperour that was already auncient and had nede of rest with his son Orson and the grene knight should abyde in garnyson in the strong castel, & Ualentine with al the other should retourne into Angorye. ¶Here wil I tel you of the two traitours Haufray and Henry that returned ito Fraunce, the which haue conspired the death of theyr father with that of lytle Charles and the quene Berthes. Now they haue ryden so much that they are aryryued at Parys, & mounted vp into the palays where as they saluted the king & al ye baros. The king made them chere and after demaunded them tidynges of ye Emperoure of Grece, of Ualentyne and of Orson and of the twelue peres and the other lordes. Syr sayde the traytours pray for them for they haue bene slayne in a great batayl before Angory. Whan the kyng vnderstode these tidynges he wept tenderly in bewailing the lordes that he wende had bene dead. But the traytours dyd it for to angre the kynge the which purchased his death at the last and that of the quene Berths first of all And because that they mighte not wel poyson her they acquainted the with a damosel that was night and day with the quene, and they gaue her such a gyfte that the false woman consented to the deth of the quene that had don her so much good so that wyth in fyftene dayes she died, wherof the kyng Pepyn was so sorowfull that he abode in his bedde. And the traytoures dyd soo muche by poysons that he dyed for the whiche both lytle and great wepte, and not withoute a cause. The traytours shewed semblaunte to be sorowful, but they were right ioyous and sayed. Nowe maye we will do our pleasure with Fraunce for there is neyther dukes erles nor barons that maye resiste agaynst vs. ¶How after the death of kyng Pepyn the duke Millon Dangler woulde haue made the lytell Charles to be crowned kyng of Fraunce. After the death of the good kyng Pepin the duke Myllon dangler that was valyaunte and wyse assembled the counsayl and wold haue made younge Charles to be crowned kynge. But Haufray and Henry by gyftes and promises corrumpted the lordes and it was sayd that Charles was to young. And because that ye duke Myllon sustained the cotrary. Haufray & Henry made him to be taken & put in prison in chatelet in Parys & sythe helde Charles as a boy of ye kechin. It happened one day that Haufray comauded him to turne a spyt but Charles being dysplesaunte lyfte vp the spit and felled him to the earth. Henry stepte forthe for to haue smitten Charles but Charles that espied him gaue hi on the eare that the bloud yssued out wherefore Haufray bad his men take him. Than came a knight named Dauyd of Elloys and toke Charles by the hande for other tymes he had endoctrined him, so he set hym on a horse and led him oute of Parys. Whan the traytours knew that Charles went his waye theye made hym to be pursued, but they that folowed wolde not fynd hym and so retourned Than Myllon dagler sent the truth of it to his wife Charles syster when she had sene the letter she wept for the loue of Charles, so she swore Ihesus that they should abye it dear. Than she made a letter to be made and sent it vnto Ualentyne and to the twelue peres of Fraunce, that were in Angorye. When Ualentene had red it he began for to wepe and the lordes demaunded him wherfore he dyd wepe Alas my frendes there is good cause whye, for kyng Pepyn is dead and the good quene Berth also. So Haufray and Henrye haue chased the lytle Charles out of the contry and put the duke Myllon in pryson because that he susteined him. So the lady sendith vs worde that we succour her, and I wot neuer how for you know well that we abyde from day to day our mortal enemy Brandiffer. By our faithes, sayde the barons we must fynde some maner for to socour hym well sayd the noble Ualentyne or to morowe at night I shall yeld you the duke Myllon. ¶Of these wordes they began for to laughe, & Ualentyne departed wyth out makynge any more delaye, & wyth hys hors played so well that he was at Parys before mydnight, and was in Chatelet, and by subtyl arte opened the gates And gaue leue to all the prysoners, after he demauded them where the duke Myllon was, & they shewed him the chambre the whych was opened anone. The good duke that slepte wakened and sayd what are you that entre so rudely. Nowe vp sayd Ualentyne and thynke for to take your clothes for I am Ualentyne that am comen from Angory for to delyuer you. The good duke was muche Ioyous and made him redy anone. So valentyne made hym mounte vpon the hors with him and sayd to hym, kepe you frome spekynge for we shal flee in the ayre. Sith that we shal go so fast I pray you passe by the castell of Angler, and there we shall se and comforte my wyfe a lyttell, that for me and for her brother Charles is muche sorowfull. They knocked at ye gates and the watche answered that knewe theyr lord and tolde it vnto the ladye that ranne vnto ye gate in a syngle gowne and kyssed and colled hym, after she demaunded hym tydinges. Ladye saye he you knowe all but know that I go into Angorye where as we abyde the batayll of the false paynyms, and at my retorne I shall brynge with me the twelue peres of Fraunce wt a great puissaunce for to confounde Haufray and Hery and socoure Charles. Whan the lady vnderstode yt they wold make no lenger soiourninge, she made meat to be brought & there they toke theyr repaste, for they had greate luste to eate & drynke. After they toke leue of the lady and were in Angory vpon the morowe before all the barons, wherof the lordes were much abashed, and praied Ualentine much to learne them that arte, but he refused them. Nowe it happened in those dayes that Brandiffer that was vpon the see ariued a myle fro Angory. And ther he made his syege to be set accompanyed wythe fyftene kynges al his subiectes Theye of the citie herde the tydynges wente & shytte the gates and drew vp the brydges, and after mouted vpon the walles for to behold the paynyms that dressed vp great nomber of tentes and pauilyons. The sarazyns were in theyr siege the space of a moneth wyth out giuyng assaute, and without that any cristen me yssued out on them. ¶How the Emperour of grece, Orson and the grene knyght departed from the strong castell for to goe succoure Ualentyne in Angory. The Emperoure of Greece that was in the strong castel herd say that Brandiffer wyth a great puyssaunce had besyeged Angory, so he was moued in deuocion for to go help ye chryste men. They toke counsel togyther and accorded that a valiaunt knyght should kepe the stronge castell with two men. After theye departed for to go into Angory. The Emperour of Grece Orson, & the grene knight accompanyed wyth a thousand fightynge men entred into the sea, & pulled vp the saylles, but they had not gone but a lytle way whan they saw a greate flote of shyppes cominge towarde theym. It was an Admyral paynym that went for to socour the kyng Brandiffer wyth ten thousand men. Well knew the chrysten men that they were of theyr enemies, soo they put them in armes and reged them in bataile on theyre shippes syde. The sarazyns sawe well that they were christen men wherefore they aproched and smote vpon them fyersly. And the christen me that reclaimen god & oure ladye defended them valiauntlye Thanne was there a cruel batayl the Emperour of grece Orson & the Grene knyghte shewed theyr prowesses, and cryed hyghlye. Ihesus socoure vs. At these wordes the cristen men tooke suche courages that the lest at that houre had the strengthe of ten and for the loue of Ihesu christ were content for to suffer death. And the sarazins that were ten agaynst one enclosed the cristen me So it nedeth not to demaunde the prowesse of Orson & of the Grene knight for they dyd suche deedes of armes that there was no paynym that abode onlyue before them whan the Admirall paynym saw theyre prowesses he approched nere them and smote a valiaunt knyght into the sea beside Orsan of the whiche he was muche angrye for he loued him, soo he toke an axe and gaue the Admyral suche a strooke that he ouerthrewe hym dead in his shyppe. And whan the paynyms sawe that they were al discomforted and lost theyr strength and withdrew them in fleynge all that nighte. ¶But they lost fyftene of theyr shippes and foure thousande of theyr men that was slain. And after the Emperour of Grece spake vnto his men and sayd. Lordes I counsail that we take the armes of these cursed sarazins & armed vs with & araye vs lyke sarazyns for I doubte me soore that we shal be mette on the sea by the Paynyms. The counsail pleased euery body because that they shuld not be knowen of the sarazins. The Gownes, the armes, and the harneys of the dead folke they toke and cast the bodyes into the sea. In an euil houre dyd the Emperoure of grece aduyse hym therof for by the armes that he beareth he shalbe put vnto death bi his sonne Ualetine as you shal here afterwarde. Now the christen men are vpo the se that rowled vp al their baners, and set forth in the wynde the of the sarazyns and rowed so wel that they ariued within a litle while at the hauen of Angorye. ¶Howe the christen men yssued out of the citie of Angorye, and of the ordenaunce and of theyr marueilous batailes. The kynge Brandiffer and the kynge Lucar a moneth after had assyeged the citie of Angory wyth al theyre puissaunce. Ualentyne and the other barons had taken counsel for to yssue out vpon theyr enemies, so they sente the defyaunce vnto Bradiffer agaynst the morning and Brandiffer that was fierse accorded it. Than the Christen men that were wythin the citie of Angory ordeyned theyr batayles in ten parties wherof the duke Myllon had the firste. The seconde Sampson of Orleaunce. The thyrd had his sune Geruays erle of Uandosme. The fourth the erle of champaine. The .v. quitin of Normady. The .vi. the duke of Burgoyne. The vii. the erle of Dampmartin. The eyght the erle of Asserue. The .ix. the Marshal of Constantinoble. And valentyne the tenthe, that gaue al the other oftentymes courage to do well. Than the christen men yssued out of Angorye for to assayle Brandiffer that had made fiftene strong batayles, and there was in the leest aking. Nowe it is not too be demaunded the great rychesses that shyned on the fyelde as well on one syde as other. One myght haue heard than trumpettes and clarons and the great batayle beginne. About the standard of the paynyms was Brandiffer, kyng Lucar, the kynge of ynde the kynge of salure, the admyrall of cordes, the admyrall of Orbye, the kyng Damene, the kynge Dubias, Iosue of Palerne, the earle Draymant, the duke Corchyllant, and Croste of Ortanye. Whan it came to the apprachynge of the bataylles, a paynym of Surie that had neuer bene in warre, the whiche for to assaye his body passeth forth & came toward the christen men with his spere couched muche fyersly. Ualentyne sawe him wel the whiche smote his horse with the spores ad ranne against the paynim, and with one stroke smote him downe dead. At that same houre the batayle bega muche fyersly. But the valyauntnes of the paynyms is not to be compared to that of the christen men, & specially of Ualentyne, of the duke Myllon, and of the .xii peres. The kyng of ynde entred in to the batayl, & greued the christen men sore. Whan Ualentyne sawe that he rode towarde him & gaue him so great a stroke that he smote them downe. Than the christe men made the sarazyns to recule a backe a great waye, for they were dyscomfyte. But a sarazyn capitayne of the reregard, came and succoured them with thyrty thousande paynyms. And there began the batayl more stronger than before. The kyng Lucar found the kynge of ynde that fought muche strongly & gaue hym succour. The christen men were so muche charged with the paynyms at that houre yt it was force to the to withedrawe theim towarde a ponde that was nere a fielde, and they shold haue had to muche to do if it had not be two valiaut knyghtes that arriued that day in Angorye accompanied with seuen hundred men of armes. The. ii. knyghtes that I tell you of, came from the holy sepulcre the whiche had suffred great aduersyties, as well in pryson as otherwise for to do ther vyage. The one of the brought into Fraunce the doughter of a ryche admyrall named Claradine, and mayd her to be baptyzed. The least of the tow knyghtes was Reynarde of Prouaunce and the other Myllon of Dyion, and they were fayre and hardy knyghtes So they hadde tydynges of the batayll that was there be syde, and made ther men to be armed, and gaue them synes and standardes for to make the paynyms the more a ferde. And so they came out of the cytie for to succoure the christen men ad smot in to the bataill muche fyersli. At the approching the paynis was muche a bashed of thys newe coming and not with out a cause, for Myllon of Dyion at his entere smote downe dead the king Lucar, and the king Rubres, wher of Brandiffer was muche a bassed. And after entred Reynarde that slewe diuers of the moost valyauntest, valentyne was much a marueyled wha he sawe those towe knyghts do suche dedes of armes so he rod towarde them and sayde to them. Lordes wel be you come, tel me if it please youe what you are and what dryueth you hether. Frende sayde Reynarde we are Lordes of Frauce that come from the holi sepulcre so we haue heard speke of this enterprise, and in the honoure of Ihesus we are come thys waye for too helpe you to defend the holy fayth as we are bounde to doo and it please you to knowe oure names wyte that I am called Reynarde lorde of Prouaunce, & my felowe is called Myllon of Dyion, a valiaunt & a hardy lorde. Lordes sayde Ualentyne you are wel com, for Myllon Dangler is here and the other peres of Fraunce. Than thei entred in to the batayl that was harde and mortel Nowe the kynge of ynde recorded hym of Ualentyne that had smyten hym doowne, so he ranne a gainst him with thre kinges and in suche wise presed him that thei smote him and his horse to the earth. But ye valiaunt knyght rose vp a none and toke his sworde and defendded him al so well as he might, but he had to muche to do. Than the duke Myllon, Sampson, and Geruays, came and gaue him succoure in suche maner that thei conquerd him a horse. After they ran toward the kyng of ynde and smote him downe, and toke his shelde fro hym & gaue it to Ualentyne, for he had lost hys. Now vpon that feate happened tydyns, wher of porceded pyteous thynges for a messenger came and sayd vnto Ualentyne. Syr I dyd go euen nowe toward the hauen, wher as I haue sene great nombre of sarazyns yt cometh hetherwarde. Lodres sayd the god knyght valentyne we muste go for to kep the passage. So there dyd assemble valentyne and the Duke Myllon of Dyion for to go toward the hauen. Alas it was hys father the Emperour of grece and his armie that cam to succoure them, in an euill hour toke they the armes of the paynymes, that it behoueth that valentyne must put hys father pyteously to deth. ¶Howe Ualentyne slewe his father pyteously in the batayle without knowyng hym. Also sone as the Emperoure of grece ad his men were descended on lande. Ualentine aryued there wyth all the course of his horse his spere couched. The Emperoup of grece that had a hardey courage toke a spere and came against his sonne that bare a shelde of a sarazyn, so they recoutred the one the other by suche force that Ualentyne perced his father throughout & smote him downe dead to the earth without spekyng any worde. After he cryed montioye viue grece, ad Orson that vnderstode him knewe that it was his brother that hade slayne his father, so he threw downe his shelde and hys spere, and lyfte vp hys helme. After he cryed in weping brother Ualentyne euill prowesse haue you doone, for to daye you haue slayne the father that engendred you and whan Ualentyne vnderstode hym, he let hym selfe fall downe of the hors to the earth. And Orson lyght downe and ranne and colled hys brother, makyng soo great sorowe that non cant recount it. So there came toward them Reynarde of Prouaunce, and Myllon of Dyion for to comforte them, and toke vp valentyne & sayd vnto hym. Knyght haue pacience for you can not bye your father agayne wyth wepynge, euen soo as it hath pleased god the thyng is happened. Alas sayd Ualentyne what is be fallen me. I am a boue all the other ye moost cursed, vnhappy, ad euil fortuned. Alas death where arte thou that thou comest not and take me for I am not worthy that the earthe susteyne me, nor that none of the elementes lende me nourisshinge wha that I haue comytted suche a dede before god detestable, & to the men abhomynable. Alas vnhappy Ualentine in what an hour was thou borne for to comete so vyllaynous a cause, and so vnnaturall murdre I haue suffred all my lyfe paine, tormente and muche great thought, but aboue all thinges I suffred now ye greatest dolour False kyng of ynde cursed be thy shelde and hym that coposed it for by it I haue ben vnknowen of my father Alas fayre brother Orson syth that I haue put our father vnto death take my swerde and cut of mi hede nor it is not reason that I liue ani more vpon the earth, nor that I be put in the nombre of knightes. Brother said Orson take comfort vnto you and kepe you from dyspayre, be thynke you well swete brother yt god is puyssaunte ynought for to pardon a more greater thynge, retorne you towarde him & aske him pardon for youre synne and promise to do penaunce, for certes who yt is dead, ther is neuer no remedye, so it is better to praye for him than to wipe hys death so much. Thus Orson comforted him that had hys hert right sorowfull, and he dyd so muche with ye helpe of the other barons that Ualentyne mounted on hys hors, & as a man that careth not to lyfe or dye, he entered in to ye battayle with the other in smitinge so greate strokes that all that he found be fore him were they neuer so valiaunt they escapen not. At that houre the king Christofer retorned which smote vpon the cristen men. And valentyne gaue hym suche a stroke that he perced hys bodi throughoute. At that fierse batail was the Duke Millo of Dyion, and Reynard of Prouauce that by theyr valyautnes put him selfe so ferre in the prece that thei were taken of the paynyms. & witholden with out any socur Than they bounde their eien and made them to be led in to theyr shyppes pyteously beting theym. But god that forgetteth not his good frendes at nede shall deliuer them and put them out, and thei shall make Charles kyng of Fraunce with honour and Ioy, to the dystruccyon of the two false traitours Haufrai and Henry. This batayl dured muche longe for they defended them valyauntly on one syde and other valentyne loken not for to saue hys life, but studyed how he myght slee paynyms and Sarazyns. So he came toward brandiffer, & they gaue eche other so great strokes that they fell both to the earth. But Ualentyne that was hardi smot vpon hym so rudely that with one stroke he cloue hys heade in two and soo he dyed. whan the kynge Bruant sawe that his brother Brandiffer was dead he departed from the bataill with the admyrall of cordes, and the kyng Iosue that made the retrette too be sowned, and fledde towarde their shyppes for too saue them. But the christe men pursued them asprely in to claymige saynt George, and saynt Iames the whiche to sayntes dyd myracle that same daye for the christen men agaynst the paynyms, as dyuers good knyghtes haue wytnessed syth. Nowe the paynims was so sore oppressed that dyuers of them lepte in to the sea and drowned them selfe. And thus on euerye syde the paynyms were dyscomfyted. The nyght was come, and the chrysten men withdrewe them into Angorye. After they yssued vpon the morowe for to burie the dead bodyes, there was dyuerse knyghtes that was bewayled ynough but aboue al the other was bytterly wepte ye Emperoure of Grece. Ualentyne and Orson made so great sorowe that none myght appease them, and the duke Myllon said vnto them. Chyldren wepe no more but praye God for his soule, for he shall neuer bee the soner on lyue for your teares. Than they made the body of the Emperoure to be borne into ye cytie as it apperteined, and made many masses to be songe, & great almesse gyuen for hys soule. But who soeuer mad piteous syghes Ualentyne wepte euer for any comfort that myght be geuen hym. ¶Howe Myllon dangler retourned in to Fraunce. And howe Ualentyne and Orson retourned into Grece. The duke Myllon dangler after that the paynims had ben discomfited the seconde time be fore angorye, toke leue of ye noble Ualentine for to retorne into fraunce saying frend Ualentyne I will nowe retourne. I woulde wel that I might retourne al so sone as I came hether Frend sayd valentyne all weping, neuer please it God that I plaie more with suche arte, for it is dampnable. And he that tought it me dyed vnhappely at the laste, and I beleue that for this sinne I haue slain my father Then the duke Myllon toke his leue, and put hym on the way with all the barons of fraunce. And valentyne & Orson helde counsayll for to retourne in to Costantinoble, but fyrste or they departed, thei made the grene knyght to be crowned kyng of Angory. & made the barons and the knyghtes of the countrey doo hym homage and promyse hym feaute. After they toke leue of hym and mounted vp on the sea. And when it came to the departyng, Orson called the fayre Galasye and sayd to her, My loue I know that of my dede you are great with chyld but weyte that I maie not take you vnto wyfe, for I haue another wedded, wher fore if it please you I shal make rentes to be assigned vnto you so yt you may lyue honestlye theron with out daunger of any body. Syr sayd Galazye I wyl passe ye sea wyth you and after I shall put me in to som religion for to serue God for you and me, Lady sayd Orson I accorde therto, Then he put her on the sea and rowed so much that they sawe the towres of Constantinoble. So thei sent worde vnto ye Empresse their mother of ye death of ye Emperoure, but thei tolde here not that Ualentine had slayne hym. Sorowful was the ladye for the deth of the Emperoure, and one the other syde Ioious of the comynge of her two chyldren. Euerybody made Ioye throughe the cytie for the commyng of Ualentyne and Orson. Chanons, priestes clerkes, and burgeyses yssued out of the cytie in processions, and made all the belles to be ronge in receyuing them notably. And after they mounted vp in to the palays where as the dynere was ready ad set them downe at the table accompanied of great chiualrye. The Empresse began for to speke and sayd. Ualentyne my chylde now it behoueth for to wyt whiche of you twayne shal gouerne the Empyre of Grece, for I can not tel whiche is the eldest of you bothe so I truste me that you wyll worke wytely. Mother sayde valentyne I wyll that my brother be it this first yere. ¶By my fayth sade Orson it appertaieth not vnto me for to go before you. Brother I ame beholde vnto you, & you not vnto me, wherfore as for mi parte I will that you be Emperoure. Thei argued ynough vpon thys thynge, but at the laste it was appoynted that they should gouerne the Empire bothe. But the good Ualetine abode not long in that highe estate for vpon a mornynge he called Clerymonde and saide vnto her vnderstande my reason. you know that before Angorye I haue slane my father pyteously, of the which I haue made yet no confession, and I am delybered for to go vnto ye Pope and confesse my synnes and receyue penaunce. Salut from me my mother & my brother Orson the whiche you shall see at the ende of fyftene dais and no soner, and geue this letter vnto hym, and shewe it vnto none other persone. The lady wepte so muche that her face was all wette. ¶Howe valentyne toke leue of the fayre Clerymonde for to go vnto Rome to be shryuen of his synne. me,  & gyue me the rynge that I wedded you with. The ladye gaue it hym anone, of the whyche he made two peces, and kepte the one & gaue the other to the ladi saying. My loue kepe this halfe, & for any thing that you heare saye or reporte of me beleue them not but if you se this other halfe yt I bere wt me. Gouerne you wysely and euer serue God, ad kepe you from false wordes, for the world is at this day so false and deceyuynge. At these wordes he embraced ye lady and in wepinge pyteously toke leue the one of the other. Thus departed Ualentyne accompaned of one squyer aloneli. He dyd so muche that he aryued at Rome and toke hys lodgyng, and vpon the morowe he yede in to ye great churche where as ye pope sange masse, valentyne herde it wt a good heart, & after ye masse he kneled downe before ye pope in demaundynge confessyon. Than the pope that thought wel that he was of a noble house made hym sygne that he wolde here him after ye pope entred in to hys chambre, and made Ualentine come to hym yt wepte ful sore Fayre sonne said the pope what wylte thou haue that wepest so muche Alas sayd valentyne of all the senners I am the worst Than he began his confessyon, & amonge ye other fautes in casting out great teares he confessed that he had slayne hys father, and asked penaunce. And whan the pope vnderstode the case of valentyne, he behelde hys great repetaunce, & had pyte on hym saynge. My childe discomforte you not, for god is puyssaunt ynoughe for to pardon a more greter thynge, Go vnto your lodgynge and to morowe in the morninge come to me agayne, and I shall giue you penaunce to the saluacion of your soule. valentyne returned in to his ynne without tellynge any body of his dede. The night he wepte and sobbed, and whan the morning was com he came in to the churche & founde ther the pope that made a masse to be songe before hym. After the masse ye pope called him and sayde to him. My childe vnderstonde what thou must doo for to haue pardon of thy synne fyrst thou shalt chaunge thyne habyt, and go poorely clothed, and this seuen yere thou shalt li vnder the staires of thy palays with out speche if god giue the life so longe, and thou shalt neyther eate nor drinke but of ye relefe of the table, and yf thou do this penauce thy sinnes are pardoned the, and not eles. Syr sayde Ualentyne all thys shall I do wyth good heart. Then ye pope gaue hym absolucyon, and made hym dyne wyth him. After diner he departed out of ye cite with out speking vnto his seruaunte. ¶How valentyne in great dolor of his body perfourmed his penaunce for the sleing of his father. Ualentine entred in to a wode after yt he hade shorne his hear, and was there eatinge rotes so longe that none coude knowe him, after he wente towarde constantynoble, where as was made much sorowe for hym, for whan Orson had red the lettre that valentine gaue Clerimonde he wepte bitterli Brother sayd Clerimond wher fore wepe you so much Alas syster sayd Orson it is not with out a great cause for my brother Ualentyne gothe his way, & by his letters dothe me to wyte that he wyll neuer retorne, but wyll a byde in exyle for to wepe his sinnes. wha the lady vnderstode that her husbande went hys a way, she fel in a swone. And when she was reuyued she cryed on hye. Alas my loue wher fore are you departed thus wytth out lettyng me wite it. I am euyl fortuned wha you go without euer to retorn. Great sorow made the lady, and mor greater Orson. The tydynges was anone throughe the cyti that Ualentine was gone in hope neuer to retorne. Clerymonde wepte, Bellyssant complayned, and Orson syghed. That sorowe dured long throughe the cyte. And it happened as the story telleth that the same dai it was tolde vnto Fezonne that Orson had another ladi in loue yt he had gotten with child where at she toke suche angre in her hart, that she was sycke in her bedde and with in a lytle whyle dyed. Orson mayd greate sorowe, but or the yere was complysshed he wedded Galazye of whome I haue made mencyon be fore ¶Now I shal tell you of valentyne that arryued in constantyoble in so poore araye that he myght not be knowen of nobody. He wente throughe the stretes & in the houses of the burgeys sekynge almes for to here tidinges, and aftere he went into the palais at the hour that his brother Orson should soupe. Thei that kepte the table bette hym and wolde haue chased him out but he made no semblaunt. Felowes said Orson that be helde hys countenance strongely, leue that poore man ther in and bete him no more, for bicause of my brother Ualentyne I wyl that all poore men be receyued, to the ende that God sende me some tydynges, Than they left Ualentine by ye comaundement of Orson, and brought him good wyne and mete ynoughe, but he behelde a basket that the almesse was in for ye poore people & eat of it, wherof they were muche a basshed. whan the nyght was comen the porters went toward Orson and sayd to him. Syr wyll you that thys knaue yt counterfeteth the foole abyde herein. yes said Orson I wyll that you suffre and endure of hym, and that you let hym do his wyll herein, for parauenture it it is a vowe or promes yt he hath made to God, for wha he speketh not none can not tell what he is. Thus abode Ualentyne vnder the stayres and made his bedde of strawe. Upon ye morow Orson passed before him that had gret pyte on hym and gaue hym his almesse. After passed by hym to go to the chyrche his mother, and hys wyfe Clerimonde that behelde him muche & gaue him almesse. Alas poore man sayd Clerymonde how maye you endure her all nyght wythout any couerynge if it please god you shal haue to nyght. And al so soone as thei were passed he gaue it vnto two poore me the whiche mocked hym & sayd, this knaue is a foole that hath nothinge gyueth his almes a waye. And Ualentyne sayd in hys hearte. Ueray God pardon all theym that mocke me, for they know not the miserable faut wherbi it behoueth me to liue thus. whan it came to dinner thei gaue vnto Ualentine al maner of meates, but he made them synes al so well as he myght that he wolde none saue onli of the leuinges And whan Orson knew his condycion he commaunded that thei should putte of the beste meat of the table in to the basket, and that the poore man should be serued fyrst. Lordes sayd Orson by the God in whome I beleue euer my harte telleth me that this poore man doth som penaunce that he hath promysed to god. In this wyse was valentyne a great whyle with in his palays with oute beyng knowhen of any body so longe that euerye bodi sayde that he was dead, wherfore the king Hugon mayd the faire Clerymonde to be demanded for wife. And after enterprysed and dyd a great treason. ¶Howe the kyng Hugon made Clerymonde to be demaunded for wyfe, and howe he betrayed Orson and the grene knyght. In that same time there was a kynge in Hogrye that was named Hugon. That same kyng herde speke of Ualentyne that had left the Empiere of grece, & the lande of Guerpe So he went into Constantinoble and was receyued of Orson muche honourably. On a mornynge Hugon called the fayre Clerymonde and sayde to her in fayre language. Lady knowe that I am kynge of Hongrye, and holde vnder me diuers greate lordes, but of one thyng I am euyll that is that I haue no wyfe and am to mary, for the which thinge I am come toward you. For I haue vnderstande that the knyghte Ualentyne wyl neuer retourne, wherfore I require you yt you haue me for your husband, so shal you be crowned quene of Hongrye, and be greately honoured, for a boue all other you are she that my harte desyreth so ardauntlye. Syr sayd the lady of the good and the honour that you present me I thanke you humbly, but for to aunswere you wel seke you another wife, for my loue Ualentine lyueth yet so I am delybreed for too abyde hym seuen yere. And whan that it should be so that I would take a husbande it behoued not to speke vnto me but to ye Emperoure Orson ad to my brother the grene knight for without their counsayll I wyll neuer consent therto for any thyng that maye be sayde vnto me. ¶Lady sayd Hugon you speake right honestly, & your answere pleaseth me. Than he came towarde Orson & demaunded hym if he hadde any tydynges of Ualentyne. Free kyng sayde the Emperoure Orson that of hym had no doubte I knowe none other thynge saue that by a letter that he lefte me with his wife, ye which telleth that he is gone in exyle for to wepe his synnes & bereth vpo hym he bereth halfe of the ring that he wedded his wife with, and the other he hathe lefte her, and charged her to beleue nothyng of him, but if she sawe the other halfe of the ring. Syr said Hugon that noted well these wordes, god be his sprde, for he is a knyght to be moche praysed. Nowe I wyll tell you one thynge that I haue in my courage, I am delyuered for to go vnto Iherusalem for to vysyte the holy sepulcre so I wold gladly that you wolde bere me company. Syr sayde Orson I am contente, and we wyll go in to Angorye and take the grene knyght with vs that is kyng therof. It pleaseth me well sayd kyng Hugon lette vs go where you wyll. Than Orson toke leue of the fayre Galazye, and of hys moder and mounted vpon the see, and cam in to Angory where as they were receyued much honourable, and in greate ioye. They made great chere and after all thre went in to Iherusalem, and toke vp theyr lodging for to reste them. And vp on the morowe they went toward the good patriarke that songe masse befor them, and made them be guyded throughe the cyte for to vysyte the holy sepulcre and other holy places in great deuocyon. They gate the pardons and dyde their pylgrimage deuoutly, saue the kyng Hugon that bere the treasone in hys hearte, by the whiche he made the noble prynces be taken and enprysoned that trusted in hym For right so as they visited the holy places ye traitour kyng Hugon stale out of ther company and yede vnto the kynge of Surye that was the kynge of Indes broder that was slayne before Angorye. Hugon saued hym by mahowne & sayd vnto hym. Kynge vnderstonde me and I shal tell you a thynge for your prouffyte. Knowe syr that there is newly aryued here two knightes yt you ought to hate aboue all other, for thei haue slayne kynge Brandyffer, kynge Lucer, and the puyssaunt kyng of Inde your brother. When Rabastre vnderstode that his brother was dead, he wepte moch and after sayd vnto Hugon: Syr can you yelde me the two knyghtes. yea said the traytor Hugon, so that you wyl giue me their seales of golde. Syr said the kyng of Sorye, I shoulde be to ingrate yf I refused you so lytell a thynge, you shall haue the seales and other thynges ynough if you maye deliuer me the two knyghtes. yes said Hugon, and herken now. Sende your messengers into the house of the Patriark, for he can tel you where they are. Then the kyng of Sury dyd so, and sent, viii. hundred men armed to the good Patriarke, the which shewed them the lodges at the kynges comaundment, The Paynims went thyther anon and founde Orson and the grene knyght at dynner, the which they tooke and bounde straitly, and in betyng theim, ledde theim towarde the kyng. Alas saide Orson we are betrayed: for ryght so as kynge Pepyn and the twelue Pieres of Frauce were once sold vnto the Sarazins in this citie, so are we nowe. When the kyng of Surye sawe theym he sayd vnto them: False enemyes of our lawe, I am right ioyous that I holde you now: tel me your names for I wyll knowe theym, and for a cause. Syr sayde Orson, I am called Orson: and this is the grene knyght. By Mahounde said the kyng, I haue heard moch speke of you, and you haue a felow named Ualentine, the which if I helde he shoulde neuer escape my handes onlyue. Then he made them to be dispoyled and tooke their seales from them, the which he gaue afterwarde to kyng Hugon. So Orson and the greene knyght were put in a depe dongeon with bread and water longe. They thought that the kyng Hugon had be slayne of the sarazyns, Alas they knew nothyng how the mater did go, for the tratoure Hugon was in the cytye yt called vnto hym a disloyall traytoure named Galeran whiche had serued hym longe, for suche mayster suche seruaunt. Galeran sayd Hugan I haue found ye maner whereby I shall com vnto the ende of min entencyon, And be cause that you are my neuew and haue serued me longe, be secrete, and I shall rewarde you soo well that you shall be content, vncle sayd Galeran haue no doubte of me, for I know where you pretende, that is to haue the fayre clerimonde vnto wyfe. ¶It is true sayde kyng Hugon it nedeth not to hyde it frome you we must mayke a letter subtylly in the name of Orson for I haue hys propre seale wyth the whiche it shall be sealed. And it be houeth that the letter be mayd thus. ¶Orson by the greace of god Emperour of grece vnto you my ryght redoubted and soueraine ladye and Moder, vnto you my loue Galazye, and vnto my syster ye fayre Clerymond all vmble salutacyon & recommendacyon due, Know that there is happened vs peteous tydynges and dyspleasaunt in thys countrye, the whyche I wryt vnto you in thys present letter, so I require Ihesus that he geue you pacyens. My ladyes knowe for certayne that I haue found my brother Ualentyne in Iherusalem in hys deth bedde, so God gaue me suche grace that I spake with hym or he diede. And at his ende he charged me to send you tydynges, & to salue ye fayr Clerymonde from hym. To whome he maundeth that for all the loue that euer she loued hym wyth that also soone as she maie she take some prynce to husband And that for his death she take no discomfort but pray god for his soule. And wite that he sendeth not the halfe rynge as he had promised, for as he was in bedde it was stolen from him. And whan thys lettre was made thus Hugon made a nother lettre for to couer hys treason from the grene knyghte and Orson together, sayenge Ryght wel beloued sister we haue done you inoughe to wyte of your true, spouse & our good brother Ualentine, for the whych thynge we twayne consyderyng the great beaute that is in you, and for to accomplysshe ye desyre of the deade (on whome Ihesu haue mercye (and to encrease your honoure, we wil that you take the puyssaunt kyng Hugon vnto husband as you wyl auoyd our dyspleasure. And for the more veryfycacion we haue sealed these letters wyth our propre sealse. Also wyte that we can not come yet vnto you, for bytwene the chrysten men and the sarazyns is a daye of batayll sette the which we a byde for to susteyne the faithe of Iesu chryste, whych haue you in his kepynge. whan the letters of the reason were mayd by kynge Hugon, he closed them well and sealed them with theyr propre seales and after gaue them vnto his propre nefewe Galeran and sayd vnto hym that it behoued him to go in to constantinoble for to presente thouse letters to Bellissant and to the fayre Clerimande. Aad whan you shall haue done so I shall com after as he that knoweth not there of for to requyre Clerymande, ad I doubte me not but that she shall be gyuen me. vncle sayd Galeran I shall do ye message well for I knowe well your cause. Than he toke the letters and put him selfe vpon the waie towarde Constantynoble. ¶How Galeran dyd hys message vnto Bellyssant, and the fayre Clerymonde, & of the meruallous complayntes that Clerymonde made, Nowe Galeran dyd so moche that he arryued in Constantinoble at the houre of dyner and saluted the ladyes from ye Emperour Orson and the grene knyght, and after he gaue theym the letters. Messenger sayd Bellessant what doth my sonne. Ladie sade Galeran I left him in Ierusalem salfe and sounde. So you mai know by these letters more certeinly of his dedes. The ladyes commaunded that the messenger shuld be feested. Now it was of custome that whan they wolde dyne or soupe, thei made Ualentine to be brought into the Halle for to nourysshe hym the better, and be cause that he knew that he eate but leuinges, they gaue him so good that he wold vse no more therof, but often toke that which they caste vnto the dogges, and then thei cast the dogges largely. He herde well the tidinges of ye messengers so he thought what he shold do. Then ladies rose vp from the tables, & whan grace was sayde Bellissant maid a secretare to come that redde the letters and tolde them the tenoure of them both. And valentyne hard it well the whiche was in the halle but he made no semblaunt. So it is not to be demaunded the great sorowes one lamentacyons of the ladies yt was made for Ualentyne that they maunded was deed, for they knew the seales of the good knyghtes. The fayre Clerimond rent her clothes & pulled her heere saying Poore woman a boue all other moost dolorous wher of recometh not the death and take the. Alas Ualentyne wherfore am I not gone with you for to ese your body Broder grene knight and you Emperour Orson, you haue to harde courages that wyll marye her so soone. Alas how oute she euer to take a husband that of the valyauntes hath lost hys excellence of good the baste, of worthy the moste hardy, the rose of honour, the floure of chyualry of noble the myroure, ye example of curteyse, of troth the patrone, & of wyse the chosen. False dethe what hast thou thought whan by ye I am oute of all humayne Ioye, neuer in my life I require to haue myrthe, but al wayes in languysshenge be wayle hym yt of al yu humaynes is worthy honour. I shal neuer in my life haue other husband, but in continuall sorowes shall vse my dayes. Well sawe Ualentine the great dolour that Clarimonde bare for hym, wherof he hadde great pitie, but for doute of knowyng, he bare it in his herte. ¶And when Bellisant sawe that Clerimonde discomforted her so, she sayde vnto her: My doughter take to you pacience, you know that he was my sonne, so I ought to be sorowfull at the hert, but when I consyder that there is no remedye, it is better pray for his soule then wepe so moch, so thynke on that which your brother and the Emperour Orson maudeth you. Alas sayd Clerimonde, wherof speke you to me: what mariage may they make of her that trusteth neuer to haue ioy. Lady. for god sake speke no more therof, for I wyll neuer haue no husband. Doughter said Bellisant you are euyll aduised: for syth that so hygh a man as kyng Hugon wyl haue you, you shalbe neuer the more praised. And I tell you well that there may suche one come that ye shall mary with. At these wordes the fayre Clerimonde entred into her chamber sore weepyng. And Ualentine is vnder the stayres, that thynketh in hys hert from whence such treason mai come. So it happened at the ende of foure dayes that kynge Hugon arriued in Constantinoble, and was receyued in great honor, but the fayre Clerimond made him no semblaunt of loue. My Lady said he you haue wel heard how your sonne is dead, wherof I am sory. So it is accorded that I shall haue Clerimonde vnto wyfe. Syr sayde Clerimonde, I haue no wil to mary you nor none other. Ualentine hearde all this treason. So the thyng was so moch pleaded that she accorded at the laste to haue the kyng Hugon, wherof he was moch Ioyous, but it dured not long. ¶How Belyssant and Clerimonde knew the treason and false enterprise of kyng Hugon, and howe the prouost smote of the head of Galeran. Ualentine had gret pitie on his loue that thei were aboute to betraye, so he entred into a chapell of our Lady, whereas he was accustomed for to praye to God, and kneled downe before the ymage of the Uirgyn Marye, & sayd: Blessed Uirgyn Mary. I besech thee pray thy dere Sonn to defend my loue Clerimond fro this treason that is made agaynst her. And er he had ended hys prayer an Angel sayd vnto him: Ualentine, God hath herde thy prayer: go out of the citie and take the habites of a pylgrym that thou shalt fynde there, and after retourne in to the palais and recounte be fore all ye copany ye treason suche as thou knowest it, for thou shalt not be knowen. Ueray God sayd valentyne I thanke you. Than he departed and founde the pylgrym ad toke his habytes, after he retorned in to ye palays where as the ladyes were and the traytour Hugon that spake dyuers fayned wordes vnto the fayre Clerymonde. He salued all the campany and after sayd all one hyghe to the Empresse Bellysant. Lady I beseche you humbly that you wel shewe me the wyfe of Ualentine. Pilgrym sayde Hugon that chaunged coloure, go in to the kechyn and there thou shalt haue thyne almesse. Syr, sayd Ualentyne I will do a message vnto her Pylgrim sayd the lady I am she that you demaunde. My lady in a good houre sayd he. I haue sene your loue yt salueth you bi me, & letteth you wyte that he will be here with in this thre dayes. Pilgrem said the lady aduise the wel what thou sayest, for I haue had certayn tydinges that he is dead. Lady sayd Ualentyne you ought not to beleue, it for I deliuer me vnto death if he bee not yet on lyue, ad that thou shalte se him with in thre dayes. wha Hugon herde the wordes that Ualentyne tould vnto ye ladyes, he yssued secretly out of the palays end mounted vpo the horse with out retorning. The ladies were to muche a marueled and woulde haue feasted the pylgrym. But he would do nothing and sayd to them. My ladyes pardon me, for I haue my felowes in the towne whiche I wil go se. Than Clerymonde gaue him much money the which he distrybuted afterwarde to ye poore folkes. whan she was out they demaunded where the kyng Hugon was. By fayth sayde a damosell I sawe hym renne presently vnto his horse. And vppon these wordes Galeran entred that demaunded after his vncle. By God sayde Bellyssant in a good houre are you come, for you shall neuer escape til that you haue tolde the treason that your vncle hath made. And whan Galeran herde these wordes he began for to tremble. Alas lady sayde he for God haue mercy on me and I shal tell you all, saye on I pardon thee. It is true that mine vncle Kynge Hugone hath doone this treasone, and solde vnto the paynims within Iherusalem the Emperour Orson and the grene knight. After he recounted to her all alonge as you haue herde before. There was made a meruaylour sorow, so whan Galeran had tolde all, he departed thinking to haue escaped, but the prouost made hym to be haged and strangled. And Ualentyne lefte the pilgrimes gowne and toke him clothes agayne and into the palais. Poore man sayd Clerimonde where haue you bene. I beleue that you are displeaseunt because that I wyll mary me. Ualentine enclyned his heade and left her, and began for to pray god. Clerimond had made a quilte to be broughte vnto him, but he lay vpo the earth, & so he did his penaunce among the doogges. ¶Howe Orson and the grene knyghte were delyuered out of the pryson of the kyng of Surye, by the appoyntement of the warre that they made after to kinge Hugon of Hongry. The kynge of Surye that helde Orsone and the grene knyght in pryson made them one daye be brought before hym and sayd to them. Lordes you se yt I may hange and drawe you, wherfore I sweare by my god Mahowne that you shall neuer escape me, but yf that you rendre to me the cytie of Angorye & the strong castell, with thirtye other strong places that you hold. Syr sayde Orson: we wyll not dooe it but if you yelde vs the kynge Hugon that you holde. And the kynge of Surye sayd vnto them: speake not to me of him, for he is gone and beareth with hym your scales, & wyte that by hym you haue ben solde to me and betrayed. When the Emperoure Orson vnderstode hym, he was moche ameruaylled, and swore that he woulde neuer rest tyll that he had taken vengeaunce on the kyng Hugon, and the grene knight said that he shuld not faile him. Now Orson and the grene knight accorded the kyng of Surye his demaunde for to saue their liues, and retourned into Constantinoble where as they cested great sorow. After the faire Clerymone tolde him how she had herd tidynges of Ualentyne, whereof Orson was Ioyous, for he desyred moche his comynge. That nyghte Orson laye with Galazy, and engendred a sonne that was called Morant, the which helde the realme of Angorye. It was not longe after that Orson called his hoast for to go into Angorye. And when the kynge Hugon knewe it, he sente a messenger vnto hym saiynge, that and he wold accorde, he wolde leue hym the cytye of Angorye, & geue him foure horses laden with golde. And yf that any accused hym of treason, he would fyght with hym excepte Orson. Then after the message was done, the grene knight waged a batail against him. And the king Hugon came out of angorye armed for to fyght wyth the grene knight as it was acorded: but ye grene knight was there fyrst. Then they smote theyr horses with the spurres and recountred ech other & broke their speres After thei set their handes vnto their swerds, and god wote what strokes they gaue eche other so moche that god helped the fight: for the grene knyght gaue such a stroke vnto the king Hugon vpo the helme, that he cut a parte of his head to his shulders, & so he fel in a soune Then the greene knyght was honoured, after Hugon spake and demaunded a confessour, and tolde hym all the falsnesse and treason, and dyed in that place. Orson made the body to be taken & notably buried in an Abbaye there besyde. And such honour was done to hym because that he was kyng crowned. And in so moche Orson shewed the noblenes that was in him. Euery bodo was enfourmed of the treason of kyng Hugon, and by the counsel of the wyse men they rendred the citie of Angory to the Emperour Orson, and all the countrey the which tooke possession and also the homages. Tho after he retourned into Constantinoble and the greene knyght. Ualentine was moche ioyous of that he sawe them in good prosperitie, Clerimonde meruailed moch because that Ualentine came not, & sayd: Ha false pilgrym, thou hast betraied me. when thou tolde me that my loue Ualentine shoulde come on the third daye, and yet I haue no tidynges of hym. Alas she thought not that he was so nere her, for he was vnder the stayres of his palayes, where as by the wyll of god he shall finysh his dayes shortly, and then they shall knowe him. ¶How at the ende of seuen yere Ualentine dyed with in his Palayes a Constantinoble, and howe he wrote a letter that he was knowen by. At the ende of seuen yeare a greuous malady toke valentine so that he felte him selfe much feble, whereof he thanke god deuoutlie. Alas sayde ye holye man my god my creatoure that hathe made me to thy semblaunce haue mercy on me that am a wreched synner, and please it the for to pardon me the deth of my father, and all the synnes that euer I dyd syth the tyme that I was borne. veray redeptour of all the worlde consyder not my folyshe youthe ye whiche I haue passed folyshely in pleasures mondaynes, and comdampne me not but by thi holi merci receiue my poore soule in to thy blessed handes, and defende me from the deuyll. And in saieng these wordes an aungell of heauen came and appeared vnto hym sayenge. ¶valentyne know for a certaynte that thou shalte departe oute of thys worlde within thys foure dayes, for it is the wyll of oure lorde Iesu christ which sendeth me vnto the. Alas my lord god sayd Ualentyne I owe well for to thanke the whan by thy holy augel thou doest me to wyte ye last ende of my dayes. Than the holi man Ualentyne made signe that thei sholde bryng him paper & ynke, and whan he had it Ualentyne wrote how he him selfe in the abyte of a pelgrem discouered the treaso, & all the estate of hys life. After he putte in his name and folded the halfe of a rynge in it and helde it in hys hande. And after these thinges Ualentyne made a preeste to come, to whom he confessed his synnes deuoutelye and receued the holy sacramentes, and at the oure he dyed. And forth wyth all the belles of the cyte beganne for to rynge for him, where of the people was muche abashed and a merueled. And the Emperour Orson and all the lordes and barons descended and dyd fynde the preest besyde the holy bodi. Frende sayd the Emperour Orson: wherfore is it that they ryng so fast in the Cyte Syr sayd the preest I thynke that it is a myracle that God wyll shew for hys holy name. For euen so as he yelded vp the ghost the belles began to rynge on euerye syde. whan Orson saw that the poore man was deade in that place, he was much pensyfe and a merueled. By my faythe sayd he I thynke that thys same is holy body, and that God doth myracles for hym. Than he aduysed the letter that he helde in hys hand, ad thought for to haue taken it, but he might not haue it in no maner of wyse. So there came the fayre clerymonde and she assaied as the other dyd and hadde it. For al so soone as she touched it the hand opened, and she toke the letter at her owne pleasure. Soo it was opened a none, ad than Clerymonde saw and knew the halfe of the rynge, wherfore she sayde: Lordes, we shall haue tidynges anone of my loue Ualentyne. So there was a secretary that read all the deedes of the holy man. It is not to be demaunded the great dolours ad complayntes of Orson of Bellyssant, and of Clerymonde, for he hade his herte to harde that wepte not then. The fayre Clerymonde as halfe dead kest her selfe vpon the body in makyng such complaintes that they wende she wold haue dyed. Alas sayde the lady, where maye I become when I haue loste my ioye, my lyfe, and my comforte, and myne only hope. Alas my loue Ualentyne, what haue you thought whan you are come to dye so neare me in pouertye, and in so great myserye, without geuyng me anye knowledge of you. Alas I haue sene you often in pouertie, colde, and trauayle without geuyng you any comforte. Nowe am I aboue all, the most vnfortuned, when I myght not know, nor aduise him that I ought to serue so longe in bitter tribulacion, as true and loyall spouse. After she kyssed his face and hys handes by a meruailous distresse. And after the great doole, the holy body was borne to be buried in the great churche of Constantinoble, with so great a company, that none myght passe through the stretes. And it was not longe after but that the body was canonised, and put in shrine. So God shewed well that he was well worthye for to be called Saynt: for the daye he dyed, all sycke men were healed of their maladyes that visited his tombe. So it was not long after the death of Ualentyne that Clerymonde dyd make her anonne, and sythe the story sayth that she was Abbesse of the Abbey that was fouded in the worship and honour of Saynt Ualentyne. Thus departed out of this worlde the holy body glorious. And Orson abode Emperor seuen yere, the which he gouerned well and wysely, and no more. And in that same time he had a chylde of Galazye named Morane, that same Moranie in his tyme passed the Realme of Angory. ¶Of the merueilous vision of Orson, & how he becam an heremite in a great woode. Within seuen yere Galazye dyed, for whom the Emperour Orson made great sorow. And after the death of her he ete but bred and rotes, and small fruites that he found in the woode where as he dyd remayne. So it happened hym one nyght in vision, that him seemed that he sawe all the gates of heauen open, & sawe the Ioyes of the saued, the syeges of the sayntes crowned in glorye, and the Angelles that songe melodiouslye before the Sauioure of the worlde. After he sawe betwene two hygh roches in the botom of an obscure valey, the gulfe of helle, wher as was the damned. Some in a brennyng fyre, the other in boilyng caudrons, the other hanged by theyr tongues, the other assayled and enuironned with serpentes, and generallye he sawe all the paynes of helle, whiche is horrible and fearfull for to recounte. After the whiche vision, he wakened all afraid and amerueyled of the thynges that he had seene. And in wepyng piteously, came vnto the grene knyght and sayde to him: Frende I know that the worlde is of lytell valoure, and of shorte durynge, and that all is but vaynglorye of the pompes of this worlde, displeasaunt vnto god and to the salute of the soule, lytle profitable. For the whiche thynge I praye you that you wyll take keepe vnto my chyldren, and enfourme them so in deedes and condicions, that thei may gouerne the Empyre of Grece to the pleasure of god and the world, for I leue you the charge, as vnto hym, that aboue all the men of the worlde I trust moost, And knowe that the remnaunte of my lyfe I wyll leade solatarye, and habandone the worlde. And at thys same houre I renounce all wordly honour and take my leaue of you. When the grene knyght herd these wordes he began for to wepe tenderly, and Orson recomforted him and said Alas weepe no more for me, but pray vnto god that he geue me strengthe and puyssaunce for to accomplishe my wyl. After Orson departed in defendyng the grene knyghte to tell it anye bodi. So he wente in to a greate wodde where as he lyued holyly, & after his heathe god shewed for hym many myracles and was a saynt canonyzed, And the grene knyght gouerned the chyldren so that they finished their dayes gloryouslye and wente vnto the blysse that neuer shal haue ende, to the which he bryng vs all that suffered deathe for vs on the crosse Amen. ¶Thus endeth the hystorye of the two valyaunte brethren Ualentyne & Orson, sones vnto the Emperour of Grece. ¶Imprented at London ouer a gaynst S. Margaretes Churche in Lothbery be William Coplande.
