 iudgement of your skilfull eyes: so well otherwise, with the learned labors of more excellent authors satisfied. Yet dailye perceyuing the clemencie of your hignesse most noble minde, conioyned with so high an estate of Souereignetie, and noting your Princelye curtesie, and, as it were, a heauenly humilitie matched with the great knowledge, graffed in the roote of your Maiesties royall hart, I was by this, though before discouraged, boldened to presume so farre, as humblye to offer thys my simple present vnto your Highnesse, expressing my good will, which of my fruitelesse Garden, and barraine soyle, haue founde out thys fragrant Flower of Friendship, crauing the only accepting of the same no otherwise, than that Noble Alexander of Macedon,   [ Alexander  ] who greatly estemed the poore Poeme, giuen him by the Philosopher Pirro, Or Antoninus the Emperor,    [   Antoninus  ] that cosidering the giuers good will, highly regarded a fewe simple Metres offered vnto him. Wherfore, redoubted Souereigne o noble Alexander my hope is, for that, in the person of your Maiestie, are assembled the rare vertues, not onely of those Princes, but of many others, you wyll amongst the Noble presentes of more higher estate, receyue these fewe simple lines, as from him, that continuallye prayeth for the long and prosperous continuance of your Maiesties happye reigne. Your Maiesties most humble Subiect, Edmunde Tilney. springing trees, with leaues of liuelye greene, and being as it were in the prime of hys delightes, had garnished the pleasaunt fields a newe with fragrant flowers, early on a morning, when Phoebus also had spreade abroade his blisfull rayes, and comfortable beames, I with a friende of mine, called Maister Pedro di luxan, deuised how to enioye some parte of that delightfull season, and in the ende concluded to walke, and range abrode in the fieldes, and pleasaunt groues, where we were not onelye partakers with ye sweete recording birdes, in the wonderfull workes of the almyghtie: but were therebye also occasioned, to glorifie the Creator thereof. Thus consuming the time, till it was neere noone, and when the Sunne began to waxe somwhat warme, we determined to go from thence, vnto a worthie Ladies house therby called the Lady Iulia, where we might rest vs the heate of the day. And as it chauced, we came in very good time. For euen as we entered the Ladies house they had newly washed,  & were ready to sit downe to dinner, where we founde a ioyfull companie assembled togithers, both Ladies, and gentlemen, amongst the which, was Madame Iulias daughter, called the Ladie Isabella, a very faire gentlewoma. There was also ye Lady Aloisa with manie other Ladies, and their lincked Mates, beside M. Lodouie Viues, and an olde Gentleman called M. Erasmus, of whome after we had taken acquaintance, and vsed such courtesie as ye time, and place required, we sate all downe orderlye to dinner, where there was such exceeding cheere, such pleasaunt talke, such melodie, and such sweete cheering of ye Ladies, that it was a worlde to see how mery we were. And being thus in our pleasures, the Lady Iulia deuised wt the company in what pastimes we should spende the after noone. Some lyked well of carding, and dicing, some of dauncing, and other some of Chestes, all which were condemned by the most parte, who alleaged that those Pastimes were not aunswerable to the tyme of the yeare, but more meete for Christmas: and therefore suche game were fittest, yt might be vsed abrode in the fieldes, as bowling, shooting, & such other lyke. But M. Pedro nothing at all lyking of suche deuises, wherein the Ladies should be left out, saide, yt he wel remembred how Boccace & Countye Baltizar with others recouted many proper deuises for exercise, both pleasaunt, & profitable, which, quoth he, were vsed in ye courts of Italie, and some much like to them, are practised at this day in the English court, wherein is not onelye delectable, but pleasure ioyned with profite, and exercise of the wyt. With that all the whole assemblie, both Ladies, and Gentlemen, desired him, for that they were vnskilfull in those deuises, hee woulde put some one of them in vre, which he best liked off, and they all woulde be obedient to his determination. At the first he vtterly refused it. But in the ende at their often intreaties, he aunswered, that he would doe his diligence.   [   Maister Pedro deuiseth the pastime.  ] So in haste the table was taken awaye, and the companye hauing washed, the Ladyes wythdrewe them for a whyle into their Chambers, at whose returne we went all into the Garden, a place meruellous delectable, wherein was a passing faire arbour, at the entrance wherof,   [   The discription of the Arbor.  ] on eache side, sprong vp two pleasaunt trees, whose greene leaues muche delighted oure eyes, and were supported wyth two statelye Pillers, curiously painted with diuers deuises. All the whole arbour aboue ouer our heades, and on eche side was powdred with sundrie flowers, and wrethed about wyth the sweete Brier, or Eglantyne, betweene the braunches whereof the cheerefull Sunne layde in his beames, here and there, so that the heate dyd not molest vs, neyther did the Sunne want to cheere vs. What shall I saye? It might be called a terrestrial Paradise. And when the whole companie were orderly marshalled by M. Pedro on the benches, which were trimly set with Camamile, and Dasies, he gathered from the top of the Arbour, three, or foure braunches of Roses with their greene leaues, whereof he wreathed a garlande, and demaunded of the whole companie, if they woulde consent to his election, and obey whome soeuer he did choose for their Soueraigne, whereto they all aunswered that they would.   [   The Ladie Iulia chose soueraigne.  ] And then turning towardes the Ladie Iulia, sayde, that he in the name of them all, for sundrie respects presented vnto hir, that garland, and therewith the soueraigntie ouer them for ye daye. And when he had set the same vpon hir head, said, that whereas they had willed him to deuise their pastime, he thought it best the companie being so apt for the purpose, they shoulde by course eyther rehearse some pleasant stories, or debate vpon some such matter, as the Ladie Iulia their soueraigne should commaund. And my opinion is, quoth he, forasmuch as euerye thing sheweth nowe a certaine naturall amitie amongst themselues, yea, the trees,   [   Plinie.  ] sayeth Plinie, hath a naturall instinct of friendship, the sweete flowers, the pleasaunt herbes, declares the same also, that we intreate somewhat of friendship, and bicause no friendship, or amitie is, or ought to be more deere, and surer, than the loue of man and wyfe, let thys treatise be thereof, wherein I woulde the duetie of the married man to be discribed. For the knowledge of duetie is the maintenance of friendship. All the companie commended Maister Pedro for this pleasant deuise, & the Lady Iulia standing vp, sayd, that forsomuch, as the soueraignetie, though not with hir will, was committed vnto hir wyth consent of them all, and due obedience promised, I like well, quoth shee, of thys which Mayster Pedro hath alreadie deuised, touching friendship, and duetie of the maried man. Wherefore, by the same authoritie, which I haue receyued, I commaunde you Sir, and turned hir towardes Maister Pedro, to performe this charge, which you haue deuised of the maried man, not for that I thinke you to be a better husbande, than any of the reast here.   [   Maister Pedro is commaunded to describe the maried ma  ] But because we being yet wholy ignorant in this kinde of pastimes, you may, as the principall authour thereof, instruct vs in the whole circumstance: and againe, being so well languaged, as you are, we shall haue good sporte, to heare you interlarde our Countrie speeche with some Spanishe trickes. As I doe, quoth Maister Pedro, vtterly denie to be the author of these pastimes, which haue long ago beene else where practised: so might I right well excuse my selfe, both for want of skill, and also of good vtterance. But for that I haue in the name of all the rest, promised obedience vnto your L, I wyll not be the first, that shall disobey. Wherfore worthie Ladies, and Gentlewomen, quoth he, if I doubted of your friendlye iudgement, and beneuolence, I woulde craue it at the beginning: but bicause your good hartes and noble natures,   [   Maister Pedro beginneth his Flower of Friendship.  ] haue beene by proofe sufficiently tryed of mee, lettyng that passe, I will go briefly to my charge, the Flower of Friendship, wherein I will first declare vnto you, the vertues of the matrimoniall estate, which, (setting virginitie aside, as the purest estate) is both holy, and most necessary.   [   The commendation of mariage.  ] It is not vnknowne vnto vs Christians, howe God the Creator of all things, made of the rib of Adam his welbeloued Eua,  1 as an helper, who Adam called bone of my bones, and flesh of his flesh, so that the almightie instituted this holye ordinaunce of matrimonie in the blissefull place of Paradise, when man was in his chiefest perfection: and therefore, if antiquitie maye giue any worthinesse, what is more auncient than this honorable estate, which God himselfe the founder of all ordeyned, and consecrated? What is more honorable, and praise worthie, than this, that Christ with hys mother in Canaan did not onely with his presence make honorable, but also wyth miracles did sanctifie the same? What is more iust, than to render that to oure posteritie, which we of our predecessors haue before receyued? What thing is more inhumaine, than for man to contemne that as prophane, which the eternal hath halowed, and nature hir selfe bewtified? Christ our Lorde commaundeth, that man shall forsake Father, and Mother, and cleaue to his welbeloued spouse, and what is more holye, than loue towards parents, which GOD in the commaundementes hath rewarded with the longnesse of lyfe, yet matrimony is preferred before ye same. What is then more necessarie than matrimonye, which contayneth the felicity of mans life. the Flower of Friendship, the preseruatio of Reames, the glorie of Princes, & that which is most of all, it causeth immortalitie. I might here alleage a number of authorities in the commendation of mariage, aswell of auncient Doctors, and Fathers, as also worthie Philosophers, and graue learned men. But bicause you doubt not therein, and the state doth sufficiently commende it selfe, I let them passe, and will before I proceede any further, shew you the rites of diuers Nations,   [   The rites of diuers nations in marying.  ] in celebrating this mysterye, whereof as some will make you to laugh, so other some are to be noted. As for the christian orders they are not vnknowne vnto you.   [   The Romaines.  ] Amongst the auncient Romaynes, as Cicero recordeth, were two kindes of mariages, wherby they had also two sortes of wyfes, the one more ordinarie, whome they called Matrones, the other were called houswyfes, which were married by conioyning of handes, almost like vnto vs. These did they esteeme as their daughters, and had lyke inheritance of their landes, who bare the rule of theire houses, and therefore called houswyfes. But no accesse of ye housband might be permitted vnto them. For on the Matrones begat they their children.   [   The Babilonians.  ] The Babilonians married their maydes without dowries in this maner. All their maides, which were to bee married, were assembled in a place appointed, and placed orderlye the fayrest first, then the meaner sort, and last the fowlest. The fayrest was giuen vnto him that woulde giue most money to marrie with hir, still paying according to their bewtie, more or lesse, till they came to the foulest, & to them, that woulde marry any of those, was giuen parte of the money that was taken for the fayrer sort, paying according to the rate, as they exceeded in foulenesse. The lyke maner also, was vsed amongst the auncient Venetians,   [   The Venetians.  ] as sayeth Sabellicus, an vnhappie custome was it, quoth the Lady Iulia, & likely that the Flower of Friendship was but weaklye rooted betweene them of so slender acquaintance, but I praye you tell vs, how the indifferent sorte were maried, that were neyther foule, nor fayre, but louely browne. Mary, quoth he, for such amongst the Venetians, there was no money either giuen, or taken, but were maried for naught. And so perchaunce, quoth a merie gentleman, that stoode by, called Mayster Gualter of Cawne, were some of the fairest, as they be sometimes nowe a dayes. I haue also read, quoth Maister Pedro, that in Fraunce,   [   The frenchmen.  ] the maydens did choose their husbands in this sorte. The parents called a number of yong men to a banket, who they thought fittest, & him, to whom the mayde gaue first water, by that signe she chose for hir husband.   [   The Mauritanians.  ] In Mauritania, as sayeth Diodorus Siculus, there was such store of women, yt euery man might haue fiue wyfes, and no lesse than three, which also after ye death of their husbands, within one moneth eyther wyllingly buried themselues with him, or were perforce executed by the lawe. In the Isles of Canaria,   [   In the Isles of Canaria.  ] there were contrariwise so many men, and so fewe women, that euerie wife might haue seuen husbandes, & could not take lesse than fiue. But I trust, quoth the Lady Aloisa, that those men were not so kinde harted, as to be buried with their wyfes, as the women in that other countrie were with their husbandes. I thinke not, quoth Maister Pedro, and I doubt whether those women of Mauritania coulde not haue beene contented to haue taried behinde their husbandes, had there beene no lawe to haue compelled them. Tush quoth the Lady Iulia, thys is farre fro your matter. What appertaineth thys to the Flower of Friendship ? Lady, quoth he, I am not yet come to my purpose. But one worde more, and I will to my charge The Chaldeans,   [   The Chaldeans.  ] that honored the fyre for their God, had an easie custome. For whe they minded to marry, the Priest kindled the fyre in the good mans house, and both the parties touching it, were assured togither, and when anye of them mislyked, one of them quenched the fyre, and so were they as free, as euer they were before. In another Countrie the Priest of theire Idols enioyed the first nightes pleasures of the Bride,   [   The Scots.  ] as in Scotlande the Lorde of the Soyle, had the first fruites, of all the Uirgins, wythin his Lordship. A number of suche like customes, I could recite, but I maye not spend longer tyme in those trifles,   [   What equalities is in mariage.  ] and the Lady Iulia desireth to heare of our friendly Flower, whereto now I returne, and saye, that equalitie is principally to be considered in thys matrimoniall amitie, as well of yeares, as of the giftes of nature, and fortune. For equalnesse herein, maketh friendlynesse.   [   Pitachus Mityleneus  ] Pitachus Mityleneus one of the seauen sages of Greece, being demaunded of a yong man, whome he should take to wyfe, aunswered, go, and learne of the children, that play togither, and they will informe thee. For they had a game among them, wherein they often repeated, take to thee thy peere. Marry not a superiour,   [   Plutarch ] sayth Plutarch. For in so doing, in steede of kinsfolkes, thou shalt get thee maisters, in whose awe thou must stande, and a riche woma, that marieth a poore man, seldome, or neuer, shake off ye pride from hir shoulders. Yea Menander sayth,   [   Menander.  ] that suche a man hath gotten in steed of a wyfe, a husband, and she of him a wyfe, a straunge alteration, a wonderfull metamorphosis, But Licurgus the law maker well considered that,   [   Licurgus.  ] when he ordayned that women shoulde be married without dowries, so that then they had nothing to be prowde off, saue onely their vertues, which ought to be accounted ye chiefest dowrie. For that which is more excellent, is to be preferred before things of lower valour. Why then for lack of substance, shall a vertuous wife be repelled, or for want of welth, wisedome bee reiected?   [   Alexander  ] Alexander, the great monarch of the whole world, shewed hys noble courage in nothing more, than in that hee reiecting the ryche Barbarian Queenes, vonchsafed to match with Barcina, daughter of Arbaces, a poore gentleman, but of noble parentage, wherein not riches, but nobilitie adorned with vertues preuayled. Well, quoth the Ladie Iulia, I pray you what is he now a daies, that had not rather marrie a woman ful of money, wanting vertue & grace, than that hauing vertues, lacketh money. For my parte, it well lyketh me that equalitie, as you say, be obserued, seing equalnesse causeth friendlynesse. But I vnderstand not this kinde of equalitie, wherein you seeme to allow the greatest inequalitie yt can be. For Alexander being Lorde of the whole worlde coulde finde no equall match, in respect of his greatnesse. Much lesse Barcina that was so farre his inferiour, both in parentage, and substance. Not so farre his inferiour, quoth Maister Pedro, for the great vertues, which abounded in Barcina, and as I sayde before, the onely ryches to be required in a woman, was in all respects comparable to the great greatnesse of Alexander the great, neyther did she want sufficient parentage, and though not a conquerour of the worlde, yet well knowne to be proceeded from the conquerours own image, so that a vertuous woman, being wise, and of good linage, wanteth no equalitie on hir parte to counterpeise the greatest ryches, or treasure, that any man can haue. For where vertue aboundeth, all good things doe flowe. And to conclude, I say, that great regarde ought the man to haue in his choise, that he may leaue hys childe parentage, which being ioyned to vertues maketh them perfite. Now for ye equalitie in age, I say, cosisteth likewise in the inequalitie of yeares, but not so much as the Philosophers, in times past affirmed. For Aristotle by hys reasons, woulde haue the man to be twentie yeares elder than hys wyfe, bicause they might leaue off procreation at one time. Hesiodus the Greeke poet, & Xenophon the philosopher, would haue the woman foureteene, and the man thirtie yeres old, so that there should bee sixtene yeares betwene them, bicause in that time, the man should be best able to rule his housholde, and the woman taken from euill occasions. Licurgus lawe was amongest the Lacedomonians,   [   Licurgus.  ] that the men shoulde not marry, before thirtie, and seauen yeres of age, and women at eyghtene. What maner of equalitie is thys, quoth the Lady Isabella, I woulde neuer marry, rather than to take such old crustes, whose wyfes are more occupied in playstering, than in enioying any good conuersation. You say truth, quoth Maister Pedro, neyther doe I allowe it, yet maye I not condemne the auncient philosophers. For in those dayes men liued longer, and their natures were much stronger. Therefore by likelyhood it was at that time more tollerable. But my opinion is, that they differ not aboue foure or fiue yeres. After this match made, and equalities considered, next followeth,   [   What loue in mariage should be.  ] to loue, & to like well: For perfite loue knitteth louing heartes, in an insoluble knot of amitie. Loue indifferent serueth not, loue fayned prospereth not. Wherefore it must be true, and perfite loue, that maketh the Flower of Friendship betweene man and wyfe freshlye to spring. This loue must growe by little and little, and that it maye be durable, must by degrees take roote in the hart. For hastie loue is soone gone. And some haue loued in post hast, that afterwards haue repented them at leysure. Wee all seeke the fayrest, the richest, and noblest. But vertues are laide aside, and nought accounted off, we seeke to feede our eyes, and not to content oure eares. Why? quoth Maister Gualter, shal a man choose his wyfe with his eares. To choose with our eares, quoth Maister Pedro, is to enquire of hir vertues, & vices, by report whereof you shall vnderstande hir conditions, and qualities, good, & bad. As for that, quoth Gualter, it booteh not. For the best of them all haue their faults, and if she be vertuous, shee will looke to be so honored, that hir husband shall haue the more a do to please hir. And I remember, that a wise man, I knowe not hys name, being enquired of a friende of hys, with whome he should marry, aunswered, that he had beene married foure sundrie times, first with a fayre woman, who was so prowde of hir bewtie, that he was faine to please, and content hir, least she should dishonour him, the seconde verie riche, whose substance made hir so stately, that he was forced lyke a slaue to obey hir, the thirde was so vertuous, that he was glad to honor, and reuerence hir, to keepe hir, still in hir vertuous goodnesse, the last was of good linage, which so exalted hir stomacke, that shee made him hir bondman. Nowe choose, quoth he, which of these foure thou canst best content thy self. You haue made a fayre reason, quoth the Lady Aloisa, I neuer knewe that you were so deepely learned before, and all the Ladies woulde haue driuen Maister Gualter out of the arbor. But father Erasmus sayde that he remembred the lyke thing of Anaxagoras, and therefore he was not to be blamed, because he did but repete the woordes of a Philosopher. What then, quoth Maister Pedro, it is no parte of my charge to disprayse women, but to speake the best of them, and to plant the Flower of Friendship betweene them, and their husbands. Wherfore, let loue be rooted deepely in the mans hart towardes the woman. Let hir person be sought, not hir substance, craue hir vertues, not hir riches, then shall there be a ioyfull beginning, and a blessed continuance in amitie, by which all things shall prosper, & come to happie ende. Beware of hatred, be circumspect in loue, which of them first taketh place, doth abide during lyfe. And loue grounded remayneth for euer, which being once gone, al other goodnesse foloweth for companie. Therefore to confirme this loue ye married man must,   [   The man must beware in chyding when he is newly maried.  ] as much as he can, alwayes absteyne from brawling, lowring, and grudging, especially when he is newly married. For if the wyfe first conceyue hate, she will neuer receiue loue againe. The husband then must be merie, and pleasaunt with his wyfe, to make hir the more in loue with him at the beginning, so that if afterwardes they chaunce to fall at square, it shall rise but of a sodaine anger, which will be gone againe as soone, and not of anye olde conceyued malice. There be manye men, that boast much, howe they be serued, and feared, like Bugges, of their wyfes, but they maruellously deceyue themselues. For much better were it, if they were better beloued, and lesse feared. For whome the wyfe hateth, in feare she serueth, but whome shee loueth, she gladly cherisheth, It is good reason, that all women doe labor to stande in the good grace of their husbandes, but much more ought we men to foresee, that we fall not into the hatred of oure wyfes. For if she once fasten hir eyes on another, he shall enioy hir in dispite of hir husbands beard. In this long and troublesome iourney of matrimonie, the wise man maye not be contented onely with his Spouses virginitie, but by little and little must gently procure that he maye also steale away hir priuate will,   [   The maried man steale away his wyfes priuat will.  ] and appetite, so that of two bodies there may be made one onelye hart, which she will soone doe, if loue raigne in hir, and without this agreeable concord matrimonie hath but small pleasure, or none at all, and the man, that is not lyked, and looued of his mate, holdeth his lyfe in continuall perill, his goodes in great ieopardie, his good name in suspect, and his whole house in vtter perdition. I will recyte two, or three examples of those that loued their wyfes well,   [   Such as loued well their wyues ] and then I will proceede. The first, that loued hys wyfe, was our father Adam, who being set in Paradise,   [   Adam.  ] and forbidden on paine of death, one onely tree in the Garden, to content, and please Eua his wife, did notwithstanding eate of it,   [   Darius.  ] and dyed. Darius the great king, being ouercome by Alexander, in all things shewed himself stoute and inuincible, till he vnderstoode that his wyfe was taken prisoner, who then poured out his teares aboundantlye, as lamenting for that which he more esteemed than hys lyfe, or estimation. Valerius Maximus sayth,   [ Tiberius Gracchus.  ] that Tiberius Gracchus finding two Serpents in hys bed, sent for the soothsayers to knowe what yt straunge chaunce ment, and signified, which aunswered, that if ye killed the male serpent, he shoulde die before his wyfe, but if the female were first slaine, hys wyfe shoulde die before him. He bearing entire loue towardes his wyfe, gaue his owne death to prolong hir lyfe, and kylled presently the male serpent. There be, quoth the Lady Iulia, fewe such husbandes in these oure dayes, or rather none at all. That is the matter, quoth Maister Cualter, that your Ladyship is so afeard to marry, but yet to tell the truth, and shame the Deuill, there be mo suche husbandes, than lyke wyfes, if it were well tried. This sawcie foole, quoth Madame Aloisa, woulde bee well beaten, and banished our company. For he is still pratling against women, and interrupteth oure pastime. No, no, quoth Maister Pedro, he increaseth our sporte, and therefore we can not well want him. But I will shewe you one example more of later yeares, bicause the Ladye Iulia sayeth that none nowe a dayes doe loue their wyfes so well.   [ Baptista Fulgosa.  ] Baptista Fulgosa recounteth of a certaine poore man, and hys wyfe, that were seeking for their sustenance vpon the Sea side. The woman being taken awaye, by certaine Rouers, hir husbande swam in the sea after hir, desiring the pirates to take him also, saying, that he had rather be with his wyfe in captiuitie, than lacking hir to liue at libertie, whereat the Pirates maruelling, receyued them both into their shippe, and declaring the whole aduenture, presented them to the King of Lunis, who vnderstanding the case gaue them great commendation, and not onely set them at libertie, but also sente them home wyth great rewarde. This maye suffise to make you vnderstand, that men doe sometimes loue their wyfes, & hereby may you also see of what force the true Matrimoniall loue is, wheron let the married man fasten, and ground all the rest of his doings, and so shall thys friendly Flower, be planted in a fertile soyle.   [   Weedes that will ouergrow the friendly Flower.  ] And as there bee certaine sweete herbes, that are great nourishers of thys Flower: so be there certayne poysoned weedes, that will ouergrowe it, and in the ende vtterly destroye it, if they be not weeded out by the roote, whereof the first, and chiefest is adulterie.   [   Adulterie.  ] For what godlynesse can raygne in that house, where harlots beare the rule, whose fruits Salomon doth largely describe. For if the husband please the wicked woman, he must of force displease hys owne wyfe being godlye, and that iniurie a good woman cannot wyth anye pacience support. At what time the married man determyneth to keepe a harlot, euen the same houre, doth he set fyre to his honestie, destruction to his house, and losse of all, that euer he hath. An honest woman wyll suffer a thousand discommodities in hir husbande, so that she be assured, that he is contented with hir, and loueth hir only. What greater cruelty can a man shew vnto his wyfe, than to keepe all his railings, brawlings, and chydings for hir, and another to enioy all his (good) conuersation, and pleasures. I doubt which of them hath the greater hart, eyther he in doing, or she in suffring it. Can there be any greater disorder, than for the husbande to be merie abrode, and lowre at home, to take from hys wyfe, and giue to his harlots, to want for hys childre, and to suffise for his bawdes. The fayth that the woman oweth to hir husbande, the lyke fidelitie ought the man to repaye vnto hys wyfe, and though the ciuill lawe giueth man the superioritie ouer his wyfe, that is not to offende, or despise hir, but in misdoing, louingly to reforme hir. Therefore the abhorring of adulterie increaseth amitie betwene man, and wife, and the chiefest way to ground the Flower of Friendship in Matrimonie is, first to roote out the poyson of adulterie. The seconde weede that is to be extirped is gamning,   [   Gamning.  ] which though the woman can wyth more pacience suffer, than this others: yet for his owne sake, let him forbeare it. For what wisedome is it, that a man at one chaunce of the Dice, hasardeth as much, as the toyle of hys whole lyfe hath gotten, and scrapte together, and small commoditie the gamester reapeth thereby, when he hath best hap, if all his cardes be told. For suppose he wynne, yet is there suche cursing, such lying, such brawling, chyding, and swearing, that the Deuill laugheth them all to scorne. If he lose, he fretteth, and fumeth so, that beside the losse of his thrift, he hazardeth both body, & soule, with cursing, and blaspheming. Then if he eyther wynne, or lose, yee see these hys gaines and commodities. I condemne not honest playing for recreatio at times conuenient for some small matter, as the persons habilitie is. But what a monstrous thing is it, to consume whole dayes, yea, whole daies, and nights in gaming, swearing, and forswearing. For it hapneth often, a daylie gamester, a common blasphemer. Wherefore it were no great hinderance to the common welth, if such kinde of persons were vtterly banished.   [ Riotousnesse and dronkenesse.  ] The third pestiferous weede is banqueting, and riotousnesse. For dronkennesse, whiche commonly haunteth the riotous persons, besides that it wasteth thy thrifte, consumeth thy friends, and corrupteth thy body, doth also transforme thee from a reasonable creture, to a brute beast.   [   Socrates.  ] Socrates compareth the witte, that is ouercome with Wine, vnto a horse that casteth hys Maister, what greater reproche can there be to a man, than to be called a common dronkarde, which is as much to saye, as a man depriued of all vertues. I could recite many axamples, what discommodities haue chaunced to worthye men by thys vyce, if the time woulde suffer mee. You haue yet day ynough, quoth the Lady Iulia. Wherfore we pray you to shewe vs some of those examples for oure instruction. I am content, quoth Maister Pedro, and seing you are so willing to heare, I will declare first some what of wine, which by abuse nourisheth dronkennesse, and by vse is the best liquor of all others.   [ Anacharsis  ] Anacharsis the Philosopher sayde, that the Uine bare three kindes of grapes, the first of pleasure, the seconde of dronkennesse, and the thirde of sorrowe, so that passing the first, which is to drinke it temperatelye, and delayed, the other two are naught.   [   Noe the first inuenter of wine.  ] Noe was the first that inuented Wine, thoughe some attribute the same to Ycanus, and some to Dionysius. The first that delayed wyne, was Filona,   [   Filona first delayed wine.  ] borne in Candia, and being so dronke temperatelye, it quickeneth the wyt, it increaseth the strength, it cheereth the hart, it taketh away cares, it causeth colour in the face, it strengthneth the sinowes, it helpeth the sight, it fortifieth the stomack, it prouoketh vrine, it taketh away sorrowes, & to conclude with saint Paule writing to Timothe,   [   S. Paule to Timothe.  ] being sicke in his stomacke, counsayleth him to drinke a little wine. But as manye discommodities hath it also, if it be abused, as breeding the gowte, causing the dropsie, decaying womens beautie, and making them barraine, with many other much woorse.   [   Licurgus.  ] Licurgus the Lacedemonian law maker, commauded, that no man before. xviij. yeares of age, shoulde drinke anye wine, and from thence to fortie hee gaue leaue to drinke verie little, and much delayed, and from fortie vpwardes somewhat more, and lesse delayed.   [   Noe the first dronkarde.  ] As Noe was the first inuenter of wine: so was hee first dronken, who was therefore laught to scorne of his owne sonnes.   [   Lot.  ] Lot in his dronkennesse lay with his owne daughters.   [   Alexander  ] Alexander the great was so spotted with this vice, that alwayes in his dronkennesse, hee woulde kyll his deerest friends, and in the ende being dronke,   [   Marcus. Antonius. ] was poysoned himselfe Marcus Antonius, an inuincible Romain captaine, being once ouercome wyth Wine, gaue himselfe to the pleasure of Cleopatra, and was slayne by Octauius Caesar. Anacleon the poet was so great a bibber   [ Anacleon  ] of wine, that he was choked with ye huske of a grape. Loe, here you see the vnhappie ende of those, that passe the golden meane, and cleaue to the excesse. If the married man do weede out these three daungerous weedes by the roote, no doubt this Flower will prosper passing well, and yeeld yearely dubble increase. And, as I saide before, the better to nourishe, and mayntaine thys Flower,   [   Certaine delicate herbes, the maintainers of this friendly Flower.  ] there are certaine delicate herbes that must of force be cherished, which bee these. First to be aduised in speeche, curteous, and gentle in conuersation, trustie, and secret in that, wherein hee is trusted, wise in giuing counsaile, carefull in prouiding for his house, diligent in looking to that which is his, sufferable of the improtunities of his wife, daungerous, and circumspect in matters touching his honesty, and ieolous in the education of his Children. These be excellent herbes, quoth the Lady Aloisa, and rarely founde all in one garden. Wherefore we pray you teach vs, how we maye plant, and conserue them. That appertayneth not to my charge, quoth Maister Pedro, and if it dyd, yet want of skil, and shortnesse of time woulde not permit me. But I will instruct you in their qualities, which being well considered, will prouoke the wyse man to seeke after them. In doing whereof, as I shall sufficiently discharge my duetie towardes the Lady Iulia, concerning hir commaundement. So trust I to deserue great thanks of al these Ladies.   [   1 Aduised in speeche.  ] The first delicate herbe that the married man must plant for the preseruation of his friendlye Flower is to be aduised in speeche. For the man that without discretion speaketh more hastilye, than wisely, for the most parte falleth into errors, much babling, declareth a foolishe heade, and a silent person, is the exampler of wisedome. First expend with thy selfe, what thou wilte speake, and ponder thy meaning well. Then note to whome, where, & when thou speakest. The tongue that runneth before the witte, commonlie breedeth his maisters woe. The philosophers in their scholes, neuer taught a man to speake, but first learned him, to holde his peace: Salomon sayth,   [   Salomon.  ] that much talke cannot be without offence, and he that can refrayne his tongue is wise. Two occasions Socrates allowed, that shoulde mooue one to speake, when he knewe the matter verye well, and when necessitee constrained him. Xenophon sayeth,   [   Xenophon.  ] that nature gaue vs two eares, and but one mouth, to the intent we shoulde heare more, then we ought to speake.   [   2 Courtise in conuersatio  ] The second herb is to be courteous, and gentle in conuersasion. For ye see that fierce, and hurtfull beastes, as the lyon, the Serpent, with such lyke, bee abhorred of vs for their cruell curstnesse, when the tractable beastes, as the spaniell, and the greyhounde, with others, haue not onely place in oure houses, but we haue sometime more care to nourishe them vp, than a christian creature. The married man then must not bee rigorous towarde his wife. For there will discorde growe by hir inward hate, and neuer shall they haue ioy, or peace, if the woman cannot refraine hir tongue, nor the man suffer. If he want discretion, and shee pacience, it will rather appeere the mansion of fooles, than a house of ye wise. For at the last, except one of them yeelde vp in tyme, they will fall to raging, & so consequentlye to blowes. Women for the most part, are froward of complextion, and tender of condicion, whereto the wise husbande must haue great regarde, and if he once reprehende them sharpelye, he must a hundreth exhort them louinglye. There are manye occasions, that causeth variance betweene man, and wife, as for their children, seruants, apparell, and other such housholde matters. In which the good married man must showe his wisedome, eyther in turning it to sporte, & dissembling the cause, or aunswering not at all. If so be hee cannot suppresse his anger, let him then goe, and disgest it abroade. For the ende of indignation, is to be ashamed of our selues. And as in a myste a man appeereth greater, than in a fayre daye, saith Diogenes: than when he is pacient. The thirde is to be secrete,   [   3 To be secret ] and trustie in that, wherein he is trusted. One of the vertues most esteemed in tymes paste was secrecie; whereby the Wysedome of a man was perfitlye discerned. Hee is discreete, that keepeth well his secretes, sayeth Socrates.   [   Socrates.  ] But he is not wise, that discouereth them. The good Cato repented him but of three things,   [   Cato.  ] that he did during all his life. First, for disclosing a secrete to a woman, the seconde, for sayling by sea, when hee might haue gone by land, and the last, for consuming one whole day, without dooing some profitable deede. A marueylous example of secrecie,   [ Anaxagoras.  ] was shewed in Anaxagoras, who with others conspired to kill a tyraunt, and being betrayed, and by the tiraunt put to most cruell torments, not sufferable, but off his owne tongue, bicause he woulde not discouer that, which he promised to keepe secret. The like is reported of a woman in Athens, bicause she would not bewraye a conspiracie, wherein hir husbaude was a part. It is happie quoth the Ladie Aloisa, that some women haue beene secret in times past. For you men say nowe a dayes, that women can keepe no counsaile. See I pray you, quoth Maister Gualter, how soone this Ladie, had gotten holde of that sentence, which so little serueth hir purpose. For I trust it was an easie matter for that woman to keepe silence, when shee wanted hir tongue. Whereto the Ladies woulde haue replied, but Maister Pedro interrupted them, and sayde, that hee dyd not condemne, although the most parte were not tongue tyed, and so there be, quoth he, some men that be open ynough. But I woulde haue this married man to embrace secrecie as a vertue, and thinke it is a great shame not to bee so secret, as a woman. The fourth, is to be wise in gyuing counsaile,   [   4 To be wise in giuing counsell.  ] which is not euerye mans office, but such as be of good yeares, that haue seene, and heard much. Counsellors must be wise, lerned, vertuous, of good iudgement, & without affection.   [   Socrates.  ] Socrates counselleth a man, not to aske counsell of him, that is wholye giuen to the worlde. For his aduise will be, but after his owne pleasure. Plato sayth,   [   Plato.  ] that he studied more to giue counsayle to his friendes, than to reade philosophie in the schooles. What a mockerie is it then, for hare braynde heads, to giue counsaile in matters, whereof they neuer sawe, nor heard before. The fift, is to be carefull in prouiding for his house,   [   5 To be carefull in prouiding for his house.  ] as to feede, and cloth his familye, to instruct his children, and to pay his seruantes truely. In which things a man maye not, as in other voluntarie matters be negligent, but play the part of a good housband in remembring it, and prouiding for it in tyme. The office of the husbande is to bring in necessaries, of the wife, well to keepe them. The office of the husbande is, to go abroad in matters of profite, of the wife, to tarrye at home, and see all be well there. The office of the husbande is, to prouide money, of the wife, not wastfully to spende it. The office of the husbande is, to deale, and bargaine with all men, of the wife, to make or meddle with no man. The office of the husband is, to giue, of the wife, to keepe. The office of the husbande is, to apparell him as he can, of the wyfe, to go as shee ought. The office of the husband is, to bee Lorde of all, of the wife, to giue account of all, and finally I saye, that the office of the husbande is, to maintayne well hys liuelyhoode, and the office of the woman is, to gouerne well the houshold. And as the man maye not denie his wife things, that muste bee graunted of necessitie: so he ought not to graunt hir things of prodigalitie, & superfluous. For as great dysorder is it to graunt the one, as to denye the other. The sixt is that the married man accompany no diffamed persons, and in any case, that he harbour them not.   [   To accompany no defamed persons.  ] For manye men blame their wyfes for yll lyfe, when they themselues are the causers therof for mainteyning such companions, whereby he himselfe doth hardly escape infamie, and these good fellowes do seeke to creepe into greatest friendshippe with the husband, to the intent they may haue better oportunitie with his wife. Yet maye he vse his tried friende, or neere kinsman familiarly, as well in his owne house, as else where, hauing alwayes regarde to the olde saying, that a man may shewe his wife, and his sworde to his friende, but not so farre to trust them. For if thereby grow vnto him any infamie, let him not blame his wife, but his owne negligence. The seuenth herbe of maruellous vertue is,   [   7 To be sufferable in the importunities of his wife.  ] to bee sufferable in the ymportunities of his wyfe, sometymes disembling, and in trifling matters consenting vnto hir. For if all things, that women craue, shoulde bee graunted, all thing that they finde fault withall, shoulde be amended, & all things that they are a greeued with, should be redressed, Sampsons strength, the pacience of Iob, and the wysedome of Salomon were all to little. For some men, whose misshaps are to be lamented, are matched with such saincts, that deuise naught else, but howe to vexe, and molest theire housbands. Socrates pittied three sorts of men,   [   Socrates.  ] The first was, a good man in the handes of a curst shrewe, the seconde a wise man, vnder the gouernaunce of a foole, and the last was a liberall man, in subiection to a couetous caytife. I thanke you for this, quoth Maister Gualter, thys is the truest tale, you tolde to daye, and hitherto, you haue but flattered these Ladies. Not so, quoth maister Pedro. For I spake nothing heretofore but the truth, neyther speake I this nowe generallye against all women. For that were slaunderous vnto them. I do but touch some shrewde wyues. Tushe, quoth maister Gualter, they bee shrewes all, and if you giue the simplest of them leaue to daye to treade vpon your foote, to morrowe she will tread vpon thy head. Be not angrie, I praye you, quoth Mayster Pedro. For I giue no such leaue, but I say that for quietnesse sake, & for the increase of amity, the maried man must sometyme dissemble, and in thys case ought to consider, that if his wife be foolish, it little helpeth to aunswere hir, and lesse profiteth to reforme hir, but if she be wise, one worde will suffise. For it is a certaine rule, that if a woman will not be still with one worde of hir husbande, shee will not be quiet with as manye wordes, as euer the wise men did write, nor wyth so many stripes, as a man is able to giue hir. The wyse husbande therefore I say, and affirme, must, to preserue this pleasaunt Flower, deale with his wife, rather by subtiltie, than by crueltie. The eight is to be circumspect in matters,   [   8 Not to be ieolous.  ] that conserne his honestie, and not to be ieolous of his wife. The Stoike philosophers saye, that ieolousie is a certaine care of mans minde, least another shoulde possesse the thing, which he alone woulde enioye. There is no greater torment, than the vexatio of a ieolous minde, which, euen as the moth fretteth the cloth, doth consume the hart, that is vexed therewith. Two kinde of persons are commonlye sore sicke in this disease, eyther those that are euill themselues, or they, that in their youth haue gone astraye, supposing that as other mens wifes haue done towards them, so will theirs doe towardes others, which is vanitie to thinke, more folye to suspect, and greatest foolishnesse to speake off. For as some lewde women bee dissolute: so likewise women there be, honest, and verie circumspect. If the wyfe be to bee suspected, let the man worke as secretly, and closely, as he can to reprehende hir, yet all will not peraduenture aduaile. For, trust me, no wisdome, no craft, no science, no strength, no subtiltie, yea, no pacience suffiseth to enforce a woman, to be true to hir husbande, if shee otherwise determine. Therefore to conclude to be ieolous, eyther needeth not, or booteth not. The ninth, and laste herbe is to bee carefull in the education of his children. For much better were they vnborne,   [   9 To be carefull in education of his children.  ] than vntaught. Diogenes being enquired what were best for a man to doe to be in fauoure of the Gods, and beloued of the people, answered, that to be in credit with the people, and fauorde of ye Goddes, a man ought to doe three things, the first to reuerence, and honor much the Gods, then to bring vppe his children in due correction, and last to be thankefull to his benefactors. What auayleth riches, possessions, to be fortunate, to haue thy wyfe with childe safelye delyuered, & thy childe well nourished, if afterwardes by yll trayning, & for want of education, he become vicious? The monarch of Macedon Philippes Sonne,   [   Alexander  ] being asked whye hee honored more his mayster, than his father, saide, that his maister gaue him lyfe euerlasting, and his Father lyfe but for a time. There came once before the wise Solon a Father with his sonne, one accusing the other, the father complayned of the disobedience of his Sonne, and the sonne accused the father of his ill bringing vppe, which was the cause of his disobedience. Solon well considering the case,   [   Solon.  ] determined that bycause the Father had not brought vp his sonne in due correction, hee should therefore after his death, be depriued of his sepulchre, which was verie rigorous in those dayes, and the sonne for hys disobedience was disherited. I assure you, quoth maister Lodouic, that same was an excellent iudgement of the wise Solon, and if it were put in vse at these dayes, there woulde, be many fathers to lye wythout graues, and as many sonnes put from their inheritance. The more pittie, quoth mayster Pedro, and I thought to haue sayde more therein. But the sunne is so much declined, that it is more then tyme to vnburden these Ladies of this tedious talke, and I feare me, I haue alreadye troubled them to long. Not so, quoth the Ladie Iulia. For sooner shoulde we want the day light, than good will to heare you, though the day were so long againe. You say your pleasure, quoth mayster Pedro. But nowe to knit vp this Flower of matrimoniall amitie, and friendshippe, touching the office of the man, I say, that hee must aboue all thinges haue the feare of God before his eyes, which with the rest well considered, and put in execution, no doubt hee shall enioye the flagrant sauour thereof. Then rose vp the Ladye Iulia, with the whole copany giuing my friende mayster Pedro greate thankes, wishing that there were many such husbandes, and therewith she tooke the garlande from hir head, and saide turning hir towards master Pedro, that she would surrender vnto him againe the authoritie, which shee of him receiued with that charge, that hee shoulde the next daye bestowe it on some other in that place. For I shall not bee in quiet, quoth shee, till I haue hearde the married woman prescribed in lyke sorte, as you haue done the married man, neyther can this Flower well prosper, or bee perfite, except the woman also put to hir helping hande. Whereto mayster Pedro aunswered, that in the woman was to be required great helpe for the preseruation of this friendlye Flower. Yet will I not, quoth hee, take the authoritie from you. But if you list to departe with it to some other, you shall your selfe to morrowe resigne it to whome it pleaseth you, and in the meane time hee willed hir to leaue the garlande, and hir authoritie in the place, where she receyued it, which she dyd, and than went we out of that most pleasaunt arbour into the Garden, where we tooke oure leaue of the Ladyes and gentlemen, who were verye loth to haue left our company. But maister Pedro had so apointed, that we coulde not tarry. Therfore promising to come againe the next day, we went home the same waye wee came in the morning, where the Nightingale saluted vs with such sweete melody, that we were at the end of our iourney, before we were ware. continuance, of thys Flower of Friendshyp. which letted vs of our mornings walke, notwithstanding we sent word to the Ladie Iulia, that in the after noone, wee determined according to oure promise, to meete hir in the garden. So after our dinner was finished, and the guestes departed, wee prepared readie our horses, partlye for that the weather was somewhat to hot, to trauaile on foote, and partly for the more speede. But for all oure haste, the companye was assembled before we came, and merilye sat togithers, gyuing eare to the pleasaunt, harmonie, and melodye, that was made by the musitions, to whome after our reuerence accordingly done, we drewe neere, and tooke our places in the Arbor, where as the euening before, the Ladye Iulia had left hir athoritie. And euerye one orderly set, shee tooke the garland of hir soueraigntie, and standing vp sayde. That the authoritie, which shee had receyued the day before of mayster Pedro, shee purposed to giue to some other, least in vsurping a continuance therein, shee might doe iniurie to the rest of the companye, and so curteouslye comming to the Ladie Aloisa, shee set the garlande of principalitie vppon hir heade,    [   The Ladye Aloisa chosen souereigne.  ] with election confirmed, by assent of vs all, wyth the promise of due obeysance. The Lady Iulia sate downe soberly in hir place againe, and the Ladye Aloisa, standing vp, declared howe much against hir will shee tooke that authoritie, and soueraigntie vpon hir: notwithstanding for as much as the Lady Iulia by the free consent of the rest, had elected hir, she neyther would, vncurtesly, nor might she honestly, contemne,   [   The Ladye Iulia commaunded to describe the married woman.  ] or reiect it, by the vertue wherof, quoth she, I will that the Ladie Iulia doe briefely (for that the day is farre past) discribe vnto vs, the office, and duetie of the married woman, in lyke sort as mayster Pedro hath done for ye mans behalfe, and therein to shew in what sort she must applie hir selfe, to maintaine this Flower of Friendship betweene hir husbande and hir. When the Ladie Iulia heard this, she began a little to chaunge hir colour, and standing in doubt what she shoulde doe, much dissehabling hir selfe, but in the ende after hir pawse awhile, I rather choose, quoth she, to hazard the iudgement of ignorance, by my vnskilfull tale, than to be condemned of disobedience by vngentle resistance. For disobedience is a fault in all persons, but the greatest vice in a woman. And now, in hope of pardon,   [   The Lady Iulia beginneth the married woman, and agreeth with maister Pedro in diuers points.  ] if my vnlearned speeche be not aunswerable to your expectations, of thys married wyfe this is my opinion. In dyuers pointes I agree with maister Pedro, which are as well necessarie, in the waman, as requisite in the man. For if in suppressing of the three foresaide weedes, the chiefest enimies to the Flower of Friendship, the man must be careful, much more ought the woman to trauayle, that they doe not spring in hir, and also the great regarde in choyse wyth others: wherein bycause mayster Pedro hath already satisfied you, I maye be vnburdened of that trauaile. For if the man ought to be circumspect in the electing of his wyfe, what shall the siely women doe, being so often deceyued by you men? Therefore must she with great care consider, and be well assured of the mans honest conuersation, of his manners, and affections, and specially what loue he beareth. For the venom of loue blindeth the eyes, and so bewitched the senses of vs poore women, that as we can foresee nothing, so are we perswaded that all the vices of the beloued are rare,   [   Loue blindeth the eyes, and bewitcheth the senses of women.  ] and excellent vertues, and the thing most sower, to be verie sweete, and delicate: for the aduoyding of which, the woman cannot be to inquisitiue. I meane not of the mannes welth, and substance, but of hys vertues, which be the true riches, and remayneth for euer.   [ Themistocles.  ] With which thing mooued, Themistocles being demaunded whether he had rather marry his daughter, to a riche man vicious, or a poore man vertuous, worthily aunswered, that he would sooner choose a man without money, than money without a man. Also I dissent not from mayster Pedro in his equalitie of match. And after such hir choyse,   [   The happinesse of mariage consisteth in a chast wife  ] let hir indeuor to increase a perfection of loue, and aboue all imbrace chastitie. For the happinesse of matrimonie, doth consist in a chaste matrone, so that if suche a woman bee conioyned in true, and vnfayned loue, to hir beloued spouse, no doubt their liues shall be stable, easie, sweete, ioyfull, and happie. But loue taken awaye, in steede of most sweete pleasantnesse, is placed a bitter, vnsauerie, and an intollerable estate. The first thing therefore, which the married woman must labour to intende, the first thing which shee must with all hir force, applie hir whole minde vnto, and the first thing which shee must hartily put in execution, is to lyke,   [   The woman must lyke and loue well hir husband.  ] and loue well. For reason doth bynde vs, to loue them, wyth whome we must eate, and drinke, whome we must only accompany, of whose ioyes, and sorrowes, wealth, and woe, wee must be partakers, for whome also wee forsake parents, friendes, and all, leauing onelye to them, for no shorter time, then during lyfe. And albeit they be cancred of nature, yll in conuersation, worse in condition, base of lynage, deformed of personage, and vnaduised in worde and deede: yet being our chosen husbands, we may not, nor can we forgo them, or chauge with our neighbours,   [   The Parthians exchaunged wiues with their neighbours.  ] as dyd sometyme the Parthians, but seeke gentlye to redresse them, indeuor to please them, and labour to loue them, to whome we haue wholy giuen oure bodies, oure goodes, our lyues, and libertye. But it often falleth out, that discord groweth beweene man and wyfe, by the ignoraunce of one the others nature, and for this cause we are bounde to learne, and abserue them, and let not the woma to hastilye perswade hir selfe, in ymagining that hir husbande lyketh, & loueth hir intirelye, and sheweth hir a good countenaunce. For in that moment, when he shall perceyue that she loueth him not hartily, euen then will he abhorre hir vtterlye. For as to season vnsauerye meates, pleasant sawces be prepared: so to gyue a good release to the foode of marriage, it muste bee tempered with true loue. For loue giueth to harde things an easinesse, to tedious thinges a pleasantnesse, a beginning with facilitye,   [   True loue the sause of mariage.  ] and ending in felicitie. Then spake the Lady Isabella, and sayd, that it was not possible for a woman to looue ye husbande, the which delighted more in an other. It is sure quoth the Ladie Iulia, a harde matter for a vertuous wyfe to liue wyth a vicious husbande. For an honest woman to loue a dissolute man, or a wyse spouse to accept a foolishs mate. Yet notwithstanding, howe much more the husbande bee euill, and out of order, so much more is it the womans prayse, if shee loue him. And you men, as vntractable as you be, yet is it not possible, if your wyfes doe louingly imbrace you, though you cannot inforce your euill inclinations to repaye loue for looue agayne, yet can yee not well hate them, which is no small matter. I coulde recite diuers worthie examples as well of Romaine,   [   Examples of such as loued well their husbandes.  ] as Grecian Ladies, that haue so intirelye affected their lincked mates, that not only haue they indangered themselues in greate perills for their sakes, but haue also wyllingly spente their bloude to die with them. Plutarch reporteth, howe that the Lacedemonians, waging battayle against the Mimians,   [   A worthie example of the Mimian Ladies.  ] and by conquest getting ye vpper hande, tooke a number of them captiues, which they imprisoned, intending shortlye after to put them to a cruell death. The louing Wiues of those men, when they vnderstood, the wofull hap of their vnfortunate husbandes, came to the prisons, where they were, and with sorrowfull teares, and plaintes entreated the Iaylors, that they might haue recourse to speake with ye prisoners, which thing after long, and tedious sute, obtayned, they entred in, and after most louing imbracings, and lamentable bewaylings, these wyfes tooke on them their husbandes apparell, sending them out in their womanlye attire, with their faces couered, as the guise of the countrie was, who being taken for women, were let passe, and so escaped, leauing their wyfes in prison to die the death, at the appointed tyme, for their sakes. When the daye of execution was come, and the matter fully knowne, the Lacedemonians stoode in admiration, and gaue these faithfull harts high praise, and pardoning both them, and their husbandes, sent them home wyth great rewardes, to the incouragement of others, to tread the like steps of honest loue. Panthea,   [   Panthea.  ] when she hard that hir husband was slaine in battayle, ranne forthwith with a mourning hart to the doolefull place, where he lay, whom after she had bewayled hir fill, and had bathed hir selfe in his bloude, tooke the same vnhappie launce, wherewith he was slaine, and gored hir selfe to the hart. The lyke is reported of Porcia, Brutus wyfe. Martiall also wryteth, howe that Alcesta,   [   Porcia.  ] the wife of king Admetes, vnderstanding by the Oracle of Apollo,   [   If Alcesta be deade, good Ladie reuiue hir not againe.  ] that hir husbandes grieuous disease, wherewith he was sore payned, coulde not be cured, but by the bloude of a deare friend, kylled hir selfe, saying that Admetes had not a dearer friend, than shee was, which thing when the king hard, he finished his lyfe, with the lyke death, supposing it more better to couple themselues togither by one ende, than seperated, in teares to bewaile the lack of so true hearted, and louing spouse. In lyke maner Paulina the wyfe of Seneca,   [ Paulina.  ] when shee had intelligence that hir husbande by the commaundement of Nero had by cutting of his vaines bledde himselfe to death, did also cut hir owne vaynes, to accompanye hir good husbande in the lyke ende, had not Nero preuenting hir purpose, caused hir vaines to bee stopped vp againe. What shall I speake worthily of Triara,   [   Triara.  ] the sweete spouse of Lucius Vitellus, who so intirely loued hir husbande, that she accompanied him in the warres being a woman, aduenturing daungers with a manly courage, ryding alwayes next hir beloued mate, to garde him, and to be partaker of his chaunces, good, or bad. Did not Iulia,   [   Iulia.  ] Pompeius wife, expresse the signe of a most louing heart, who when she sawe hir husbandes coate brought into the City all imbrued with gory blood, fell into a sodaine sound, scriching most ruthfully, and bitterly crying: O Pompei, Pompei, farewell. And being with childe, brought forth in extreeme pangues hir vntimelye fruite, which immediately with ye mother, yeelded vp ye gasping breath, whose deaths were bewayled with many teares. Plinie the yonger, in an Epistle writeth of a fishers wife,   [   A notable example of a fishers wife.  ] that finding no meanes to cure an intollerable disease of hir husbandes, & sore lamenting his paines, that daylye increased, perswaded him, that one of them shoulde slay the other, and in the ende concluded, that they both ascended to the top of a high rocke, which hung ouer the sea, and being both cowpled togither, threwe themselues downe, and were drowned. I could occupie you, quoth the Lady Iulia, till to morrow this time, with lyke stories, of worthie women. But these may suffice, to shewe the loue of the wife to hir husbad, and to let you vnderstande also, Mayster Gualter, that there hath beene alwayes women as louing, as men. No doubt Madam, quoth he, ye loue passingly, when yee do loue, and you hate as extreemelye, when yee doe hate. Wherefore it were a goodly matter, if you coulde bring your married women vnto a meane. Not so, quoth the Lady Iulia, I will haue no meane in loue.   [   No meane in loue.  ] And when the woman hath thus grownded the perfite rootes of loue, and plantes this Friendly Flower, in a faythfull hart, she must be as curious as Maister Pedros good husbande in preseruing it against all tempestuous stormes, and from all venimous weedes. The greatest helpe whereto is shamefastnesse, which is of such power, and vertue,   [ Shamfastnesse.  ] that it sufficeth alone to defende it against all weathers. And if so be that there were but one onelye vertue in a woman, it might well be shamefastnesse. For as in a creature voyd of shame,   [   The shamelesse creature is voyde of all vertues.  ] there is nothing founde worthye of commendation: so in the Woman indued with that vertue, is not anything worthy of reprehension, & there is the roote of godlines, where springeth ye branch of shamefastnes, which is the onely defence that nature hath giue to women, to keepe their reputatio, to preserue their chastitie, to mainteine their honor, & to aduance their praise. How farre therefore are ye men ouerseene, when you onelye inquire of their beautye, substance, and parentage, leauing vertue beside, & that most excellent gift of shamefastnesse, which is the chiefest dowrye, the greatest inheritaunce, and the precious Iewell that a woman can bring with hir. There is another great mayntayner of this Flower,   [   Obedience. ] & that is the goodlye grace of obedience. For reaso it is that we obey our Husbandes. God commaundeth it, and we are bounde so to doe. I know not, quoth the Lady Isabella, what we are bounde to do, but as meete is it, that the husbande obey the wife, as the wife the husband, or at the least that there bee no superioritye betwene them, as the auncient philosophers haue defended. For women haue soules as wel as men, they haue wit as wel as men, and more apte for procreation of children, than men. What reason is it then, that they should be bound, whome nature hath made free? Naye, among the Achaians,   [ The Achaians.  ] wome had such soueraigntie, that whatsoeuer they commaunded, their Husbandes obeyed. Yea, Plutarch saith, that the man swept the house, drest the meate, and did all other necessaries, where the woman gouerning the house, and keping the money, aunswered all matters, and which woorse was, they corrected them at their discretio. What did shee, quoth Maister Gualter, & might she beate him too? Mary lo. Here is the matter, that some of our Dames in this Countrie take so much vppon them. They think belike that they be in Achaia. But sure if I had bene amongst those women: you would haue done, quoth the Ladie Isablla, as they did. For Dogs barke boldely at their owne maisters doore. Beleue not daughter, quoth the Lady Iulia, neither those ignorant Philosophers, nor these fonde customes. For contrary also to this,   [   Parthians, and Thratians.  ] the Parthians, & Thracians accounted not of their wiues, more than of slaues, so that after they had borne them a dosen children, or more, they sold the mothers at the common markets, or exchaunged them for yonger. Fye vpon that law, quoth the Lady Isabella.   [   The Numidians & Lydians. ] But what saye you to the custome which Dionysius Alicarnasseus, wryteth of the Numidians and Lydians, where the woman commaunded within doores, and the men without. Yea marie quoth the Ladye Aloisa, that was a iust law, where the commauding was equall. Not so, quoth the Lady Iulia. For though it were better than the other two: yet not tollerable amongst vs, neyther was the soueraignesse so equallye deuided, as you thinke. For if the woma keepe alwaies hir house, as duetie is, the man standeth euer at hir comaundement. For as long as she is within, though he commaund hir without, this lawe byndeth hir not to obey. Wherefore in my opinion al those Barbarian customes are to be disanulled, and cotemned of Christians. Ye say well, Madam, quoth M. Erasmus. For in deede both diuine, & humaine lawes, in our religion giueth the man absolute authoritie,   [   The man both by reason, and law, hath the soueraigntie ouer his wyfe.  ] ouer the woman in all places. And, quoth the Lady Iulia, as I sayde before, reason doth confirme the same, the man being as he is, most apt for the soueraignetie being in gouernement, not onely skill, and experience to be required, but also capacity to comprehende, wisdome to vnderstand, strength to execute, solicitude to prosecute, pacience to suffer, meanes to sustaine, and aboue all a great courage to accomplishe, all which are commonly in a man, but in a woman verye rare: Then what blame deserue those men that doe permit their wyues to rule all, and suffer themselues to be commaunded for company. A hard aduenture, quoth Mayster Gualter, hapneth to that man,   [   A harde aduenture hapneth to him that is matched with a shrew.  ] which is matched with a maisterly shrew. For she being once past shame, not onely blabbeth out all, that she knoweth, but thundereth oute that also, which hir mad head conceyueth, or hir fantasticall braine dreameth of, and yet will she maintaine, that she is neuer angrie, or speaketh without great cause. There be, quoth the Ladye Iulia, some such women, but I doe vtterly condemne them. For this maryed woman,   [   The woman must be obedient to hir husband  ] whome I haue taken vpon me to discribe, must of duetie be vnto hir husband in all things obedient, and therefore if he, sometimes moued, do chaunce to chide hir, she must forbeare. In doing whereof he shal neither eate ye more at his dinner, nor shee haue the lesse appetite to hir Supper. The wise woman must consider, that hir husband chydeth, eyther without reason, or hath good cause. If reason moue hym, then of dutie she is bound to obey, if otherwise, it is hir part to dissemble the matter. For in nothing can a wyfe shewe a greater wisedome, than in dissembling with an importunate husbande. Hir honestye, hir good nature, and hir prayse is shewed in nothing more, than in tolerating of an vndiscrete man, and to conclude, as the woman ought not to commaund the man, but to be alwaies obedient: so ought he not to suffer himselfe to be commaunded of his wife. Seneca, in his tragedies of this matter sheweth a notable example. In the warres of Mithridates, & the Romaines,   [   A notable example.  ] all the soldiours in Rome were commauded to be in redinesse, to attend vpon Silla the Consull. This edict being published, the officers came to an olde knights house, to will him to prepare himselfe. But hys wife withstood them, and sayd, that he was not at home, & that he shoulde not go. For quoth shee, though perchaunce he were able, yet being an olde Souldiour, and exempted from the warres, I will not giue him leaue. Whereat the officers being astonied, enformed the Senate thereof, who foorthwith banished the olde Knight, for suffering himselfe to bee commaunded by his wife, and hir they kept in prison during his exile for presumption. The maried woman, must be also verie carefull, and circumspect of hir good name. the flower of estimation, and the pearle of credit, which is so delicate a thing in a woman, that she must not onely be good, but likewise must apeere so. For you men are naturally so malicious, that you will iudge aswell of yt you suspect, as of that which you see. The chiefest way for a woman to preserue and maintaine this   [   The good married woma must be resident in hir owne house.  ] good fame, is to be resident in hir owne house. For an honest woman in sobernes, keeping well hir house, gayneth thereby great reputation, and if she be euill, it driueth away many euill occasions, and stoppeth the mouthes of the people. In keping at home, all things shall be better gouerned, hir husbandes hart better cheered, all euil suspicions depelled, angers aduoided, expences diminished, and the great excesse of apparell not required, wherein we are commonly so curious, that otherwise being naturally great sauers, onely therein are we as great wasters, which thing is aduoyded by the wyues honest keeping at home.   [   Wome art great wasters in apparell.  ] I cannot but maruaile, how a woman of estimation can delite in gadding abrode, to be a gossiper, hauing at home hir husbad to conferre with, hir children to instruct, hir family to looke vnto, hir kindred to please, and the euil tongues to appease, Seneca sayth that his aunt for sixtene yeares space, whiles hir husbande was in Egipt, neuer went out of hir owne house. Faunus king of the Aborigines, had a wife named Fauna,   [ Fauna.  ] who after shee was maried, would neuer looke vpon any man sauing hir husbande, in doing whereof, she gate such reputation, yt after hir death shee was honoured for a Goddesse. Licurgus commaunded that no woman, at anye tyme should go out of hir house, sauing at certaine festiuall dayes appointed. For the maried woman, saith he, hath nothing else to doe, but eyther in the temple to pray to the Gods, or at home to instruct hir children. My meaning is not in reciting these examples, to haue the maried wyfe continually lockt vp, as a cloystred Nonne, or Ancres, but to consider hereby, what respect she must haue in going abroade, and what a vertue it is to keepe well hir house. Lucretia the famous Romaine Ladye,   [   Lucretia  ] obteyned not so great praise in excelling others in bewtie, and parentage, as shee did in being founde at home a spinning, and carding with hir maydens, where as the other Romaine Matrones, were roming abrode in feasting, and banqueting, when their husbands came from ye warres to visite them. As the wife must be thus ware in going abroade: so must she be as carefull what is done at home,   [ The woman must auoyd suspicious companies.  ] on hir part not to sit ydlely, nor to permit any one suspiciously to come vnto hir, speciallye hir husband being not at home. Plutarch telleth of a custome among the Numidians, that their husbandes being abroade,   [   The Numidians.  ] the wiues kept alwayes their doores shut, and there was a lawe inuiolable, that who so euer knockt at such a dore, so shut, should therefore lose his hande. To be briefe, not onely in chastitie of bodye, but in honestie of behauiour, and talke, doth the womans honour, and good name consist, and is also mainteyned. These bee on the womans behalfe, the greatest nourishers, of this matrimoniall Flower, wherewith being adorned she shall please God, content hir husbande, and get honour of all persons, without which, all trim attyre, all outwarde paintings, and garnishings are nothing. For what auayleth it a man to haue his wife of excellent bewtie, great possessions, good parentage, and wel friended, if therwithal she be shameles, prowde, curst, and disolute. Also for the perfiting of this maried woman,   [   The maried woman must be skilfull in huswyfery.  ] certeyne outward qualities are to be required, as to looke well to hir huswifery, and not onely to see that all be done, but that all be well done, to the contentation of hir husbande, euen in thinges of least importaunce, and to occupie hir selfe accordingly,   [   The woman must not be ydell.  ] not to sit alwayes ydle, but to spende hir time in some profitable exercise, as with hir needle, and rocke, or suche otherlike, which in times past, haue beene in great reputation amongest the greatest Ladies, sought wooll, & flax, and wrought by the counsayle of hir handes. It is also a great want in a woman, if she be vnskilfull in dressing of meate.   [ Cookerie.  ] For it is the chiefest point of a houswife to cherishe hir husbande, who being sicke, will haue the best appetite to the meate of hys wyues dressing, and if shee then cherishe hym well, hee will loue hir the better euer after. Stratomacha ye wyfe of king Deiotarus,   [ Stratomacha.  ] whensoeuer he fell sicke, was his cooke, his phisition, and his chirurgion, which worthie qualities so esteemed of suche a noble Queene, why should not the married woman labour to haue them, seing that thereby, she shal enlarge ye Flower of Friendship betwene hir & hir husbad, whose face must be hir daylie looking glasse,   [   The face of the husbad, the looking glasse of the wyfe.  ] wherein she ought to be alwayes prying, to see whe he is merie, when sad, when content, and when discotent, wherto she must alwayes frame hir owne countenance. Why, quoth the Ladie Isabell, what if he bee mad, or dronke, must we then shew the like countenance. If you perceiue him in such case, quoth the Ladie Iulia, speake him fayre, and flatter him, till you get hym to bed. and there reprehende him louingly, with kissing and imbrasing, that he maye perceyue it to come of pure loue, more than of malice, for better were it to conuert him louingly in gentlenesse, than to controle him frowardly in shrewdnesse. It is most true, quoth M. Pedro. For in this point, we are not muche vnlyke to wylde and sauage beasts, as the lyon, or the vnicorne, which by force can not bee tamed, but by humilitie,   [   Men must be reformed by gentlenesse.  ] and gentle meanes, so that who will reclayme vs, must auoyde all contrarying, and vexation of minde, whereof I could tell you a pretie story, that of late yeares happened to a gentlewoma, that by suche gentle wyles reclaymed hir husband, being farre gone, but I shoulde iniurie the Lady Iulia, to entermeddle so farre in hir charge. Not so, quoth she, but you shall greatly pleasure mee therein, wherfore I pray you let vs heare it.   [   Mayster Pedro telleth a prety tale howe a woman reclaimed hir husband.  ] There was, quoth he, a Gentleman of good calling, that greatly delighted in hunting, who on a daye, neere to a little village encountred with a poore Wydowes daughter, a simple wench, but somewhat snowie fayre, whose gaye eyes, had so intrapped thys folye hunter, that vnder the colour thereof, he oftentimes resorted vnto hir, and laye diuers nightes out of hys owne house. When his wife, being both fayre, wise, and vertuous, vnderstoode thereof, as well by his demeanour, as by other coniectures, lyke a wise woman she dissembled the matter, and kept it secrete to hir selfe, not altering eyther countenance, or conditions towardes hym, but on a time, when she was assured, that he was gone another waye, hied hir to the house, where she learned of the yong woman the whole circumstaunce, fayning hir selfe to be his sister, and when she had viewed the chambers, and bedding, wherein he laye, which was verie homely, she returned home againe and trust vp a good bed, well furnished, and hangings, with other necessaries, which as secretly as she coulde, conuayde thither, desiring both the olde woman, and hir daughter to be good to hir brother, and see that he wanted nothing. The next day, came this gentlema home, and according to his custome, went a hunting to his old haunt, where he seing this newe furniture, marueyled much thereat, and inquired what the matter ment. The old mother aunswered, that a sister of his had bene there, and wylling them to cherishe hym well, gaue them besides certaine money. The gentleman vnderstanding then how the world went, and knowing it to bee hys Wyfes doing, returned foorthwith home, and demaunded of hir the truth, and what shee ment thereby, who denyed it not. The cause why, quoth shee, I sent suche furniture thither, was, bicause I vnderstanding howe daintilye you were accustomed to lie at home, doubted you might by suche harde entertainement haue gotten some harme. He should, quoth the Ladie Aloisa, haue had a bed of nettles, or thornes, had it bene to mee. For sure I would not haue beene the cherisher of my husband in his vnthriftinesse. And so should you haue made him worse, quoth mayster Pedro. But it happened muche better to this gentlewoman. For he being ouercome by hir vertue, liued content with hir euer after. This storie, quoth the Ladye Iulia, hath well holpen me forwarde, for the which I thanke mayster Pedro, & now to continue my purpose, I saye, that verie circumspect, and warie must the woman bee in reprehending of hir husbande in suche great matters. For in things of small importance, the best wil be for hir to dissemble, noting diligently the time, the place, and the maner in doing. The best tyme is, when anger, and malincholy raigneth not, and in any case, let no person be in place, to heare hir. For it is a wise mans griefe, to beare the open reproofe of his wife. The best place, is, as I sayde, when they are both in bed, a place appointed for reconcilementes, and renuing of loue, and friendship, let your words not be spitefull, but louing, kinde, gentle, merie, and pleasaunt. For though the woman euerie where, ought to be merie with hir mate: yet muste she chiefely in bed, thereby to shewe what loue shee beareth him, where she maye lawfully poure out into his bosome all the thoughts, and secrets of hir louing hart. But now to conclude, and knit vp the married womans office in mainteyning and conseruing this Flower of Friendship in holye Matrimonie, she must being of hir selfe weake, and vnable besides hir owne diligence, put hir whole trust in the first,   [ The maried woma must put hir trust in God.  ] and principall author thereof, whome if she serue faythfullye, wyll no doubt, make thys Flower to spring vp in hir aboundantly. For daylie we maye see a foule deformed woman, that truely feareth, and serueth God, so well beloued of hir husbande, as if she were the fayrest of bewtie in a Countrie, and women voyde of Gods fauour, and grace, what qualities soeuer they haue besides, seldome, or neuer enioye they the happie estate of Matrimonie, nor shall they euer attaine to the sweete, and perfite smell of thys moste delectable Flower of spousall amitie, and friendship. I thinke verily, quoth maister Pedro, if eyther Medea, or Circe coulde haue obtayned this Flower, as cunning inchaunters as they were, to haue tempered theyr charmes withall, Circes had not so soone lost hir Vlysses, nor Medea forgone hir welbeloued Iason. Herewith the whole assembly rysing vp, gaue the Ladye Iulia hir deserued prayse, and thankes, and the Ladie Aloisa laying a side hir soueraigntie, went all out into the Garden, where wee roming about the pleasaunt allies, discoursed a newe of that which had beene sayde, both by the Lady Iulia and of mayster Pedro, which was very well boren away. But the Ladie Isabella, who in this seconde debating fell to my lot, at our departing required me for hir sake, to penne the whole discourse of this flagrat Flower. For quoth she, your quiet silence both these dayes, assureth mee, that you haue well considered thereof, and therewith the reast of the ladies ioyned with hir, at whose importunate request, with the helpe of my friend Maister Pedro, and others, I haue aduentured to published this Discourse. FINIS. Imprinted at London by Henry Denham, dwelling in Paternoster Rovve, at the signe of the Starre. Anno Domini 1568\.  Cum Priuilegio.  
