 Salutem Plurimam in Christo lesu  . That part of your letters from Hatfield, decimonono Octob. renewing a most pleasaunt memory of our fredly fellowship together, & full of your wonted good will towardes me: I aunswered immediatly from Spires by Fraunces the post: whiche letter if it be not yet come to your hand, ye might haue heard tell of it in M. Secretary Cicels chamber in the Court. As concernyng the other part of your letter, for your wish, to haue bene with me, in this mine absence from my countrey: and for your request, to be made partaker by my letters of the sturre of these times here in Germany. Surely I would you had your wish: for then should not I now nede to bungle vp yours so great a request, when presently you should haue sene with much pleasure, which now peradueture you shall read with some doubt, lesse thynges may encrease by writyng which were so great in doyng, as I am more afrayd to leaue behind me much of the matter, then to gather vp more then hath sprong of the trouth. Your request conteineth few wordes but coprehendeth both great and diuers matters. As first the causes of the open inuasion by the Turke: of the secret workyng for such soddeyne brechesse particularly why Duke Octauio, the Prince of Salerne, Marches Albert, and Duke Maurice brake so out with the Emperour, which were all so fast knit vnto hym as the bondes of affinitie, loyaltie, bloud, and benefites could assure him of them: Octauio being his sonne in law, the Prince one of hys priuy chamber, Marches Albert hys kynsman, and Duke Maurice so inhaunsed with honor and enriched with benefites by hym, as the Duke could not haue wished greater in hope, then the Emperour performed in deede. Here is stuffe plenty to furnish well vp a trimme history if a workeman had it in handlyng. When you and I read Liuie together if you do remember, after some reasonyng we cocluded both what was in our opinion to be looked for at his hand that would well and aduisedly write an history: First, point was, to write nothyng false: next, to be bold to say any truth, wherby 1 aesar is read to his great prayse, and Iouius the Italian to hys iust reproch. Then to marke diligently the causes, cousels, actes, and issues in all great attemptes: And in causes, what is iust or vniust: in cousels, what is purposed wisely or rashly: in actes, what is done couragiously or fayntly: And of euery issue, to note some generall lesson of wisedome & warines, 2 Phillip Comines in French haue done the duties of wyse and worthy writers. Diligence also must be vsed in kepyng truly the order of tyme: and describyng lyuely, both the site of places and nature of persons not onely for the outward shape of the body: but also for the in ward dispositio of the mynde as Thucidides doth 3 excellently, which obseruation is chiefly to be marked in hym. And our Chaucer doth the same, very praise worthely: marke hym well and conferre hym with any other 4 that writeth of in our tyme in their proudest toung whosoeuer lyst. The stile must be alwayes playne and open: yet sometime higher and lower as matters do ryse and fall: for if proper and naturall wordes, in well ioyned sentences do lyuely expresse the matter, be it troublesome, quyet, angry or pleasant, A man shal thincke not to be readyng but present in doyng of the same. And herein 5 Liuie of all other in any toung, by myne opinio carieth away the prayse. the thyrd, doth in most part I beleue of all these pointes so content all men, as if the rest of our story of England were so done, we might well compare with Fraunce, Italy, or Germany or in that behalfe. But see how the pleasant remembraunce of our old talke together hath caried me farther then I thought to go. And as for your request to know the cause and maner of these late sturres here ye shall not looke for such precise order now in writyng, as we talked on then. No it is not all one thing to know perfectly by reading and to performe perfectly in doyng I am not so vnaduised to take so much vpo me, nor you so vnfrendly to looke for so much from me. But that you may know that I haue not bene altogether idle in this my absence, and that I will not come home as one that can say nothing of that he hath sene and heard abroad: I will homely and rudely (yet not altogether disorderly) part priuately vnto you such notes of affaires as I priuately marked for my selfe: which I either felt and saw, or learned in such place and of such persos as had willes to seeke for, and wayes to come by, and wittes to way the greatest matters that were to be marked in all these affaires. For no wieke almost hath past in the which there hath not commonly come to my hand for the most part of the notable thynges that haue bene attempted in Turky, Hungary, Italy, Fraunce, and Germany. In declaryng to you these thyngs I will obserue onely the first two pointes of our wont communication: that is to my writyng I will set forward nothyng that is false, nor yet keepe backe any thyng that is true. For I playing no part of no one side, but sittyng downe as indifferent looker on, neither Imperiall nor Frech, but flat English do purpose with troth to report the matter: And seyng I shall lyue vnder such a Prince, as kyng Edward is, and in such a countrey as Englad is (I thanke God) I shall haue neither neede to flatter the one side for profite, nor cause to feare the other side for displeasure. Therefore let my purpose of reportyng the troth as much content you, as the meane handlyng of the matter may mislike you. Yet speakyng thus much of trouth, I meane not such a hid trouth as was onely in the brest of Monsieur d'Arras on the Emperours side, or in Baron Hadeck on Duke Maurice side, with whom and with on other of his counsell he onely conferred all his purposes three yeares before he brake out with ye Emperour: but I meane such a troth as by conference and common cosent amongest all the Ambassadors and Agentes in this Court and other witty & indifferent heades beside was generally conferred and agreed vpo. What better comoditie to know the trouth any writer in Greeke Latine or other toung hath had, I can not perceiue, except onely Xenophon, C aesar, and Phillip Comines: which two first worthy writers wrote their owne actes so wisely, and so without all suspicion of parcialitie, as no ma hetherto by mine opinion hath borne him selfe so vprightly in writyng the histories of others: The thyrd hauyng in a maner ye like oportunitie hath not deserued lyke commendations, at least as I suppose. Englad hath matter & Englad hath me furnished with all abilitie to write: who if they would might bryng both lyke prayse vnto them selues, & like profite to others, as these two noble me haue done. They lay for their excuse the lacke of leysure which is true in deede: But if we cosider the great affaires of Caesar we may iudge hee was worthy to winne all praise that was so willing & wittie to winne such time when his head & his handes night and day were euer most full, would to God that these our me as they are ready to prayse hym were euen as willyng to follow hym, and so to wynne like prayse them selues. 
