 familiaritie borne towardes mee. An other (of no lesse weight) the exceding zeale and fauour that you beare to good letters. The which (I agree with you) do no lesse bloome and appeare in pleasaunt ditties or compendious Sonets, deuised by green youthful capacities, than they do fruitefully florish vnto perfection in the ryper workes of graue and grayheared writers. For as in the last, the yonger sort maye make a mirror of perfecte life: so in the first, the most frosty bearded Philosopher , maye take iust occasion of honest recreation, not altogether without holsome lessons, tending to the reformation of manners. For who doubteth but that Poets in their most feyned fables and imaginations, haue metaphorically set forth vnto vs the right rewardes of vertues, and the eue punnishments for vices? Marie in deede I may not compare Pamphlets vnto Poems, neither yet may iustly aduant for our natiue countrimen, that they haue in their verses hitherto (translations excepted) deliuered vnto vs any such notable volume, as haue bene by Poets of antiquitie, left vnto the posteritie. And the more pitie, that amongst so many toward wittes no one hath bene hitherto encouraged to followe the trace of that worthy and famous Knight Sir Geffrey Chaucer , and after many pretie deuises spent in youth, for the obtayning a worthles victorie, might consume and consummate his age in discribing the right pathway to perfect felicitie, with the due preseruation of the same. The which although some may iudge ouer graue a subiect to be handled in stile metrical, yet for that I haue found in the verses of eloquent Latinists, learned Greeks,  & pleasant Italians , sundrie directions, whereby a man may be guided toward thattayning of that vnspeakeable treasure, I haue thus farre lamented, that our countreymen, haue chosen rather to winne a passouer praise by the wanton penning of a few louing layes, than to gayne immortall fame, by the Clarkely handlinge of so profitable a Theame. For if quicknes of inuencion, proper vocables, apt Epythetes, and store of monasillables may help a pleasant brayne to be crowned with Lawrell. I doubt not but both our countreymen & countrie language might be entronised amonge the olde foreleaders vnto the mount Helicon . But nowe let mee returne to my first purpose, for I haue wandred somwhat beside the path, and yet not cleane out of the way. I haue thought good (I say) to present you with this writte booke, wherein you shall find a number of Sonets , layes, letters, Ballades, Rondlets, verlayes and verses, the workes of your friend and myne Master F. I . and diuers others, the which when I had with long trauayle confusedly gathered together, I thought it then Opere precium to reduce them into some good order. The which I haue done according to my barreyne skill in this written Booke, commending it vnto you to read and to peruse, and desiring you as I onely do aduenture thus to participate the sight therof vnto your former good will, euen so that you will by no meanes make the same common: but after your owne recreation taken therin yt you wil safely redeliuer vnto me the originall copie. For otherwise I shall not onely prouoke all the aucthors to be offended with mee, but farther shall leese the opertunitie of a greater matter, halfe and more graunted vnto mee alreadie, by the willing consent of one of them. And to be playne (with you my friend) he hath written (which as farre as I can learne) did neuer yet come to the reading or perusinge of any man but himselfe: two notable workes. The one called, the Sundry lots of loue . The other of his owne inuencion entituled. The clyming of an Eagles neast . These thinges (and especially the later) doth seeme by the name to be a work worthy the reading. And the rather I iudge so because his fantasie is so occupied in the same, as that contrary to his wonted vse, he hath hitherto withhelde
