 iudgement iangle, vvithout reason rage and some, as if some instinct of Poeticall spirite had navvly rauished them aboue the meanenesse of commen capacitie. And being in the middest of all theyr brauery, sodenly eyther for vvant of matter, or of ryme, or hauing for gotten theyr former conceipt, they seeme to be so pained and traueiled in theyr remembrance, as it vvere a woman in childebirth or as that same Pythia, vvhen the traunce came vpon her. Os rabidum fera corda domans &c. Nethelesse let them a Gods name feede on theyr ovvne folly, so they seeke not to darken the beames of others glory. As for Colin, vnder vvhose person the Authour selfe is shadovved, hovv furre he is from such vaunted titles and glorious shovves, both him selfe sheweth, vvhere he sayth. Of Muses Hobbin. I conne no skill.     And, Enough is me to paint out my vnrest, &c. And also appeareth by the basenesse of the name, vvherein, it semeth, he chose rather to vnfold great matter of argumet couertly, then professing it, not suffice thereto according ly, vvhich moued him rather in Ælogues, then other wise to vvrite, doubting perhaps his habilitie, which he little needed, or mynding to furnish our tongue vvith this kinde, wherein it faulteth, or follovving the exampel of the best & most auncient Poetes, which deuised this kind of wryting, being both so base for the matter, and homely for the manner, at the first to trye theyr habilities? and as young birdes, that be nevvly crept out of the nest, by little first to proue theyr tender vvyngs, before they make a greater flyght. So flevv Theocritus, as you may perceiue he vvas all ready full fledged. So flew Virgile, as not yet vvell feeling his vvinges So flevv Mantuane, as being not full fornd. So Petrarque. So Boccace; So Marot, Sanazarus, and also diuers other excellent both Italian and French Poetes, vvhose ioting this Author euery vvhere follovveth, yet so as few, but they be wel sented can trace him out, So finally flyeth this our nevv Poete, as a bird, vvhose principals be scarcegrovven out, but yet as that in time shall be hable to keepe wing with the best. Novv as touching the generall dryft and purpose of his Æglogues, I mind not to say much, him selfe labouring to conceale it. Onely this appeareth, that his vnstayed yougth had long vvandred in the common Labyrinth of Loue, in vvhich time to mitigate and allay the heate of his passion, or els to vvarne (as he sayth) the young shepheards is his equalls and companions of his vnfortunate folly, he compiled these xij. Æglognes, vvhich for that they be proportioned to the state of the xij. monethes, he termeth the SHEPHEARDS CALENDAR, applying an olde name to a nevv vvorke. Here unto haue I added a certain Glosse or scholion for thexposition of old vvordes & harder phrases: vvhich maner of glosing and commenting, vvell I vvote, vvil seeme straunge & rare in our tongue: yet for somuch as I knew many excellent & proper deuises both in wordes and matter vvould passe in the speedy course of reading, either as vnknovve, or as not marked, and that in this kind, as in other vve might be equal to the learned of other nations, I thought good to take the paines vpon me, the rather for that by meanes of some familiar acquaintaunce I vvas made privie to his counsell and secret meaning in them, as also in sundry other vvorks of his vvich albeit I knovv he nothing so much hateth, as to promulgate, yet thus much haue I aduentured vpon his frendship, him selfe being for long time surre estraunged, hoping that this vvill the rather occasion him, to put forth diuers other excellent vvorks of his, vvhich slepe in silence, as his Dreames, his Legendes, his Court of Cupide, and sondry others; vvhose commendations to set out; vvere verye
