 of holy scripture, that Satan is displeased, if wee heare the word preached or read, and also that he is so well contented, when as we neither heare nor reade the word of God, but continue in ignorance. his nature by that our Sauiour Christ saith: Ye do not vnderstande my talke, because ye cannot heare my word: Ye are of your father the deuil, and the lust of your father 18 ye will do. &c. Also in these words of Christ: When the vncleane spirit is gone out of a man, he walketh through drie places, seeking 19 my house whence I came out, & when he commeth, hee findeth it swept and garnished: then goeth he, and taketh to him self seuen other spirits worse than him selfe, & they enter in, & dwell there: so the last end of that man is worse than the first: therfore S. Peter 21 saith: Your aduersarie the Deuil goeth about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may deuour. &c. S. Paule saith: If our 22 Gospell be then hid, it is hid to them that are lost, in whome the god of this world hath blinded the mindes, that the light of the glorious Gospell of Christ should not shine &c. Origen sayeth: D aemonibus est super omnia genera tormentorum, & super omnes 23 poenas, siquem videant verbo Dei operam studiis dare, scientiam diuin ae legis, & mysteria Scripturarum intentis perquirentem. In hoc eorum omnis flamma est: in hoc vtuntur incendie Possident enim omnes, qui versantur in ignorantia : that is, Unto the deuils it is a torment, aboue all kindes of tormentes, & a payne aboue all paines, if they see anie man reading, or hearing the worde of God, and with feruent studie searching the knowledge of Gods lawe, and the mysteries & secrets of the scriptures. Herein standeth all the flame of the deuils: in this fire they are tormented. For they are seased and possessed of all them, that remaine in ignorance. Thus you haue heard, and may easily perceiue, that this is he, who (by his ministers the Papistes) shut vp the kingdome 24 is in Christ, he can transforme him selfe into an Angel of light. This is he, that soweth Darnell amongest the Lordes wheate: this is that enimie, that commeth and taketh away the word of God out of our heartes, lest we should beleeue, and so be saued. declare it to me. how he can abide no man for to beare the word of 27 God, & obey it, knowing wel that faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the word of God, & that they cannot heare but by the preaching, &c. therfore he practiseth by all wayes & meanes to make vs deafe, that we may not heare the preaching, and so beleeue, 28 & be saued. Therfore my sonne marke this well, that when as you, or such others, doe litle delite, or lesse regard to heare 29 ye obey, whether it be of sinne vnto death, or of obedience vnto righteousnesse. Thus you see what an enimie Satan is to mans saluation, and his wages that he giueth, is eternall death. the worde of God: reason we are accustomed cotinually to sinne. Secondlie, by a vaine hope and trust in our selues & our free wil. Thirdlie, by an Epicureal & worldly care. Fourthly, by encouraging our selues to doe wickedly, by the examples of other men that daily offend. Fifthlie, by pleasures, pastimes, & such like. Sixthlie, by his owne craftinesse and subtiltie. Seuenthly, by rearing vp slaunders vpon the preachers of the word of God. Eightlie, by open persecution, &c. These are the wayes and practises that commonly he vseth. drawe vs fro hearing the word of God. Yet hitherto you haue not expressed to me whether there be any danger or punishment threatened against such, as will not heare Gods word. soone. to auoide the daunger that may ensue vpon me, in not hearing the sermons. Contraries being set one against the other, appeare more euident, so by the curses, you may the better cosider of the blessings. the voice of the Lord thy God, all these curses shall come vppon thee, & ouertake thee: Cursed shalt thou be in the towne, & cursed in the field, cursed is thy basket & store, cursed shal be the fruit of thy bodie, and the fruite of thy land, the increase of thy kine, and 38 thee, cursing, trouble, & shame, in al that which thou settest thine hande to do, vntil thou be destroyed, & perish quicklie. The Lord shall make the pestilence cleaue vnto thee, vntill hee hath consumed thee from the land, the Lord shal smite thee with a cosumption, and with the feuer, and with a burning ague, and with feruent heate, and with the sworde, and with it lasting, and with myldewe. &c. as in that chapter you may reade throughly, wherin you shall finde most terrible plagues vpon those, that are contemners and disobeyers of God & his worde. In Samuel you may reade also, that Saul was reproued for this fault, and loste 41 his kingdome for it. Hath the Lord (saith Samuell) as great pleasure in burnt offrings & sacrifices, as when the voyce of the 42 hearke is better than the fat of Rammes: Because thou hast cast away the worde of God, therefore he hath cast away thee from 44 being king. Salomon saith, Because I haue called and ye refused, I haue stretched out my hande and none would regarde, but ye haue despised all my counsels, and would none of my correction. I will laugh at your destruction, & mocke when feare commeth. Then shall they cal vpon me, but I will not answere, they shall seeks me earely, but they shall not finde me, beeause they hated knowledge, and did not choose the feare of the Lorde, they would none of my counsell. Therefore shall they eate the fruite of their owne way, & be filled with their owne deuises. Again he saith: He that turneth away his eare from hearing the lawe, euen 45 his prayer shalbe abhominable. Reade Ieremie, & see what plagues came vppon the people, for their neglecting of Gods word, Ezechiel saith, That a booke was deliuered him (against 46 and frame their liues answerable to it) which was writte within and without. Lamentations, and mournings, and woe. They 48 against them, that none of them which were bidde, shal taste of his supper. He saieth also, That the kingdome of God shalbe taken from you, and shalbe giuen to a nation whiche shall bring fruites thereof. Also you may perceiue by Christes weeping ouer Jerusalem, when he prophesied of their destruction, for not 50 comming to him when he called, and for killing his Prophetes, who were sent to call them to repentance: howe wrathful Gods indignation is against all such. &c. Very well did S. Paul say: 51 See that ye despise not him that speaketh: for if they escaped not, which refused him that spake on earth, much more shall we not escape, if we turne away from him that speaketh from heauen. 52 posteapeccantibus poena : The greater benefites we receiue (at Gods handes) and doe abuse them, or not regarde them, the greater punishment shall fall vpom them afterward. heart and conscience verie diepelie. and entreth through (saith S. Paule) euen to the deuiding asunder of the soule and the spirit, and of the iointes, & the marie, and is a discerner of the thoughtes & intents of the heart: Whereby you see that it woundeth mortally the rebellious, but in the elect, it killeth the old man, that they should liue vnto God. for feare. If we do abhorre and feare the punishment, lette vs also abhorre and feare the cause of punishment (which is sinne.) great danger, that contemptuouslie refuse to heare the word of God, when it is preached. qui verbum Dei negligenter audierit, qu am ille qui corpus Christi indigne sumit : that is, He is no lesse guiltie that negligentlie heareth the worde of God, than he that eateth vnworthily 56 the bodie of Christ. Saint Cyrill saith: If wee doubt of them that heare the word preached, what shall wee doe of them, 57 that doe neuer heare the worde preached at all: Ignorantia in eis qui intelligere noluerunt, sine dubitatione 58 peccatum est: in eis autem qui non potuerunt, p aena peccati. Ergo in vtriusque non est iusta excusatio, sed iusta damnatio : Ignorance in them, that would not vnderstand, without doubt is sinne; in them that could not vnderstande, it is the punishment of sinne. For in either of them there is no iust excusation but iust damnation. Therefore was it called the mother (not of devotion, 59 as the Papistes tearme it) but of all mischiefe and vice. But we may say of our aduersaries the Papistes, as Iren aeus said against the Valentinian heretikes: Veritatis ignorantiam ,  60 cognitionem vocant : Ignorance of the trueth, & blindnesse, they call knowledge. contrarie, and thinke no offence lesse, nay, that it is no offence at all, to absent them selues from the Sermons, and neuer scarce come to the Temple at prayer, hauing no iust (but rather vniust) occasions to followe their owne pleasures in whatsoeeuer, and yet boldly wil say and affirme (as I my self haue heard them) they are Gospellers and Protestantes, and do beleeue verie well in God, and knowe as much as the Preacher can, or is able to say, or teache them. 61 into his kingdome, nor euerie one that can saye the Lords praier, the Bileefe, & the ten commandements, is a good Protestant, but they that do the will of our heauenly father. So the Jewes bragged that they had Abraham to their father, and 62 that they were not borne of fornication, but that they had one father, which is God: yet Christ pronounceth, that they are of their father the Deuill, for his works they did. And amongst all the workes, Christ speaketh of this sinnefull worke of Satan, which was their bragging, that they were Gods children, & yet 63 would not heare Gods worde. But to those shalbe saide: What art thou that takest my couenant in thy mouth, and hatest to be reformed, & hast cast my wordes behind thee: &c. Although these 64 men can saye well, yet (for that they shewe not obedience to their heauenlie father, that sayeth: This is my onelie begotten sonne, heare him) he wil destroy them with the hypocrites, that professe they knowe God, but by workes doe denie him, and are 65 simulantes fidem, non subditi sunt fidei, sibiq fidem 67 ipsi potius constituunt, qu am accipiunt : that is, There are manie that counterfeite faith, and yet they are not subiect or obedient to the (true) faith: these men do rather prescribe to themselues a faith, than to receiue the (true) faith and religion. faith notwithstanding. Quomodo dicit se credere in Christum, qui non facit, quod Christus sacere pr aecepit ? How can he say, that hee beleeueth in 68 Christ, that doeth not that, whiche Christ hath commaunded: Whereby you may see, how wide these people are from true religion. It was well said of S. Augustine, Constat fidem stultam 69 non sol um minime prodesse, sed etiam obesse: It is certaine that a foolish faith not onely doeth no good, but also hurteth. Therefore (if you and they repent not) ye shall one day feele the iust reward thereof: when in your torments and endlesse paynes ye 70 shalbe forced, with the wicked in hell, to crie and say: We haue erred from the way of trueth, and haue wearied our selues in 71 through daungerous wayes: but the way of the Lorde we haue not knowne. What hath pride done to vs? or what profit hath the pompe of riches brought vs? we ought to heare and reade Gods holy word? the commandement of almightie God our heauenly 73 father, which saith: ye shall walke after the Lorde your God and feare him, and shall keepe his commaundements, and hearken 74 vnto his voyce. Againe, The Lorde thy God will rayse vp vnto thee a Prophete like vnto me, from among you, euen of thy brethren, 75 vnto him shalt thou hearken. &c. This is my welbeloved sonne, heare him, &c. He that heareth you, heareth me, & he that 76 eternall life: and they are they, which testifie of me. &c. The second cause is, the ende that we were created and redeemed for, that is, to learne to know God, to honour him, worship 81 hunc autem conditum esse propter Deum, hoc est, ad agnoscendum & glorificandum Deum. &c. All thinges were 83 they are Gods Againe: Whatsoeuer ye do, do all to the glorie of God. we knowe nothing, nor can perceiue anie thing, as of our selues, without the helpe of Gods spirit, and the word of his promise. 89 Iren aeus saith: C um impossibile esset sine Deo discere Deum, per verbum docet Deus homines scire Deum : When it was impossible to knowe God without God, God by his word teacheth 90 men to know God. So Dauid saith: That a yong man shall redresse his way, by ruling him selfe according to Gods worde: 91 His word is a lanterne to our feete, and a light to our pathes. &c. The lawe of the Lord is perfect, conuerting the soule, the testimonie of the Lord is sure, and giueth wisdome vnto the simple: the comandements are pure, & giue light vnto the eyes: by them is thy seruant made circumspect, & in keeping of them there is 92 great reward. S. Paule saith: Whatsoeuer things are written afore time, are written for our learning, that we, through partience and comfort of the Scriptures, might haue hope. Againe: 93 The whole Scripture is giuen by inspiration of God, & is profitable to teach, to improue, to correct, and to instruct in righteousnesse, that the man of God may be absolute, being made perfect 94 teach them that are ignorant, to reproue and couince them that speake against the faith, to correct sinners, to instruct those that 96 salutem, totum iam impletum est in Scripturis: qui ignarus est, inueniet ibi quod discat, qui contumax est & peccator, inueniet futuri iudicii flagella, qu aetimeat, qui labor at, inueniet ibi glorias & promissiones vitae aeternae. Whatsoeuer is sought for saluation, is wholie conteyned & fulfilled in the scriptures: he that is ignorant, shall finde there what he ought to learne, he that is a stubborne and disobedient sinner, shall finde there scourges of the iudgement to come, which shall make him feare, he that laboureth and is oppressed, shall finde there promises and glorie of eternall life. when we talked of Gods curses and plagues. Christ saith himselfe, this is the codemnation, that light is come into the world, and men loued darknesse rather than light, because their deedes 99 were euill. &c. Thus you haue heard the causes, why wee ought to heare sermons preached by those, that preach Christ truly, and to reade the holie Scriptures. necessitie to be considered of all men. you aunswere me to these questions, which I shall demaunde of you. forgetfull of the benefites purchased for vs, by the precious bodie and blood of our sauiour Iesus Christ. perceiue you haue read the Scriptures, and haue some knowledge of Gods will, and therefore sith you knowe your maisters will, and doe it not, you shalbe beaten with manie stripes. to be hearers onelie? selues. For if anie heare the word, and doe it not, he is like vnto a man, that beholdeth his naturall face in a glasse: For when he hath considered him selfe, he goeth his way, and forgetteth immediatly, what manner of one he was, &c. S. Paule also saieth? 105 The hearers of the Lawe are not righteous before God, but the doers of the Lawe. We are (saieth he) his workemanship 106 created in Christ Iesu vnto good workes, which God hath ordeined, that we should walke in them. Herein (saieth Christ) is 107 Dei, & obseruant eum : Blessed are they that heare the word 112 is, our faith and religion) to shine to the worlde, that the worlde may see our good workes, and glorifie our heauenlie father, &c. Whereby we may see, that wee ought, and must needes haue, with hearing, doing: with faith, workes: with doctrine, life: with knowledge, practise: with science, zeale: with professing, expressing: with hearing, keeping: with wordes, deedes: with talking, walking. So that these must needes dwell together in one house, as Marie and Martha, two sisters, which ought to be 113 tanquam comites indiuidu ae. He that hath my commaundements 114 serisat in vita: qui habet in sermonibus, & seruat in moribus: qui habet in audiendo, & seruat in faciendo, aut qui habet in faciendo, & seruat in perseuerando, ipse est qui diligit me. He that hath (my word) in his memorie, and keepeth it in life: he that hath it in wordes, and keepeth it in manners: he that hath it in hearing, and keepeth it in doing: or he that hath it in doing, and keepeth it in perseuering and continuing: hee it is that loueth me. You see then, that wee must not onelie be hearers, but also doers of the worde. It shall not be asked (at the dreadfull daye 116 nihil est, si non auditionem fructus sequatur : To heare the trueth is nothing, vnlesse there followe fruites of our hearing. Therfore we must be that good ground wherin the seed of Gods 121 Libertine doctrine, to giue a carnall libertie to men, to doe and live as they liste, or that all workes, fasting, prayers, almes deedes, obedience &c. are ouerthrowne or denied thereby, as the Popes Catholikes haue and doe report. 128 confirmed all godly life, and good workes. But this hath beene alwayes the practise of Satan & his Ympes, falslie to report of this doctrine, as we read in the holy Scriptures. pray you giue me to vnderstand, what he was, that preached this day at our Church: and therewith he is a great enimie to sinne and vice, which nowe reigneth too too much amongest all estates and degrees, and a great friende to vertue and true religion. worde and sacraments, so as they may builde vp Gods Church, both with doctrine and conuersation of life. 138 may shewe them selues to the world, an ensample in word, in conuersation, in loue, in spirit, in faith, and in purenesse, and that they shewe themselues Ianternes of light, and ensamples 139 and integritie. &c. that I had not been at it: but my businesse was such, as by no meanes I could be there. and put off for that present, vnto another time? I pray you, may I be so bold as to understande of you, what this great businesse was, that thus hindered you from hearing so notable and worthie a sermon, as was preached this morning? whatsoeuer it was, I put you out of doubt, it was about no matters of anie common wealth. house. that this morning I could scarse hold open my eyes for sleepe, and therefore was fayne for to recouer my lost sleepe this forenoone. rest, and sleepe when he pleaseth? orderly, that he may the better go about those lawfull affaires that he hath to do. For otherwise (as you vse your rest & sleepe) shall happen to you, as Salomon saieth: He that loueth sleepe shall come vnto pouertie. &c. Our life is a watching, therfore 144 we ought to take heede, that we lose not the greatest part of our life in sleepe, namely, sith of the same many vices be engendred as wel of the bodie as of the mind. Cato to this effect saith: Plus vigila semper, nec somno deditus esto: Nam diuturna quies vitiis alimenta ministrat. there is nothing hauing life that sleepeth not. Aristotle  145 saieth, that all creatures hauing blood, take their repose and sleepe &c. Sleepe is a surceasing of all the senses from trauel, which is, or is caused by certaine euaporations and fumes risyng of our meate and suffenaunce receiued, mounting from the stomacke immediately vnto the braine, by whose greate coldenes these vapours warme are tempered, casting into asuber euery the forces or senses exterior, at whiche time the vitall spirites retiring to the heart, leaue all the members of the body in a sleepe, vntil such time againe, as these said vital spirites recouer new force and strength to them againe, & so these vapours, ceasing or diminishing, man again awaketh, and returneth to himselfe, more apt to his businesse, than at anie time before: and therefore to sleepe and take much rest, is not so noysome or hurtfull as you affirme. Phisition: but far wyde either fro good Philosophie or wholesome phisicke. Although it be good and necessarie for the bodie, yet must it not be with excesse, and immoderately taken: for that 146 wel as also of the soule, even as moderate and competent rest bettereth them, increasing their vigor and their force, euen so immoderate rest hurteth and weakneth. For as many things are necessarie and needfull in mans life, so taking in excesse and out of season, annoie and grieue much as to eate, who feeleth not howe hunger so compelleth, and yet he that eateth too much, repenteth it, as we commonlie see. Sleepe then must be taken, for necessitie only, to reuiue, refresh. and comfort the wearie senses, the spirites vitall, and other wearie members. For too much sleepe (besides that it maketh heauie the spirites and senses, the partie also becommeth slouthfull, weake, and effeminate with ouermuch idlenesse) ingendreth much humiditie & rawe humors in the bodie, which comonlie assault it with sundrie infirmities, messengers of death, and of finall ruine. For when we sleepe too much, all the moystures and humors of the bodie, with the naturall heate, retire to the extreme partes thereof, no where purging or euacuating whatsoeuer is redundant: so then vnmeasurable sleepe is not only forbidde by Philosophers & Phisitions, but also is a thing odious to the wise. Ouid with other Poets, tearme sleepe an Image, or pourtraite of death, saying: 147 What else thou foole, is slougish sleepe, but forme of frosen death? By setled houres of certaine rest, approch thy want of breath. Therefore be you (and all such as you are) ashamed then, that spende the greater part of your time in idlenesse, and sleepe in your beddes, vntill you be readie to goe to your dinner, neglecting thereby all duetie of seruice both towardes God and man. These are the men that one speaketh of, saying: Diu dormiunt de niane, & sero cito cubant de nocte. They will goe verie late to 148 bedde at night, and sleepe long in the morning. Surelie hee that so doeth, his offence is nothing lesse than his, that all day doeth sitte in fat dishes, surfeting like a grosse and swollen Epicure, considering these creatures should onely be taken to the sole sustentation and maintenance of life, and not to fill or pamper voluptuouslie the bellie. Dionysius saieth: Non viuas, vt edas: sed edas, vt viuere posses: ad sanitatem, non ad incontinentia habenda 149 est ratio : Thou liuest not to eate, but eate as thou mayest liue: For there must bee a gouernement to vse it for thy health, and not to incontinencie. Chrysostome saieth: Non vita est propter 150 cibum & potum, sed propter vitam cibus & potus : The life is not appointed for meate and drinke, but meate and drinke is appointed for the life. In which sort wee must take our sleepe, onelie for necessitie, and nothing for idle pleasure, and that in due time, and not out of season, that wee may the better serue God and our neighbours. If that young man Eutichus, for sleeping at Peules sermon at Croas in a windowe, fell downe (as 151 a punishment of God) from the third lofte, deade, what punishment then thinke you, will God bring vpon you and other like, that sleepe from the sermon, and neuer come to diuine seruice, but sleepe out sermons and all, which commeth to passe by your night watchings and idle pastimes: Therefore no excuse will serue you herein. from the Temple, at prayer and preaching? were called to the supper, which seemed to make lawfuller and more honest excuses than you do: when as one would go to his Farme, another to proue his Oxen, and another to abide 152 sinnes, as Salomon saieth: He that turneth away his eare from hearing the lawe, euen his prayer shalbe abhominable. The 157 Gods word. For whatsoeuer is not of faith, is sinne. For where a true faith is, there is alwayes obedience to Gods worde: for 159 faith hath her certaintie of the word of God, and true obedience waiteth vpon faith continuallie, as one of her handmaydes. of life passe by vs: Let vs be partakers of our wantonnesse, let vs leaue some token of our pleasure in euerie place: for that is our portion and our lot: Yet in the ende they shalbe forced to say 170 in bitternes of heart (if they repent not:) we haue wearied our selues in the way of wickednesse and destruction, but the way of the Lord we haue not knowen: what hath pride and pleasures of 171 our youth profited vs: &c. Horrible is the end, saieth Salomon, of the wicked generation. &c. haue saide: yet as Salomon saith, there is a time for all things, a time to play, a time to worke, a time to builde, a time to pull downe. &c. 173 saith: To him that knoweth howe to do well, & doth it not, to him it is sinne, This he spake to such as saide in his time, as you doe nowe, that confessed what was good, but they would not doe it. 175 Nihil est diuturnum, in quo est aliquid extremum. Secondlie, to 182 we would wish, and not thereby to maintaine idlenesse and vain pastimes. So may the drunkarde, adulterer, vsurer, thiefe, &c. (with the whole rabble of wicked and the vngodly ones) likewise, and to the same effect & purpose alleadge this place, and applie it for their practises, as you doe for yours. But Syrach 185 teacheth you another lesson, saying: God hath commaunded in man to do vngodly, neither doth he giue any man licence & time to sinne. &c. This both well appeare by the words of S. Paule, 186 iuste versemur : that is, Time is therfore graunted vnto our life, that we should liue rightly & iustly all the dayes of our life. The godly man hath alwayes said: Veritas filia temporis est, 188 & mater omnium virtutum : that is, Trueth is the daughter of time, and the mother of all vertues. And that no time nor houre ought to be spent idlie, appeareth by that Christ himselfe saide: The kingdome of heauen is like vnto a certaine housholder, that 189 vineyarde. &c. Whereby it appeareth, that wee ought to waste and spend no time, nay, no houre in idlenesse, but in some good exercise. &c. as it may onelie redounde to the glorie of the immortall was it said of one, vpon these wordes that Christ said to the, that stood idle al the day, ( &c. e. Tota die, id est, tota vita, in pueritia, adolescentia, in iuuentute, & in senectute, vobis nihil proficientes, proximis non subuenientes, Deo non seruientes, hostibus non resistentes, & in posterum non prouidentes : All the day, that is, all the life (to be idle) in thy childhoode, in thy boyhoode, in thy youth in thy age, nothing profitable to theselues, helpefull to their neighbours, seruiceable to God, nor resisting their enimies, and lesse prouiding against the last day. This made Seneca complaine, that a great part of our life perisheth in doing nothing, a greater in doing euill, and the greatest of all, in doing things vnprofitable. Chrysostome saieth, that we must be doing, Corde, mente, ore, manu: corde credendo: mente compatiendo: ore confitendo: manu operando : With heart, minde, mouth, and hand: with heart in beleeuing: with minde in pacience: with mouth in cofessing: with hand in labouring. So that you may well perceiue, that to be idle and do no good, is against the lawe of God, and the lawe of nature, as Hesiodus saith: Illi pariter indignantur & dij & homines, quisquis otiosus : both the gods and men detest those, that 194 appellare, fratres muscas, quod nihil facietes boni , idlers & wanderers were wont to be called friers flees, that do no good. true saying? Quies laboris remedium : Rest is the medicine of labours and wearinesse: Therefore breathings and refreshings from continuall labours must be had, because it driueth away irkesomnesse gotten by serious toyle, and doeth repaire again the bodies and mindes to labour: euen as too much bending breaketh a bow, so to be addicted perpetually to labors, & neuer to refresh the minde with pastimes, must needes cause the minde not long to endure in earnest studies: and therefore it is said, festiuall dayes in old time were inuented for recreation. exercises, for recreation & quickning of our dull mindes. And where you say, that holy dayes (as they are termed) were inuented in old time for pastimes, I thinke you say trueth: For the Pope appointed them (and not God in his worde) and that onely to traine by the people in ignorance and idlenesse, whereby halfe of the yeare and more, was ouerpassed (by their idle holydayes) in loytering and vaine pastimes, &c. in restrayning men from their handie labours and occupations. S. Augustine  195 speaking of the abuse of the Sabboth day, saieth: It is better to digge and go to plowe on the Sabboth day, than to be drunke, & liue idlelie: howe much more may wee say so of these festiuall dayes, neuer appointed nor commaunded by God: &c. you so bitterly & inuey against plaies & pastimes? the health of man, and recreate his wittes, so farre I speake not against it, but the excessiue & vnmeasurable vse therof, 196 taketh away the right institution thereof, & bringeth abuse &misuse, & thereby is an hinderance of mans obedience to Gods word (as it is seene in you this present day:) & therefore they are rather changed into faultes & transgressions, than honest exercises for mans recreation. Therefore we must in all our pastimes remember what Cicero saith: Non ita generati sumus a natura, 197 vt adludu & iocu factiesse videamur, sed seueritate potius, et alia studia grauiora. We are not made and brought foorth into this world by nature, to the intent we might appeare & seeme to be created to the maintenance of gaming & pastimes, but wee are borne to more weightie matters, and grauer studies. Therefore S. Paule saith: Whatsoeuer ye do, do all to the glorie of God. 198 Stoikes, that will thus exclude pastimes and playes from vs, as we nowe vse them. allowe of all honest, good, and lawfull pastimes, for those endes and purposes where vnto they were appointed, for mans recreation & comfort? Cicero sicut somno & caeteris quietibus, tum cum grauibus, serijsq. rebus satisfecerimus : that is, Honest games and pastimes are allowable, but we ought to vse them as we do sleepe & other eases of the bodie,and to bee taken after such time, as wee haue laboured inough in weightie matters, and serious affaires: As we reade of the Romane Sceuola, he used oftentimes to play at 199 Tennise, onely to recreate his spirites, after he had taken great paynes in weightie matters of the common wealth. although you tie it to times, matters, & persons. rebus, sunt certi denique fines: quos vltr a citraq, nequit consistere virtus. I pray you what measure or meane keepe you and your companions now a dayes, that playe when you should sleepe, & sleepe when you should labour? The Lorde biddeth you 201 watch & pray, and you watch and play all night long, whereby you are not able to do your duetie in hearing of Gods word, receyuing of his sacramentes, praying with the congregation, nor yet able to vse your vocation & calling: whereby you prouoke & heape Gods heauie displeasure and wrath vpon you, therefore you haue great cause to be hartily sorie, and to repent. euill, and therefore I haue not offended, that I neede to repent me for it. which hath hindered you from all good and godly exercises? No good at all, but rather great hurte, for that you abused, and not vsed your sleepe in due time and order, by reason of your idle nightwatching playes, and idle wanton pastimes, to satisfie the 209 pleasures and desires of the fleshe, and therefore you neede repetance. Hereby is inferred that generall rule: Cuius rei est vsus, eiusdem est & abusus. There is nothing used, but that also may be 210 . abused: For god in mercie giueth vs nothing (be it neuer so good) 211 better, than that a man shoulde be mery, and reioyce 213 in his affaires, because that is his portion. Wherefore then shall not we in our youthfull dayes play and pastime? declareth, that man by his reason, can comprehend nothing better in this life, than to vse the giftes of God soberly and comfortably. Also he speaketh against the greedie carefulnesse of the couetous rich men, that vse to become slaues and bondme to theire mucke and riches (cotrary to the rule of Dauid which he geueth saying: If riches encrease, set not your hearts 214 thereon.) A litle before the place by you recited, he sayth: I know that there is nothing good in them, but to reioyce and doo good in this life. To that end was it spoken of the wise man against 215 rich man lacketh that which he hath, as wel as that 216 aliena, sed etiam ille auarus est, qui cupide seruat sua. He is not only a coueteus man, that taketh away another mans goods, but 217 own goods (fro helping the poore) so that it is a manifest toke of Gods plague, when a rich man hath not a liberall heart to vse his riches. August. mittendum esse, quiinuasit alienum ? If he shal be cast & sent into fire, that giueth not of his own proper goods, where thinkest thou, shall he be cast and sent, that inuadeth and taketh away other mens? rich and therefore not couetous. not cause of couetousnesse, but the filthie desire and insatiable mynde & heart of man, and also his greedy desire to haue. Therefore 223 Paule saith: The desire of mony (he saith not simply mony, but the desire) is the roote of all euill, which while some lusted after (he sayeth lusted) they erred from the faith. Againe: They that will be rich, fall into temptation and snares, and into many foolishe and noisome lustes, which drowne men in perdition and destruction. So that wee see, it is the lust and will, and not the riches per se , that doe make vs to be couetous men. Augustine  224 vaineglory, and then riches will not hurt. Non enim (sayth 225 not, but the carefulnesse of them. Chrysostome also saith: Non est 226 pauper, non est, inquam, qui nihil habet, sed qui mut a concupiscit: vicissim, non est diues, qui multa possidet, sed qui nullius eget, &c. Voluntas hominum & diuites facit & pauperes, non pecuniarum vel abundantia, vel defectus. that is to say: He is not a poore man, I say, that hath nothing, but he is a poore man that coueteth and lusteth: Againe he is not rich that hath & enioyeth much (goods,) but he that coueteth no other mans (goods.) &c. The wils and desires of men maketh rich and poore, not the want, or abundance of mony. Seneca sayth: Diues est, non qui magis habet, sed qui min us cupit. He is rich, not that hath muche, but that coueteth 227 man be content with that he hath. &c. Whereby you see prooued, that you and such others are couetous men. talke, As is lawfull for Christians to play at al, or no? me so often to tell you? often? Declare it. graue learned Diuines, that it is not lawful for any Christian man prosessing the faith and true religion of Christe Jesu, to play at any game or pastime at all. no doubt, they seeme to giue reasons for it, but yet I must needes confesse, that these reasons of theirs are sifted very depe and very harde, and marueilous precise. to persuade by. account to God of the whole course of our life, and of eche particular deed thereof, they aske, what account we are able to yeelde to God of the time that wee leese in play: And seeing (say they) that me must forbeare euery idle word, that God rebuketh 229 be for, yea, though it be neither oathe nor blaspheming of the name of God, but onely bicause it is idle, and spoken to no purpose: 230 howe then (say they) can we excuse our selues of al the idle time, that we spend in playing? We must do al (say they) that we doe, be we great or small, rich or poore, to the glory of God, And 231 when we play, can we say that therein we glorifie God: Paule (say they) willeth vs to redeeme the time, which we haue lost in fond and euill things, when we were Idolaters: shall we thinke that it is lawfull for vs to leese and spend the same in play, nowe when we are called to the glory of God? It is sufficient for vs (saith Saint Peter) that we haue spent the time past of this life 232 after the lust of the Gentiles, walking in wantonnesse, Iustes, drunkennesse, in gluttonie, drinking, and in abhominable Idolatries, to the end, that the rest of the time that we shall liue in this fleshe, we should liue no more after the concupiscences of men, but after the will of God. There are so many duties, (say they) that God by his woord requireth of vs, so many meanes and holy exercises & occupations, to bestow our selues either to the glory of God, or the profit of our neighboures at all houres, both day and night, yea, though they were longer, and that euery day had eight and fortie houres. But in steed of bestowing our selues in holy exercises and better businesses, we spend away our time in playing: therfore it is intollerable, and by no meanes lawfull for any man, that calleth him selfe a Christian, to play. There is the reading of the woord of God, and other good bookes, there is comforting the sicke, visiting prisoners, relieuing the needy, and also the occupations, that ech man hath in his estate & particular 233 calling: all the which, with other like exercises, are expresly commaunded vs by the woord of God, and we can scarce finde in our hearts to do any of them, and yet can we bestow (say 234 they) so long time in playing, Certainly al these things wel considered, we cannot perceiue (say they) howe it should be seemely 235 kinde of play: As also Saint Chrisostome, 238 scrupulous, For I say with S. Augustine, that it is the part of a wise man, sometimes to recreate himselfe, and reioyce the minde, that he may better away with, longer continue, and more chearefully returne to his ordinary labour and vocation. S. Ambrose sayth: Licet interdu honesta iocu. &c. Honest pastimes are sometime lawfull. they haue made. things, that a Christian is bound of necessitie to do, & those things, which are permitted & granted him by God, for the refreshing and helping of his infirmitie, as to ease him when he is weary, to sleepe after labour, and to play after long paine. cannot endure, that lacketh rest. And therefore the holy Scriptures (which are the rule of good and euill) make mention of playing, and allowe Christians so to doe. Zacharie saith: And 239 the streetes of the citie shall be full of boyes and girles, playing in the streetes thereof. Also when Saint Paule saith: Whether 240 ye eate or drinke, or whatsoeuer else ye doe, doe all to the glorie of God. We may by this worde, [whatsoeuer ye do] vnderstand all honest recreations, which certainly are as lawful & permitted to vs, by reason of our infirmitie, as is either eating, drinking or sleeping, when we haue neede thereof, And as our Lord 241 so honest recreation is inuented for man, and for his health, which maketh vs the better and more deuout to serue God. Then to play at honest games and pastimes, is a thing both indifferent and lawfull, and suche as are lefte to Christian libertie, as Paule saith: Brethren ye haue beene called vnto libertie: only vse not your libertie as occasion vnto the fleshe, but by loue serue 244 one an other: which thing must be obserued in any wise. Neuerthelesse, I confesse wee ought not to abuse it (through too great pleasure which we take in them) no more than to abuse any other thing of the like kinde. In very deede it shoulde seeme too great a cruelty, to restrain wearied natures, or ouertoiled bodies, that they neither might nor durst take some recreation. For, although we ought to apply al and euerie our doings to the glory of God, & edifying and helping of our neighbours: neuerthelesse when we take our honest recreation to mainteine & preserue our vigour & health, or to recouer our strength, or to refreshe vp our spirits, that we may afterward the more cherefully & freshly goe about that businesse, that God hath called vs vnto, and doe it the better, the same in the ende redoundeth in the glorie of GOD, whom we shall by this meanes be more able & ready to serue, & also to seeke our neighbours furtherance & profit. I doe not then forbid or condemne al play, neither mislike, that a faithful Christian do sometimes play & sport himselfe, so that such play & pastime be in lawful & honest things, & also done with moderation. plaies are tollerable vnto men, and that they may vse and frequent it without fault, or offending God, or hurt to the profession of a true faithfull Christian. after some weightie businesse, to make one more freshe and agilite, to prosecute his good and godly affaires, & lawfull businesse, I saye to you agayne, hee may lawfully doe it: yet I woulde demaunde one thing of thee my sonne, if thou wilt aunsweare me. companions been burthened withal? Hath it beene in studying in your booke, eyther in geuing counsell and aduise for gouernment of common wealthes, or else in labouring and toiling in your handie craftes and vocation, for the sustentation and maintenance of your wiues and family at home, that you should haue such neede to consume this whole night for recreation, pastime and vaine plaies? heare of it, of any thing, much lesse to vse it. 248 was in him, of his grandmother Lois, and his mother Cunica: Whereby appeareth their diligence in bringing vp Timothie in godly knowledge, learning, & faithfulnesse in religion. Solon the Lawemaker among the Athenians, made a lawe, that the child, (whose father neuer regarded to bring vp his sonne in any good learning or exercise, shoulde not be bounde to succour or relieue his father in any respecte, in what neede soeuer hee were in. Aristotle being demaunded, what the learned differed from 254 differ from the dead. Therefore Diogenes said well: Learning 255 and good letters, to young men bringeth sobriette: to olde men comfort: to poore men riches: to rich men an ornament, (and;c. Not without iust cause did Chrysostom say: Fathers are louing 256 to the bodies of their children, but negligent & hateful to their soules. Which is the cause, that Ecclesiasticus saieth: If thou 257 bring vp thy sonne delicately, he shall make thee afraide: if thou play with him, he shall bring thee to heauinesse. Laugh not with him, least thou be sorie with him: &c. And where you say, you cannot labour, I tell you plainly, then are you not worthie to eate or 258 260 sed fame eos ad laborem cogite . Nourish not among you these idle loytering persons, but compel them with very hunger to labour: wherby you may learne, that none ought to liue idlely, but should 261 be giuen to some vocatia or calling, to get his liuing withal, that he may doe good vnto others also. Thomas de Aquino sayeth: 262 Quinon habet exercitium, vel officij, vel studij, vellectionis, periculose viuunt otiosi . They that haue no exercise, either of office, 263 studie, or reading, these liue daungerously that liue idely. Ecclesiasticus 264 lagendo, discut male agere . Men in doing nothing, but being 266 idle, do learn to do euil. Adam was put (by God) in Paradise: it is added, that he might dresse it, & keepe it. Teaching vs, that God would not haue man idle, though as yet there was not neede 267 to labour. Also God said vnto Adam (after his fal:) In the sweat of thy face thou shalt eate bread. Dauid saith: Thou shalt eate the labors of thine owne handes. Salomon sayeth: A slouthfull 268 which may liue in wealth and idlenesse. But the holy Ghost (as you haue hearde) approueth them blessed, that liue of the meane profit of their owne laboures. So it appeareth, that of al things, Idlenesse is most to be eschued and auoyded of al men, (especially of those that professe the Gospell of Christe) because it is the fountaine and well spring, where-out is drawne a thousande mischiefes: for it is the onely nourisher and mainteiner of all filthinesse, as whoredome, theft, murder, breaking of wedlocke, periurie, Idolatrie, Poperie, &c. vayne playes, filthy pastimes, and 270 Idlenesse. 271 Otium enim omne malum edocuit : Idlenesse teacheth all 274 est, & nouerca virtutum , Idlenesse is the maister of fables and lies, and the stepdame of all vertue. So Ambrose sayth: Periculo saotia secura esse virtuti . This secure Idlenesse is most dangerous that can be to vertue. Therefore my sonne, doe according to the olde Prouerbe, Qui fugit molam, fugit farinam. waies, and be wise: For she hauing no guide, gouernour, nor ruler, prepareth her meate in the summer, and gathereth her foode in the Haruest: Teaching hereby, that if the word of God cannot instruct vs, nor persuade vs, yet we should learn at the litle Ant, 277 to labour and prouide for our selues, and not to burthen others, as Saint Paule sayth: If there be any that prouideth not for his owne, and namely, for them of his housholde, he denyeth the 278 faith, and is woorse than an Infidel, Againe he saith: Let him that stole, steale no more: but let him rather labour & work with his hands the thing which is good, that he may haue to giue vnto him that needeth. How is it the, that man shameth not to liue a trifling and an idle loyterer, considering howe painefully and busily the poore Ant toyleth in the summer, gathering her prouision and store for the Winter, and also hauing such manifest precepts in the holy Scripture, to instruct him, as you heare of S. Paule himselfe. Therefore he put that precept to auoide theft, to moue the Ephesians to labour, for that idlenesse maketh one to consume his owne goods and treasures, whereby commeth. pouertie, of that issueth deceyt, and from thence commeth theft: he addeth a reason why he should labour, not only to succour him selfe, but those also that haue neede. He biddeth them simply to worke, but saith, work that is good, that is to say, that work and vocation which God hath ordained & appointed, which is good and profitable to men. A learned father saith herevpon, Prohibes 279 prauas ac inutiles artes, vt sunt histrionu, pr aestigiatoru, Magorum, Astrologicae, & alias omnes diuinationes aliasq, curiosas artes diuersorum generum : Forbidding (by Paules words) euil and vnprofitable artes, as of Enterludes, Stage plaies, Juglings, & false sleights, Witchcrafts, Speculations, Diuinations, or fortune tellings, and all other vaine and naughtie curious kinde of arts. Wherby we haue to note, with what kinde of labour & exercise we ought to get our liuings. For if it be by these or such like wayes and meanes, it is most detestable and abhominable before God and man, & cannot escape without great punishmet, unlesse they repent, and so turne from their wickednesse. labour and trauell? it must be done, he hath so decreed it, as Job saith, 280 sumus, sed ortus nostri partem patria vindicat, parteamici &c. 287 We are not borne and brought into this world, to ourselues only, for our owne sakes, but also for others: for part of our birth and being our countrie doth chalenge, and the other part, our parentes A man is a woolf to a man, that is, a deuourer one of another. Therefore let vs labour diligently in good exercises, that we may haue to minister to the needy brethren, remembring alwaies 289 what is saide: It is a blessed thing to giue, rather than to receiue. Thus you may perceiue throughly, how commendable the labouring man is, and howe detestable and odious the loyterers and idle persons are in any common wealth: Otiosos & vagos 290 solitus est appellare, fratres muscas, qu od nihil facientes boni . Idlers and wanderers were wont to be called Friers, flies, which neuer do any good: Teaching hereby, that Popish friers were & are but idlers and loytering vagabonds, good for nothing, but euen as flies flie abroade vpon al mens meate, to fill themselues of other mens trauels: euen so do they. For they go idlely a limiting abrode, liuing vpon the sweate of other mens trauels. Against such idle Friers & Monks S. Augustine wrot a book reproouing earnestly their idle covetous liues. &c. Seneca passing by a certaine towne called Vacia seeing a citizen of Rome idle and loytering, sayd: Hic situs est Vaci ae , Here lieth or sitteth the filth and dong of Vacia. It was truly said of one: Qu od otium puluinar est Satana , That Idlenesse is Sathans fetherbed and pillow, that he layeth all idlers and loyteres to sleepe vpon. The 291 Prophet Ezechiel saith, it was one of the sinnes of Sodom, for which God plagued them, saying: This was the iniquitie of thy sister Sodom, pride, fulnesse of breade, and abundance of idlenes was in hir. &c. Saint Paule also reprooueth a sort of young widowes, which were in his time, and liued idlly, saying: Refuse 292 the younger widowes, for they being idle, haue learned to go about from house to house, yea, they are not onely idle, but also pratlers & busie bodies, speaking things, which are not comely. Here may you see, what mischiefes ensue of idlenesse, both in 293 men and women. In old time (we reade) that there was vsually carried before the maid, when she should be married, and came to dwell in her husbandes house, a distaffe charged with flaxe, & a spindle hanging at it, to the intent, she might bee mindefull to liue by hir labour, 294 it was alwaies solenmized vpon the working day, to teach what they must do, &c. Likewise they were woont in old time, to haue painted Snailes in their houses, to teach them thereby alwaies to keepe home within their owne house, & to see her seruantes labour in their businesse duely and truly, for the avoiding of idlenesse, the mother of al other vices. S. Hierome the maid Demetrias to eschue idlenesse: And therfore when shee had made an end of her praiers, he willed her to go in hand with wooll and weauing, that by such chaunge of woorkes the daies seeme not long, He bid hir not to woorke, for that she was in any pouertie (being one of the noblest women in Rome) but that by such occasion of woorking, she should put out of hir minde foolish and filthie imaginations & fantasies. A certaine woman of Lacedemon taken prisoner in warre, was asked what she could doe: I can (saith she) rule an house. So Aristotle sayth: That in keeping of an house, it is the mans part to get, & the womans to keepe. But if she be spending & wasteful, prodigal & idle, Ecclesiasticus counsayle must be followed, where he sayth: Set a good 297 as omnium vitiorum magistra atque origo est . Idlenesse (saith Chrisostome) is the mistres and beginning of al vice and wickednesse. Cato saith: Segnitiem fugito, qu ae vitae ignauia fertur: Nam cum animus languet, consumit inertia corpus : as if hee should say: A slouthfull and idle life is to be fled, for when the minde is vnlustie, then idlenesse consumeth the bodie. Idlenes is most delectable to the flesh, which delighteth aboue measure in slouth, lithernesse, ceasing from occupation, slougishnesse, and heauinesse of minde, and it hath a desire to be doing of nothing, and to be voide of all care and businesse. Yea and this remember my sonne Youth, that filthie lustes are chiefly nourished by excesse & idlenesse, for therof is the firebrand and kindled, and thereof is the oyle poured in & ministred so abundatly, as not wout 298 alioqus multa mala, nihil tamen aut facilius aut magis alit, quam libidinem . that is, Although idlenesse otherwise nourisheth many euils, notwithstanding she nourisheth nothing more easie than sensualitie and vnlawful lust (of whordome:) Therfore was it saide of that wittie Poet: 299 Qu aeritur, gisthus quare sit factus adulter? In promptis causa est: desidio sus erat. That is: It is asked wherefore Aegisthus was Adulter made: The cause is plaine, and quickly knowne: since he with slouth was cladde. saieth: He that walketh in the darke, knoweth not whither hee goeth. And Saint Paule said, that he knewe not lust had beene 301 sinne, except the Lawe had said: Thou shalt not lust. Euen so may I say, that I had not knowne that Idlenesse had beene such a detestable sinne as it is, except God had opened this to me by the meanes of you. Nor yet that Satan thereby vseth to seduce and bring vs from all vertue to vice, from faith to infidelitie, according 302 saying of olde hath bene: Otia dant vitia. our heartes, that he may possesse vs, as Christ saith: While man slept, there came his enimie (Satan) & sowed tares among the wheate. &c. As we see in king Dauid: when he was yong, he exercised himselfe in preparing a house for the Lorde, and sayde: 304 I will not enter into the tabernacle of mine house, nor come vppon my bed, nor suffer mine eyes to sleepe, nor mine eye liddes to slumber, vntill I finde out a place for the Lord, an habitation for the mighty God of Iacob. After, when he began to be idle, it 305 is said in the booke of Samuel, that Dauid went not vp with Ioab his Captaine, but sent him, and all his seruantes with him, against the children of Ammon, to besiege Rabbath. But (saith the text) Dauid remained in Ierusalem, and fel to lie idlely vppon his bed at noone, or euening tide, and rose vp and walked vpon the roofe of his pallace, and from the roofe he sawe Bethsabe Uriah the Hethites wife washing of her self, and she was beautifull to looke vpon, &c: and Dauid sent for her, and she came vnto him, and he lay with her, and gate her with childe, &c. By this example, you may see the dangerous falles that Gods children fal into, by this detestable vice of idlenesse. And therfore that old saying by you alledged, is most true, Otia dant vitia : Idlenesse bringeth and gathereth (wheresoeuer she entreth) al maner vices and wicked sinnes. Ambrose hath a pretie apt similitude to set foorth the nature of Satan vnto vs, and also his sleightes and craftie practises to deceiue vs, to the ende wee thereby may the better auoyde his subtilties. somewhat thereby to auoyde that wicked enimie. of Oysters, but for that they (Oysters) are so strongly and well fenced with two harde shelles, which he cannot breake by strength, therfore he wayteth diligently to bring the Oysters out of the water, into the hot sunne. Whiles the Oysters open with the sunne, and with the ayre & winde, the Crabbe presently putteth a little stone into the Oyster as he gapeth, whereby hee canot close or bring together agayne his shelles, then afterward the Crabbe without danger putteth in his claws, and deuoureth the fleshe at his pleasure. Euen so (saith he) when men are giuen to Idlenesse, and open their mindes vnto pleasures, the Diuell commeth, and casteth into our mindes and hearts, filthie cogitations in such sort, that our shell which before did defend vs, cannot be drawne close together agayne, then full easily both he deuour us cleane. Ambrose, yet I pray you let me a litle further trouble you about this matter of Idlenesse. haue to demaunde, and I will aunsweare you, as God shall giue me leaue and knowledge. also that God detesteth it, and yet (by your patience) I doe reade in the Law, that God himselfe commaundeth vs to be idle, saying (in the fourth commaundement) The seuenth 307 day is the Sabboth of the Lorde thy God: in it thou shalt do no manner of worke, thou, nor thy sonne, nor thy daughter, nor thy man seruant, nor thy maide, nor thy beast, nor the straunger that is within thy gates. &c. Where by it appeareth, that the Lorde alloweth of Idlenesse, &c. cogitationis , that is: There is idlenesse of sitting still, and there is idlenesse of meditations. Uery well noted also was it of Brentius, ad negotia, sed ad delicias & voluptates. Est otium honestu & necessariu, quo boni viri reddunt sese aptiores ad negotia & vocationes suas sectedas. Tale otium non solum suasit, sed mandauit Deus in lege, dum in stituit Sabbatum, & iubet in eo no hominem tantum verumetiam iumenta quiescere. Ottemur no ad luxum, quod impij & ignaui solent, sed ad pietatem &c. That is: There is a beastly and slouthful idlenesse, which idle persons get to themselues, not for labours, but for pleasures & delights. There is also an honest and a necessarie idlenesse, whereby good men are made more apt and ready to do their labours and vocations, where vnto they are called. This kinde of idlenesse, God doth not onely persuade, but also commaundeth it in his lawe, in that he appoynted the Sabboth day, and commaunded that in it, not only man shoulde rest, but the beastes also. Let vs then be idle, not for carnal pleasures, as the wicked and vngodlie are woonte, but for godlinesse and vertues sake. &c. Maister Bullinger also sayeth: Sabbatum a Deo institutum est, non propter otium per se. Otium enim Deus nuspiam 310 per se approbat: proinde otium Sabbati commendatur propter aliud, nimirum propter diligens religionis studium, ideo enim feriandum pr aecipitur a laboribus manurijs, vt hoc totum tempus impendamus exercitio religionis . that is: The Sabboth day was appointed of God, not for idlenesse simply. Idlenesse of it selfe is no where allowed of God: therefore the idlenesse of the Sabboth day was commended for another purpose, that is, for the studie and diligent desire of religion. Therfore he commaunded to rest from our handie laboures, that we might bestow all that time in the exercise of religio. It is likewise in the very same commaundement saide: that God rested the seuenth day. &c. Shall we conclude 311 with the heretikes, that God sitteth idlely in heauen, and hath no care of his creatures by his heauenly prouidence, now he hath once created them: (God forbid.) This rest of God (as the Scripture testifieth) was a creatione, sed non  a gubernatione , it was from creating, but not from gouerning and ordering them. For he doth alwayes by his power sustaine them, by his prouidence gouerne and rule them, and by his goodnes nourish them. We must rest therfore from handy and bodily workes, but wee must not cease from such workes, as pertaine vnto the true worshipping of God. This seruice among the fathers, was used in. 4. things that is, First in reading, interpreting, and hearing of Scriptures. Secondly, in prayers publike and priuate, in celebrating and receiuing of Sacramentes: Thirdly in collecting and gathering for the poore and indigent. Fourthly, in visiting & distributing to the poore, and making of peace and vnity among 312 sabboth (except those which you haue specified: and so of necessitie we ought not to vse any labour or work, what neede or necessitie soeuer there shoulde be. the Sabboth, and therefore is the sonne of man Lorde ouer the Sabboth. The Sabboth was instituted of God 314 in the temple, scumming, seething, and burning them, prepared for their sacrifices, and were not counted guiltie of the breach of 321 the Sabboth day. In like sort it shalbe lawfull to prepare meat for our neede on the Sabboth day, & to feede the body. Mathathias 322 thought it had not been lawfull to fight vpon the Sabboth day: but when he considered the end of the Sabboth, how it was ordeined to preserue, & not to destroy, he willed all men to make battell vpon the Sabboth day, because they might not die all of them, as their brethren did, which were murthered by their enimies: 323 visit the sicke and prisoners, to succour the needy, to fight in defence, 325 that we may preserue the creature of God. If it be lawfull (as Christ saith) to draw a beast out of ditch or myre on the Sabboth day, why is it not lawfull on the Sabboth day to saue a house that is ready to fall, or a burning, or to moore a ship faster, that is ready to runne against the rockes? Why is it not lawful on the sabboth day, to gather togither corne or hay, which hath layen abrode a long time, & to saue it, least it should through the iniurie and force of the weather, and hie floods and springs of waters, be vtterly destroyed? 326 commaund the congregation to stone to death that man, 327 that was found gathering sticks on the Saboth day? And why doth God threaten such plagues on those, that carrie any burthe 328 on the Sabboth day? sticks, or that he did this of necessitie, or of ignorance and simplicitie (as some suppose) but for that he did it of set purpose, contumeliously, obstinately, and stubbornly did breake and violate this commaundement of God: Or as it were in spite of Moses Gods magistrate, woulde doe this in the open face of all people, teaching others (by his example) to do the like: therefore Moses commaunded to stone him to death according to the 329 Lawe. For if he had doone it of ignorance, necessitie, or simplicitte, then should not he haue died, (as it is expressed in the very 330 same chapter) but certaine burnt offerings had been offered to the Lord for him. &c. But (sayeth the Lawe) if anye person dooth presumptuously despise the woord of the Lord, and breake 331 his commaundements, he shal be vtterly cut off from among the people. &c. Wherby you may perceiue, that he was put to death for his contempt against the Lorde. And for that cause Lyra  332 supposeth this man was first kept in prison, vntill it was tryed out, whether he did it contemptuously or ignorantly. And for that God sayth: He that defileth the Sabboth, shall die the death. &c. 333 It was repeated of God for a speciall point, teaching hereby, that the whole keeping of the Law standeth in the true vse of his Sabboth, which is, to cease from our woorkes, and to obeye the will of God: For the obseruation of the Sabboth doth extend as well to the faith which we haue in God, as to the charitie of our neighbours. Also by this example we see the authoritie of the magistrate, howe it is not onely to punishe matters and faultes 334 committed against the second table: But also for faultes and trespasses comitted against the first table, for matters touching religion. So S. Augustine sayth: In hoc Reges, sicut eis diui us pr aecipitur, Deo seruiunt in quantu Reges sunt, si in suo regno bona 335 iubeant, mala prohibeant, non solum qu ae pertinent ad humanae societatam, verumetiam quae ad diuinam religione : that is: In this Kings, as it is commaunded them of God, doo serue God as Kings, if in their kingdome they commaund good thinges, and forbid euill things, not onely those things, which pertaine to humaine societie, but also to all godly religion. Some read of Nabuchodonosor, how he serued God, when he forbad by a terrible Law all men dwelling in his kingdome, fro blaspheming God. 336 So likewise we may read of that godly king Ezechias, how he destroyed the teple of the Fools. &c. Wherby we see, that Princes 337 may lawfully deale in matters of religion, & also may lawfully put to death open and obstinate Papistes & heretikes that 338 of God. Whereas Christ saith: Let both the tares and wheate grow togither vntill the Haruest, &c. appertaineth nothing vnto the Magistrate, but vnto the minister onely. &c. As 340 for the place of Ieremie, you shall note, that he goeth aboute to shew the Iewes the right keeping of the Law. For by naming the Sabboth day, he coprehendeth the thing that is thereby signified: for if they transgressed in the ceremonie, they must needs be culpable of the rest, which is meditating the spiritual Sabboth or rest, hearing of Gods woord, & resting from worldly trauels: And doth also declare, that by the breaking of this one commaundement, he maketh them transgressors of the whole Law, forasmuch as the first and second table are therein contayned, that is, as I haue sayde before, fayth towardes God, and charitie 341 towardes our neighboures, & not for our own fantasie, gaine, and pleasure we shoulde go about our owne businesse, and leaue our dutie towards God, and giue our selues to al maner idlenes and Ethnicall sportes and pastimes, as is nowe used too muche amongst vs. That day is most holy, in the which we must apply and giue our selues vnto holy workes and spiritual meditations. 342 For if we doe but rest (in the Sabboth day) fro the works of the bodie, the do we take the like rest as beasts do, & not as the faithfull doe. Saint Hierome to this saith, Non sufficit a malis esse otiosum, 343 siquis fuerit a bonis otiosus : It is not ynough for man to rest & cease from euil things, if a man be idle from good thinges. Likewise S. Augustine veritatis, aut inuentio : that is, In idlenesse slougish rest ought to be away, and when he is at rest, there ought to be either inquisitio of the truth, or inuention of the same. 344 Christ for euer and euer. Father for it. Yet I pray you let me vnderstand, what Christ meaneth by saying in S. Mathewe, that of euerye 348 idle worde that men shall speake, they shal giue account thereof at the day of iudgement? euery idle worde (O Lorde be mercifull to vs,) what shall we doe then for our idle and sinfull woorkes: By these idle 349 the hearers, letting passe good and gratious talke, & speaking of friuolous vayne thinges, ful of scurrilitie and baudrie. 350 and whatsoeuer springeth of the affections of the flesh. Maister Musculus we shall not giue accounte to God onely for deedes, but also for wicked wordes, not onely for vaine wordes, but for idle wordes: if for idle wordes, what for hurtful wordes: what for lyinges?: what for slaunderinges: what for cursinges: what for iestings and mockings? what for periuries shal be done hereafter to those at the day of iudgement? Wee see hereby, that there is not a worde in our tongue, but the Lorde knoweth them wholy altogether. 352 Not without great cause therefore did Dauid pray vnto the Lorde, that he would set a watch before his mouth, to keepe 353 the doore of his lips. Because (saith Paule) euil speakings corrupt good manners. Saint Paule saith: that fornication and all 354 as it becommeth Saints. Neither filthinesse, neither foolish talking, neither ieasting, which are things not comely, but rather giuing of thaks. Let your speach be gracious alwaies, poudred with salt. &c. He saieth also: Let no corrupt communication proceede 356 that it may minister grace to the hearers: In fine therefore he concludeth to the Collossians, thus: Whatsoeuer ye shal doe, in worde or deede, doe all in the name of our Lorde Iesus, 358 359 est or, vnde semper coelestia erumpunt eloquia ! O saith Augustine, howe holy is that mouth, whereout commeth alwayes heauenly speaches. Let them take heede therfore, which speake what they list, saying with the wicked in the Psalme: With our tongue 360 vs? But (saith the Prophet) the Lorde wil cut off all flattering lipps, and the tongue that speaketh proud things. Dauid asketh 362 thereof. talke, when companies are gathered togither, to make them merie withall? 366 Gods name, or hurt to your neighbour, you may. For there are diuers examples in the Scriptures of pleasant talke, 367 saying: Crie loude, for he (meaning Baal the Idoll) is a God, eyther he taketh or pursueth his enimies, or is in his iourney, or it may be that he sleepeth, and must be awaked. &c. When honest 369 iesting (to good honest endes) be used, it is tollerable: Therefore S. Paule sayeth not simply (Ieasting) but addeth, which are things not comely, meaning ieasting that is ful of scurrility and 370 filthinesse. had before, which was, that you went aboute to driue me to labour for my liuing, and that everie man shoulde walke in his vocation, to get his bread in the sweate of his face. 371 Well, I tell you playne, Plaies must be had, and we will haue them, say you to the contrarie what you lyst. 372 house goeth to decay, and by the idlenesse of the hands, the house droppeth through. Againe, A diligent hand maketh rich, but a slouthfull hand maketh poore. He that tilleth his lande, shall be satisfied with bread: but he that followeth the idle, is destitute of defence. &c. carefull for our lives, what we shall eate and drinke, and sayeth that the Lilies of the field labour not, neither spinne, yet Salomon was neuer arayed like vnto them. And also that the birdes doe not sowe, reape, nor carrie into the barnes &c. We are bidden also not to care for to morrowe, for the morowe shall care for it selfe, the day hath inough with his owne griefe. &c. By this I doe gather, that labour is not so necessarie, or that wee shoulde haue 376 any care, but to cast all our care vpon the Lorde, for he careth for vs. And therefore what neede we to labour? that, which commeth of a diffidence and mistruste in Gods prouidence. You must cosider, that there are two sortes of cares: The first is that which is ioyned with faith, by honest laboure, to prouide for his familie thinges honest and necessarie: For otherwise (saith Saint Paule) he denieth the faith, and is 377 worse then an infidel. The seconde is that, which riseth of doubt or dispayre, of an Epicureall care and mistrust in the Lord, and this kinde of care is here by Christ reproued: For Christs words teach vs, that God will prouide for euery day that, which shal be necessarie, though wee doe not increase the present griefe therof, by the carefulnesse howe to liue in time to come. And here you must note and marke, that Christ our Sauiour doth not say: Labour not for meate and drinke, but be not carefull (saith he:) he doth not prohibite or forbid labour, but Heathenish and an Epicureall carefulnesse: Verum incrementu Dei non datur otiosis, sed 378 operantibus ac seminantibus . God giueth not increase to the idle, but to them that worke and sow. &c. So S. Paule saith: Vnusquisq; 379 manibus suis laboret, vt habeat  & vnde det indigenti. &c.  Let euerie man laboure and woorke with his handes, that hee 380 may haue wherewithall to giue them, that suffer neede. And if your reason did holde true, then we shoulde neede neuer to praye for our necessities. Forasmuche as Christ saieth, Your heauenly 381 not carefull what you shall eate or drinke. &c. Shall we therefore conclude herevpon, that we must not pray or care litle or nothing what we eate or drinke, whether it be poyson or carrion, or any vnwholesome thing? No man is so foolishe, I trowe, so to doe. And as for the birdes, that doe not sow or reape, and the Lillies that labour not, neither spinne. &c. Although I may say to you,  Legibus enim viuimus, non exemplis . We liue by lawes, and not by examples: Yet S. Augustine shal answere you in this point, (who hauing iust occasion to reproue certaine idle Monks, that were in his dayes, which would not laboure for their liuing, as they ought to doe, but tooke occasion (as you do) by the example of the birdes of heauen, and Lillies of the fielde, to be altogether idle fro any labour or good exercise of their bodies, or handy occupations, learning thereby to liue like the idle Droane Bee in the hiue, vpon the sweate and trauels of other mens laboures:) 383 Sivultis (inquit) imitari volucres & Lilia, cur hoc quoq, illos non imitamini? Lilia no comedunt aut bibunt: aues non recondunt in crastinum, neque congregant in apothecas, neque molunt & coquut, at vos editis & bibitis, & studiose reconditis . that is: If you will imitate and followe the example of the birds and Lillies (not to labour,) wherefore doe you not imitate them also in this point? the Lillies neither eate nor drinke, the birdes doe not laye vp against the morowe, neyther gather togither into the sellers: neither doe they grinde corne, seeth or boyle meate: yet you do eate and drinke, and are carefull and diligent to lay vp in store, you do 384 non faciunt . This the birdes ( & Lillies) doe not saith Augustine. solliciti esse, Ergo solliciti esse vetamur, laborare aute iubemur. Sic eni Dominus loquens ad Ada: no dixit, cum solicitudine factes tibi panem, sed cum labore & sudore faciei tuae: Ergo no sollicitudinibus spiritualibus, sed laboribus corporalibus acquiredus est panis: Sicut laboratibus enim pro pramio diligentiae, Deo praestate, panis, abudat: sic dormientibus & negligentibus, propoena negligentae, Deo faciente, subducitur. &c. That is: the Lorde did not say, labour not, but be ye not careful: Therfore we are forbiden to be carefull but we are commaunded to labour. So the Lorde saide unto Adam: he sayd not to him, with carefulnesse thou shalt get thy breade, but with the labour and sweate of thy face. Therfore 386 diligence (by the blessing and helpe of God) their bread encreaseth, so to the slouthful and negligent, for the punishment of their 389 Nowe my sonne, you haue hearde by Gods word, and the auncient Fathers, what you ought to doe, therfore learne you first to 391 frutes of his creatures: and also to learne vs to walke in that vocation, 396 wherevnto euery man is called, as God maye bee glorified, the poore members of Christ comforted, and our selues saued. 397 not, nor haue any handie crafte, to get their liuing withal. First into Principallitie: Second, into Nobilitie: Third, into Pastoralitie, Fourthly into Vulgaritie. So that euerie member hath his office and calling, not to be idle, but alwaies diligent and laboursome in their vocations accordingly: therfore whatsoeuer the diuersitie is yet the profite is common, and serueth to the edification of the Church. So that it appeareth, it is no smal carke and care that Princes, Rulers, Pastoures &c. haue and take continually, watching when others sleep according to this saying: Non decet integram noctem dormire regentem. 412 Whom God hath placed to rule aright, Ought not to sleepe a full whole night. Notwithstanding, yet wee reade in auncient histories, that excellent men in olde time (when as they had gotten any vacant 413 or leisure time, either from holy seruice, or from ciuill matters) they spent al that leisure time, either about husbandrie, or about the art of a shephearde: For they woulde not consume the time 414 Apostles of Christ Jesu, &c: but also it manifestly appeareth by the Romane histories, wherein appeareth that Curius and Seranus and such like, were elected chiefe Magistrates, when they were in the fieldes at plough tilling the ground. It is also written that Xerxes king of Persia, in vacant time from the affaires of his Realme, with his owne hands did plant & sett immunerable trees, which long ere he died, brought foorth abundance of fruite &c. If such men would spend no time idlely, howe much lesse should meaner persons doe it. For as the wise man sayth: 418 A slouthful man is to be compared to the doung of Oxen. &c. For idlenesse bringeth much euill. be called idlenesse, onely in respect that the minde or body ceaseth from labour. all right, necessarie, godly, and profitable works. &c. 419 Also idlenesse is not only of the bodie or minde to cease from labour, but especially an omission or letting passe negligently all honest exercises: for no day ought to be passed ouer without some good profitable exercises, to the prayse of Gods glorious name, to our brethrens profit, &c to our owne comoditie and learning. and sharpe punishment appointed for such idle persons? I pray you let me knowe it, if there were, or be anie? saith: Forasmuch as idlenesse, that is to say (saith he) ceasing from necessarie occupations or studies, is the sinke which receiueth al the stinking chanels of vice, which once being brim full, sodeinly runneth ouer through the whole citie, and with his pestiferous ayre, infecteth a great multitude of people, ere it may be stopped and cleansed: And that notwithstanding, the people being once corrupted and infected with this pestilence, shall with great difficultie, and with long tract of time be deliuered. And therefore he made a law: That if anie one of the people had bene found idle, by the space of one whole day, he should be whipped, and after by the Conseruatours committed to some one Crafte that he was of: and for euerie day that he was seene to be idle, the person to whom he was committed, should (for a monethes space) set him to anie labour that hee pleased, as his slaue and bondman, and that no man should giue him meate, or to talke with him, vnlesse it were to chide and rebuke him. Draco the Lawmaker among the Athenians, made a lawe: That whosoeuer was found an idle person, should haue his head 421 cut off from his bodie. Areopagite did also vse great diligence, to searche out what 422 arte or science euery man had to finde him self withal, and those, whom he founde to be idle, he did sharpely punish. within their Citie, that had not some Arte and facultie to gette his liuing withall. For (say they) Nullam vrbibus pestem nocentiorem esse otio : There is no worse pestilence to a citie than idlenesse, &c. According as Syrach saith: A slouthfull man is to be compared to the doung of Oxen, and euery one that taketh it 424 euerie man mocketh at for his shame. 425 In the 14. and 18. yeres of the raigne of our Soueraigne Ladie Queene Elizabeth, two actes were made that idle vagarant and maisterlesse persons, that used to loyter, & would not worke, should for the first offence, haue a hole burned though the gristle. of one of his eares of an inche compasse: And for the seconde offence committed therein, to be hanged. If these and such like lawes were executed iustlie, trulie, and seuerelie (as they ought to be) without anie respect of persons, fauour or friendship, this doung and filth of idlenesse would easilie be rejected and cast out of this Common wealth: there would not be so manie loytering idle persons, so manie Ruffians, Blasphemers, & Swinge Buckelers, so manie Drunkardes, Tossepottes, Whoremaisters, Dauncers, Fidlers, and Minstrels, Diceplaiers, & Maskers, Fencers, Theeues, Enterlude plaiers, Cutpurses, Cousiners, Maisterlesse seruauntes, Iuglers, Rogues, sturdie Beggers, counterfaite Egyptians, &c. as there are, nor yet so manie plagues to be amongst vs, as there are, if these dounghilles and filthe in Common weales, were remoued, looked vnto, and cleane cast out, by the industrie, paine, and trauell of those, that are set in authoritie, and haue gouernement. So Moyses saieth: That they must take the euill away forth of 426 pepercerit malis : He is verie hurtfull to the good men, whosoeuer fauoureth and spareth the euill men. Therefore they must execute iustice, as well vpon the proper man, that is idle, as vpon the poore man: as well vpon one, as vppon another, that it may not be said: Dat veniam coruis, vexat censura columbas: Crabrones abeunt, recidunt in retia musc ae. What faultes great men alwayes committe, Are pardoned still, and goeth quitt When as the poore and simple bande, Are vexed cruelly in the lande. Because Hornets are verie great, They easilie passe through the net: When as the sillie litle flye, Is taken therein continuallie. communication with you, good Father. I perceiue that nothing is to be had or gotten in absenting from sermons, but euilnesse and losse of good doctrine and instructions, which I haue done through vaine idle pastimes and plaies. For nowe (by you) I vnderstande, that of idlenes commeth no goodnesse, but rather the contrarie. &c. Also I see and learne that euerie man (in his calling) ought to labour and get his liuing in the feare of God, and sweate of his browes. And therefore I will 427 not therefore be ashamed, to confesse my sinnes, and will 429 . no more resist the course of the riuer. not ashamed to confesse your lewde life, which is a 430 token that Gods spirit is in you. For as you confesse: we ought (euery man in his calling) to do good: for in doing nothing, we 431 learne to doe euill, so that you nowe flee from that vaine idle life, which before you haue liued, and spent a great time therin (notwithstanding, 432 Nunqu am serum est quod verum est : that is: Neuer 433 to late done, which is truelie done: that will come to passe that Ouid saith: Otia si tollas periere Cupidinis arcus. 434 If thou flee idlenesse, Cupid hath no might: His bowe lieth broken, His fire hath no light. my former wayes, and naughtie idle plaies and pastimes, and also my wilie wanton life, which wil be harde for me to bridle, according to that saying of Euripedes:  435 What custome we in tender youth, by natures lore receiue: The same we loue, and like alwayes, and loathe our lust to leaue. 436 neither is it in man to walke and to direct his steps. Therefore you must with the same Prophet say: Thou hast corrected me, and I was chastened as an vntamed calfe. Conuert 437 yong man redresse his wayes? In taking heede therevnto (saith he) according to thy word. For it is a lanterne vnto our feete, & a light vnto our pathes. &c. This word will deliuer thee (saieth 440 Salomon) from the euill way, and from them that leaue the wayes of righteousnesse, to walke in the wayes of darknesse, which reioyce in doing euill, & delight in the frowardnesse of the wicked. Therefore walke thou in the wayes of good men, and keepe the wayes of the righteous. Therfore (saieth S. Paule:) 441 Be not ouercome of euill, but ouercome euill with goodnesse. So that you must be nowe an earnest and continuall hearer of Gods word, and often to pray and cal vpon God through Jesus Christ. Alwayes be you tied to some labour and businesse, neuer giue anie respite to vnhonest lustes, but with godlie studies, and honest occupations resist the pride of the flesh, and with accustomed fasting, prayers, and repentance, keepe vnder your lasciuious life. For as S. Ierome saith: Semper age aliquid, vt Diabolus 442 aduenions semper te inueniat occupatum, non enim facile capitur a diabolo, qui bono vacat exercitio , that is: Alwayes be doing some thing, that when the Deuill commeth, hee may finde thee (wel) occupied: for he is not easily taken by the deuil, that applieth good exercise. &c. You must also call to remembrance, what 443 drawe you away from the companies of the wicked, and make you desire the companie of the godly and vertuous man. beseech you let me craue your earnest and heartie prayers vnto God for me, that I may crucifie the flesh with the affections and lustes therof, and as I liue in the spirit, so I may walke in the spirit. 449 would all men to come to repentance. And that you are nowe righteous, be you more righteous still, and that you are holy, be 455 you more holie still. &c. So that if these things be with you, and abounde in you, they will make you (saieth S. Peter) that yee 456 neuer shal be idle, nor vnfruitfull in the knowledge of our Lorde Jesus Christ. is, to accompanie alwayes with the godlie: thereby 457 a man shall learne godlinesse: for in the companie of the wicked, there is nothing but wickednesse to be learned. saying: Bring not euerie man into thine house, for the deceitfull haue many traines. &c. Againe he saith: Who can be cleansed by the vncleane? For he that toucheth pitch, shalbe defiled with it, and he that is familiar with the proude, shalbe like vnto him. &c. according to the old saying: If thou with him that haltes, doest dwell, To learne to halt, thou shalt full well. labour in their vocation and calling, do you hereby include the lame, deafe, blinde, aged, impotent, sicke, &c, and such as are not sounde in their members &c? be holpen accordingly, with the ayde & comfort of the publike collection. Therefore he that giueth to the poore, 459 & c. The poore, saith Christ, yee shall haue alwayes with you, and when ye will, ye may do them good. The fruite of the 461 poore that is cast into their bosomes, will returne againe with great profit. Blessed is he, that provideth for the sicke & needie: 462 (saieth Tobie) of thy substance, and turne not thy face from anie poore, least God turne his face from thee. &c. S. Paul willed the 464 churches of the Corinthians, as he willed the churches of Galatia, to make gatherings euerie first day of the weeke, and put 465 of the Saintes might be relieued. &c. Yet there must be a consideration in these also: For manie of them, which lacke the vse of 467 their feete, with their hands may pick wooll, & sowe garments, or toose Okam: Manie which lacke armes, may work with their feete, to blowe Smithes bellowes, &c. to serue to go in errantes. &c. So, as much as may be, in eche respect of persons, we must labour to auoide Idlenesse. Herein also we must consider, to helpe the broke, aged, old men & women, which neede to be susteined of the common collection: Also those that be persecuted for the Gospell of Christ, must be 468 ayded likewise: Also captiues and prisoners, either at home, taken abroade in warres, or else with Turkes: Also men that haue been riche, and are fallen into pouertie, either by the seas, fire, or else by any other casualtie, must likewise be holpen & succoured. Also yong fatherles & motherles children, poore scholers, & needie 469 widowes, and such other like, must be succoured, aided, & coforted, for the Church goods are the goods of the poore, & therfor 470 you must not iudge, that I speake so vniversallie, that these impotent & needie ought not to be holpen. &c. For as we reade in 471 Ludouicus the Emperors canonical institutions, that Res Ecclesia vota sunt fideliu, precia peccatoru, et patrimonia pauperum : The goods of the church be the vowes & bequestes of the faithful, prices to redeeme them, that are captiues & in prisons, & patrimonies, to succour them with hospitalitie that be poore. Prosper also saith; Viros sanctos, res Ecclesi ae no vindicasse vt proprias: 472 sed vt commedas pauperibus dimisse : Good men tooke the goods of the church, not as their owne, but distributed them, as giuen & bequeathed to the poore. Again he saith: Quod habet, cum omnibus nihil habentibus habet commune , Whatsoeuer the church hath, it hath it in common with all such as haue neede. It is reported 473 that the churches did distribute these goods into foure partes: one and the greatest part, vpon the needie people onlie: the second part, for lodging of strangers: thirdlie, burying of the dead: fourthly, in healing of diseases. It is reported, that Serapion had vnder him ( Decem millia sub se Monarchoru, quos omnes 474 sic educabat, vt ex proprijs sudoribus, necessaria copararent, & alys ministrarent egentibus :) Ten M. Monkes, who brought them vp in such order, that they gate by their owne labours, sufficient for themselues, and also wherewithall to ayde and helpe the needie and indigent. &c. Now, my sonne, you perceiue what sorte of people I speake of, and what sorte I speake not of. that euerie good and perfect gift commeth from him. togither of idle plaies & vaine pastimes, let me craue your further patience, to knowe your iudgement and opinion as touching Plaies and Plaiers, which are commonlie used and much frequented in most places in these dayes, especially here in this noble and honourable citie of London. kinde of such plaies, then should I be thought too Stoical and precise: If I allowe and admit them in generall, then shall I giue waie to a thousande mischiefes and inconueniences, which daily happen by occasion of beholding and haunting such spectacles. Therefore let me vnderstand of what sort and kynde of Plaies you speake of. are. waies to the honour of Bacchus: Others were called Ludi Florales , which were abhominable plaies in Rome, to 478 women plaied naked, with wanton wordes and gestures: 479 fighting one with another in harnesse, in the sight of the people, endeuouring eche to kill other: a spectacle of crueltie, to harden the peoples hearts against killing in warres: Others were 480 darte, & wrastling: Others were called Ludi Lupercales , games 481 wherin yong Gentleme naked, hauing whippes in their hands, ranne about laughing and beating all that they mette: Another 482 mother of the Goddes, with manie and sundrie other such like vaine Playes, which haue bene inuented. you haue not named those Playes and Players, which I would gladlie heare of. amongst vs so vniversally in towne and countrie. 483 which play vpon Scaffoldes and Stages Enterludes and Comedies, or otherwise with gestures. &c. godly, meete to be used, haunted and looked vpon, which nowe are practised? they are not tolerable nor sufferable in any comon weale, especiallie where the Gospell is preached. For it is right prodigalitie, which is opposite to liberalitie. For as liberalitie is to helpe & succour wto worldlie goods the man which is poore, & standeth needefull thereof: and also to giue to the mariage of poore Maydens, high wayes, or poore schollers &c. So prodigalitie is to bestow mony & goods, in suche sort as is spent, either in banqueting, feasting, rewardes to plaiers of Enterludes, Dicing, and Dauncing: &c. for the which no great fame or memory can remaine to the spenders or receiuers thereof. substance vpon Players garmentes. And also one Roscius a Romane and a player in Comedies (whom for his excellencie in pronounciation and gesture, noble Cicero called his iewell:) the Romanes also gaue him (as histories report) a stipende of one thousande groates for euery day (which is in our mony xvi. li. xiii. s. iiii. v.) Lucius Silla being Dictatour, gaue to him a ring of golde. &c. Sith these and such other gaue to such uses, why may not we doe the like? streetes, prisons, & other places, and also to those that are afflicted 487 he had not builded vp costly temples or churches: 489 & c. but euerlasting fire of hell (the punishment of the diuels) doe hang ouer vs, except wee doe consider Christ in his members, wandering as straungers, lacking harborough, and as prisoners wanting visitation. &c. The like may I say of the giftes, buildings, and maintenance of such places for Plaiers, a spectacle and schoole for all wickednesse and vice to be learned in. Saint Augustine saith: Donare quipperes suas Histrionibus vitium est immane, non virtus : For to geue thy goodes to Enterlude and 490 Stage players, is a great vice and sinne, and not a virtue. What do the hystories report of the ende of Plautus that was so prodigal? was faine to serue a Baker in turning a Querne or handmill to get his liuing, &c. Vespasian gaue out of his coafer. 491 sixe hundred pounde to Latine and Greeke readers. So did Plinie his Nephewe the like, for the which they deserued great fame, and encreased in great wealth and riches. builded for suche Plaies and Enterludes, as the Theatre and Curtaine is, and other such like places besides? way & fitter schoole to worke and teach his desire to bring men and women into his snare of concupiscense and filthie lustes of wicked whoredome, than those places and plaies, and Theatres are: And therefore necessarie that those places and Plaiers shoulde bee forbidden and dissolued and put downe by authoritie, as the Brothell houses and Stewes are. Howe did the Beniamites ouercome and take away the daughters of Israel? 492 but in watching them in a speciall open place, where they were accustomed vppon the Festiual dayes to sporte and daunce most idlely and wantonly. D. Peter Martyr (that famous 493 learned man) vpon this place (saith:) Hereby wee maie perceiue, that the virgins gaue themselues to plaies and daunces, which was to abuse the feast day: It had bene better for the to haue occupied the selues about grauer matters. For the feast dayes were to this ende instituted, that the people should assemble together, to heare (not playes) but the word of God, & to bee present at the Sacrifices, where they shoulde both cal vpon God, and communicate togither the Sacramentes instituted of God. Wherefore it is no meruaile if these maidens were so stollen away, resorting to such an open place, &c. and builded vp a certaine spectacle and place of safegarde for all transgressours that woulde come thither, practsing thereby to rauishe all Maidens of the countrie resorting to their newe erected place in Mount Palatine, at solemne games and playes, ouercame the people of Cenia, and slue their king, &c. Saint Augustine  495 sayeth: That the women of Saba being of curiositie desirous to bee present at open spectacles, were rapted and rauished by the Romaines: whereof followed suche warres, that both nations were almost destroied. In consideration of this & the like, Scipio Nasica (that worthie Romaine) obteined in the 496 Senate, that all Theatres and Stage plaies shoulde be abolished, for that it was so hurtfull vnto publike and ciuill manners. Also S. C. destroied vtterly that Theatre place, which was so gorgeously builded, and gaue commaundement, that no suche places shoulde be builded againe in the citie of Rome, and that they shoulde not make any seates or benches to sitte vpon (for to beholde such playes in such places) neither in the citie, nor yet within a mile compasse thereof. &c. I would to God our Magistrates 497 would folow those good and wholesome examples. to such playes, and beholde them without any hurt to them selues, or to others, and that no lust nor concupiscense is inflamed or stirred vp in them, in the beholding of any person, or of the plaies themselues. Howe say you, may it bee so? onely of such as you speake of, that resorted to such playing places. Some curious, daintie, and nice persons (sayeth hee) hearing this, wil say (to excuse their sinnes and follies:) we that do resort to beholde and consider the beautie & fairenesse of women, at Theatres and stage playes, are nothing hurt thereby. Dauid (saith he) was sore hurt (in beholding Bethsabe) and thinkest 499 thou to escape: He did not behold an harlot, but on the top of his house, Tu aute in Theatro, vbi codemnatur anima sapientis , Thou beholdest the in an open Theatre, a place where the soule of the wise is snared & codemned: in those places (saieth hee) thou seest not only Res infaustas , vnlawful things: but also hearest spurcoquia , filthy speaches, whereof is (saith he) incessus meretricis , the beginning of whoredome, & the habite of al euilnesse & mischiefe: where thou shalt by hearing diuelish and filthy songues hurt thy chaste eares, and also shalt see that, which shall be grieuous vnto thine eyes: for our eyes are as windowes of the minde, as the Prophet saith: Death entred into my windowes, that is myne eyes. Possible thou wilt say (saith hee) I am not me[illeg.] 500 Adamant: art thou wiser, stronger, and holier than Dauid: A litle sparkle of fire cast into straw, beginneth quickly to kindle & flame, our fleshe is straw, and wil burne quickly: and for that cause the holy Ghost setteth Dauid for an example to vs, that we shoulde beware of such contagiousnesse. Job saide: I haue 502 upon a Maide: Dauid also made his prayer to God, saying: O Lorde turne away mine eyes from regarding vanitie, and quicken me in thy way. Saint Ambrose Stage plaies: Uanitie, wishing that he could call back the people which runne so fast thither, and willeth them to turne their 505 eyes from beholding of such Playes and Enterludes. The like saying hath Saint Augustine. 506 Lactantius sayeth, that the eyes are diuerse and variable, which are taken by the beholding of things, which are in the vse of men, nature, or delectable things. Vitanda ergo spectacula omnia : All such spectacles and shewes (saieth hee) are therefore to be auoided, not onely because vices shal not enter into our hearts and breastes, but also leaste the custom of pleasure shoulde touche vs, and conuerte vs thereby both from GOD and good woorkes. frequent those Theatres and places where Enterludes are, and especially women and maides. fathers sayings.) Truly you may see dayly what multitudes are gathered togither at those Plaies, of al sortes, to the great displeasure of almighty GOD, and daunger of their soules: &c for that they learne nothing thereby, but that which is fleshly and carnall, which Diogenes sawe and well perceyued, as appeared by his doyngs, when as vpon a certayne day he [illeg.]ust himselfe into the Theatre or playing place, when as the [illeg.]le were comming forth: Being demaunded why he did so, [illeg.]ered: because (saith he) I will differ from the multitude, [illeg.] greatest parte of men are ledde rather by affections and reasons: &c. I wrote not what precepts may be geuen our people, for our custome now is worse than it was amongst the Pagans. Therfore let the people, and specially women, giue eare to the Pagan Ouid, if not to Christian preceptes, speaking of those common resortinges vnto playes, saying: 507 They come to see and eke for to be seene: Full much chastitie quailed thereby hath beene. Iuuenal the Poet sayth also: That no wiues or maidens, that list to content and please sad and honest men, will be founde and seene at common Plaies, Daunsings, or other great resort of people. For these Plates be the instruments and armour of 508 Uenus and Cupide, and to say good sooth, what safegarde of chastitie can there be, where the woman is desired with so many eyes, where so many faces looke vpon hir, and againe she vppon so many: She must needes fire some, and hir selfe also be fired againe, if she be not a stone; for what minde can bee pure and whole among such a rablement, and not spotted with any lust, according to the olde Prouerbe, Ex visu amor ? And as Uirgil 509 510 Playes and Enterludes, shewing what inconueneces and wickednesse is gotten thereby, and what lust and concupiscence is stirred vp thereby in beholding of it, and what filthie and foule actes are done of whoredome and baudrie, to the hurte of the beholders, adding this, Histrionicis gestibus inquinantur omnia : By the Gestures of Enterlude players, all honestie is defiled and befaced. Read those places of S. Cyprian, which he wrote of purpose against Plaies: for the inconueniencies that hee sawe and hearde to come thereof. O Lord what would he say and write of our playes nowe, if he were aliue, and saw their order in these dayes? For these causes was it that the godly Fathers wrote so earnestly against such Plaies and Enterludes, and also commaunded 512 by the Councels, that none should go or come to plaies. As in the third Councel of Carthage, and in the Synode of Laodicea, it was decreed that no christians (and especially Priests) should christians must abstain fros such places, where blasphemie is comonly used. Chrysostome calleth those places & playing of Enterludes, 514 Festa Satan ae , Sathas baquets. Saluianus doth bitterly reprehend those men and women, that will not abstaine from going to such vaine Enterludes and Plaies, saying: Spernitur Dei templum vt concurratur ad Theatru: Ecclesia vacuatur, circus impletur: Christum in altario dimittimus, vt adulter antes visa impurissimo oculos ludicoru turpiu fornicatione pascamus : We despise the Temple of God, that wee may runne to the Theatre: the Church is alway emptie and voyd, the playing place is replenished and full: we leaue Christ alone at the aulter and feede our eyes with vaine & vnhonest sightes, and with filthie and vncleane plaies. And a little after, he declareth what innumerable vices there groweth by those plaies, and what sinnes are committed 515 Christians, men and women in general:) Abstaine from prophane spectacles & Enterludes, for it is not meete that we should goe with those feete vnto Plaies, Enterludes, and abhominable spectacles, wherewith we vse to goe into the Temple of God. For they that will go with cleane vnpolluted feete into the Church of God, must vtterly & altogither abstaine from vngodly and prophane places, as these are. Fathers and Councells, I suppose a man or woman dooth not sinne, to beholde, and lust one for another, except they commit carnall copulation together. 516 the Gospel, that sayth, He that looketh on a woman & desireth to haue her, hath comitted adultry alredy in his heart. &c. And surely they are not spirituall, but carnall which doe not beleeue that they haue a spring of vngraciousnesse within them, 517 say, that fewe men or women come from Plaies and resortes of men, with safe and chast mindes. Therefore Augustus C aesar gaue comaundement, that no womaa should come to see Wrastlers greate grauitie, that it would recelue into it no Stage Players, because the argument (for the moste parte) contained the actes and doings of harlots, to the ende, that the custome of beholding such thinges, might not also cause a licence of following it: and therefore to exercise this art, is not onely, a dishonest and wicked occupation, but also to behold it, and therein to delight, is a shameful thing, because that the delight of a wanton minde is an offence. &c. Alas my sonne, notwithstanding all this, are not almost 520 al places in these our daies replenished with Iuglers, scoffers, Feasters, and Players, which may saye and doe what they 521 lyst, be it neuer so filthie and fleshly, and yet are suffered and hearde with laughing and clapping of hands: Lactantius saith. 522 Histrionu quoque impudissimi motus, quid aliud nisi libidines docent & instigant . Those filthie and vnhonest gestures and moouings of Enterlude players, what other thing doe they teache 523 than wanton pleasure, and stirring vp of fleshly lustes, vnlawful appetities, and desires, with their bawdie and filthie sayings and counterfeit doings: S. Paule therefore biddeth vs to abstaine from all appearance of euill. &c. ludes and places for plaies, seeing that many times they playe histories out of the Scriptures. Diuinitie, that is, to eate meate with vnwashed handes. Theopompus entermingled a portion of Moses Lawe with his writtinges, for which God strake him madde. Theodictes began the same practise, and was stricken starke blinde. And will God suffer them vnpunished, that with impure and wicked manners and dooings, doe vse and handle vpon scaffolds Gods diuine mysteries, with such vnreuerentnes & irreligiousnesse: What felowship hath righteousnes with vnrighteousnes? 525 (saith Saint James) proceedeth blessing and cursing. These thinges ought not so to be. S. Augustine saieth: It is beter that spirituall things be vtterly omitted, than vnwoorthily and vnreuerently handled and touched. O what rashnesse and madnesse is that (sayth Bernard,) to handle the woord of God with polluted hands, and to vtter and speake it with a filthie mouth mingled with filthie speaches and woordes. And by the long suffring & permitting of these vaine plaies, it hath stricke such a blinde zeale into the heartes of the people, that they shame not to say and affirme openly, that Plaies are as good as Sermons, and that they learne as much or more at a Play, than they doe at Gods word preached. God be merciful 527 eares, and loath that heauenly Manna, as appeareth by their slowe and negligent comming vnto Sermons, and running so fast, and so many continually vnto Plaies. Ouid was banished by Augustus into Pontus (as it is thought) for making the booke of the Craft of Loue. Hiero Syracusanus did punish 529 Epicharmus the Poet, because he rehearsed certain wanto verses in the presence of his wife. For he would not haue onely in his house chast bodies, but also chaste eares. Why then shoulde not Christians abolishe and punishe suche filthie Players of Enterludes, whose mouthes are full of filthinesse and wickednesse. 530 Saint Paule willed the Ephesians, that fornication and all vncleannesse should not once be named among them. Neyther 531 filthinesse, neyther foolish talking, neyther feasting, which are thinges not comely: but rather giuing of thankes. He sheweth the reason to the Corinthians why they shoulde so abstaine: Because euil speakings corrupt good maners (saith he.) Again 532 touche no vncleane thing, and then the Lorde will receiue vs, & abide with vs. For (sayth he) the grace of God that bringeth 534 saluation vnto all men, hath appeared, and teacheth vs, that we should deny vngodlinesse and worldly lustes, and that we should liue soberly, righteously, and godlily in this present worlde, looking 535 for the blessed hope & appearing of the glorie of the mightie God, and of our Sauiour Iesus Christ. places. the house of mourning, than goe to the house of feasting. 536 & c. For the heart of the wise is in the house of mourning: but the heart of fooles is in the house of mirth. And therefore it 537 than that a man should heare the songues of fooles. thither. they repent not, and leaue it off. Many can tary at a vayne Playe two or three houres, when as they will not abide scarce one houre at a Sermon. They will runne to euerie Plaie, but scarse will come to a preached Sermon: so muche and so great is our folly, to delight in vanitie, and leaue veritie, to seeke for the meate that shall perishe, and passe not for the foode that they shall liue by for euer. These people saieth Iob, 539 haue their houses peaceable, without feare, & the rod of God is not vppon them, they sende forth their children like sheepe, and 540 their sonnes daunce: They take the Tabret and Harpe, and reioyce in the sounde of instrumentes: They spend their dayes in 541 wealth, & sodenly they go down to the graue. They say vnto god, depart from vs, For we desire not the knowledge of thy waies. 542 speake (alas with griefe and sorow of heart) against those people that are so fleshly ledde, to see what rewarde there is geuen to such Crocodiles, which deuoure the pure chastitie, bothe of single and married persons, men and women, when as in their Plates you shall learne all thinges that appertayne to crafte, mischiefe, deceyte, and filthinesse. &c. If you will learne howe to bee false, and deceiue your husbandes, or husbandes their wiues, howe to play the harlots, to obtaine anie ones loue, howe to rauishe, howe to beguyle, howe to betraye, to flatter, lye, sweare, forsweare, howe to allure to whoredome, howe to murther, howe to poyson, howe to disobey and to rebell agaynst Princes, to consume treasures prodigally, to mooue to lustes, to ransacke and spoyle cities and townes, to be idle, to blaspheme, to singe filthy songues of loue, to speake filthily, to be proude, howe to mocke, scoffe, and deride anie nation, like vnto Genesius Aralatensis, & c. Shall not you learne then 545 Index est animi sermo, morumque, fidelis Hau a dubie testis. The tongue hath oftentimes witnesse brought, Of that which heart within hath thought: And manners hidde in secret place, It doth disclose and oft disgrace. Therefore great reason it is that women (especially) shoulde absent themselues from such Playes. What was the cause why Dina was rauished: was it not her curiositie: the Mayden 546 would go foorth, and vnderstande the manners of other folkes: Curiositie then no doubt did hurt her, and will alwayes hurt women. For if it were hurtful vnto the familie of Iacob (being so greate a Patriarch) for a Maiden to wander abroad, how much more daungerous is it for other families, which are not so holye nor acceptable vnto God: But the nature of women is muche 547 women to loue their husbands, to bring vp their children, and to be biders and cariers at home. And when he entreateth of wanton 549 and young widowes: They wander abroade (sayeth he) and runne from house to house, and at the last goe after Satan, Giue 550 the water no passage, no not a little (saith Syrash) neither geue a wanton woman libertie to goe out abroade. If thy daughter be not shamefast, holde hir straitely, least she abuse her self through ouermuch libertie. As men cannot gather grapes of thornes, & 551 figges of thistles, neither can any man or woman gather anie vertue or honestie in haunting places where Enterludes are. As one vertue bringeth in another, so one vice nourisheth an other. Pride ingendreth enuie: and idlenesse is an entraunce into lust. Idlenesse is the mistresse of wanton appetites, and portresse of Lusts gate. For no maentreth into the pallace of Lust, vnlesse he be first let in by idlenesse, and more idlenesse: can there not bee, than where such Plaies & Enterludes are. Therefore as Christ 552 sayth: The light of the bodie is the eye: If then the eye be single, thy whole bodie shall be light. But if thine eye be wicked, then all thy body shal be darke. &c. As if he would saie: If thine affections and wicked concupiscence ouercome reason, it is no meruell though men be blinded and be like vnto beastes and followe all carnall pleasures. To take away this darkenesse and blindenesse, 553 the Athenians prouided well, when they appointed their Areopagites to write no Comedie or Play, for that they woulde auoyde al euils that might ensue thereof, &c. Theodosius likewise 554 did by expresse lawes decree that daunces and wanton daliance should not be used, neither Games or Enterludes. Constantinus the Emperour made lawes, wherein he did vtterly for- 555 bid all Enterludes and spectacles among the Romanes, for the great discommoditie that came thereof. sayth: that all such Plaies (though they seeme pleasant and ful of sport) must vtterly be abolished, because no such Plaies are mentioned nor expressed in holy Scripture . S. Augustine saith: 559 that such Enterludes and Plaies are filthie spectacles. For whe the Heathen did appoint and ordeine (saith he) Plaies and Enterludes: to their gods, for the auoyding of the Pestilence of their bodies: your Bishops for the auoiding of the pestilence of your soules, haue prohibited and forbidden those kinde of Scenicall and Enterlude playes. Thus you may perceiue and vnderstand, howe those Plaies haue bene thought off among the good and godly Fathers afore time, which instruct vs thereby to hate and detest the like now in this latter time practised. players of Enterludes, sith they are so noysome a pestilence to infect a Common wealth? of my minde herein. Constantius the Emperour, that all Players of Enterludes should be excluded from the Lordes table. Iohannes de Burgo  561 sometime Chauncellour of Cambridge, and a Doctor of Diuinitie, in his booke entituled Pupilla oculi , sayth, that Histriones , Enterlude plaiers, No sunt ad ordines promouendi , are not to be promoted to any dignitie, the reason is (sayth he) Quia sunt infames , for that those Players are infamous persons: He noteth further how they are knowen, Hoc intellige de hijs qui public coram populo faciunt aspectum siue ludibrium sui corporis, exercedo opus illud : Understad this of those plaiers which vse to make shewes openly before the people, or else in vsing their bodies to this businesse, as to make sport to be laughed at. In another 562 notoriis & manifestis, non est Eucharistia confereda, quia tales vita ducunt, illicitam . The Sacrament of thankesgeuing ought not to be ministred vnto stage plaiers of Enterludes, or to 563 Witches, Sorcerers, or to any such infamous & notorious wicked persons, for that they leade a lewde and vngodly life. In the decrees, it is so decreed, that all Enterlude plaiers, and Comedie plaiers, Heretikes, Iewes and Pagans, are infamous persons, and ought to be taken for no accusers of any, nor yet to bee produced as witnesses in any matter or cause before any Iudge: if they be, the law is, that the partie may lawfully except against them, & say, they are infamous persons, for they are Players of 564 Enterludes. And this may you doe also, against common Minstrels. S. Augustine sayth also that those Enterlude plaiers are infamous persons. Cornelius Agrippa saith: There was in times past no name more infamous than Stage players. And 565 all they that had played an Enterlude in the Theatre, were by the Lawes depriued from all honour and dignitie. Also there is a notable Statute made against Uagabondes, Rogues. &c. 566 wherein is expressed what they are, that shalbe taken and accounted for Rogues. Amongst all the whole rablement, Common 567 is appoynted for them to bee burnte through the eare with an hot yron of an ynche compasse, and for the second faulte to be hanged as a Felon: &c. The reason is, for that their trade is such an idle loytering life, a practise to all mischiefe, as you haue hearde before. Common wealth, to gette their owne liuinges with their owne handes, in the sweate of their face, shall not they be admitted and taken againe to the Lords table, and afterward to be reputed and taken for honest men? 569 c aeterisq personis huiusmodi, vel Apostatis conuersis ad 570 Dominum, gracia vel reconciliatio non negetur : To Players of Enterludes and Comedies, and other suche like infamous persons and Apostates, conuerting and returning to the Lorde (by repentance) grace and reconciliation is not to be denied. And this is according to the saying of the Prophet Ezechiel: If the 571 wicked will returne from all his sinnes that he hath committed, and keepe all my statutes, and doe that which is lawful & right, he shall surely liue and not die. &c. beginning, and who deuised them. playes first, and were inuented by his crafte and policie, for that they conteine the wicked actes and whoredomes of the Gods, whereby the consciences of godly men are grieuously wounded, and wicked lustes are many wayes stirred vp. And therefore the Diuell builded Stages in cities. Arnobius sayeth: The Heathens supposed to haue pleased 573 and pacified their Gods from their wrath and displeasure, when as they dedicated to them the sounds of Instruments & shalmes 574 appoynt Playes & Enterludes to their Gods, for 575 dies habebunt quibus publica spectacula &c. religiosa &c;. The Gentiles had their certaine daies appointed for open spectacles and shewes, &c. which they dedicated religiously vnto 576 superstitionum , That the Deuil is the author of the Gentiles superstitions. For these causes & many other, sayth Theophilus, christians were forbidden to vse any such like playes, &c. If you will know more thereof. I will referre you vnto Polydore Uirgil, 577 and also vnto Iohn Textor, where you shall fully see the originall of all those Playes. &c. Enterludes are tollerated and suffred nowe a dayes in a Common wealth, a thing so euill of it selfe, and hauing so euill patrons. Gospell is preached and taught, such vaine ydle & filthie pastimes and mirthes shoulde surcease, and bee banished far away from Christians, fro whence it came. Beatus Rhenanus  578 impietatem: sed etiam, &c. It was meete for them to refraine, not onely from such things, as haue a manifest shew of wickednesse: but also from such things as might be called indifferent, partly least any of the weaker christians shoulde bee corrupted: partly also, least the Heathens should be encouraged in their errours, thinking that thing (for that the christians them 579 consistam. &c. Herein will I first stande, whether it bee lawfull for the seruat of God, to comunicate with whole nations in such thinges: eyther in apparell, or in diet, or in any other kinde of 580 superfluous thinges bee put to silence, where Gods church is, 581 meaning is this: Abolish not certaine of the superstitios of the Chaldees, reseruing certain. Therfore he comaundeth, that nothing be left in hir, be it neuer so little. Therefore 582 S. August, sayth, that his mother left bringing of wine & cakes to the church, for that she was warned, it was a resemblance of Christian man ought not to go with a Laurell garland 583 vpon his heade, and that for none other cause, but onely for that the Heathens used so to go. &c. how much more should we leaue off to imitate those filthie Playes and Enterludes that came fro 584 hominis dolos ae vestis , Craftie man, craftie coate. These 585 contrarie to nature and the lawe doe attire themselues being 587 men in womens apparell, and women in mens apparell, with Swannes fethers on their heades, Silkes, and golden apparell, 588 & c. shewing foorth in their Playes very Uenus it self as if they were fully in the kingdome of Sathan. &c. and opened such matters by the effectes, as will loathe any honest man or good woman to come neare suche Plaies. the particular secrets of the matter. sufficient to prooue that they ought to be ouerthrowne and put downe. there is dayly vnto them, and thereout suck they no small aduantage. were in all kinde of sensuallitie delicious, farre passing al other: for they used commonly to bidde their guestes a whole yeare before, that neither the bidder might lacke time to prepare al dainties, and delicious fare, and costly furniture, nor the guestes to adorne and trimme themselues vp with golde. &c. So they vse to set vp their billes vpon postes certain dayes before, to admonish the people to make resort vnto their Theatres, that they maye thereby be the better furnished, and the people prepared to fill their purses with their treasures, that they may sing, which Horace sayth: 590 Now are the braue and golden dayes, Nowe fame with play we gaine, And golde can shewe vs many waies Mens fauour to attaine: For mony they heare the Musicke sweete, And Playes they buye with golde, Wee seeke for golde, and straight vnmeete, Our name by it is sould. How they doo get, fewe folkes doo care, but riches haue they must, By hooke or crooke we daily see, they drawe men to their lust. 591 No faith nor feare of God haue they, which doe those playes pursue: Their handes are geuen to sell and spoyle, their gaine they call their due. hearde of you, out of the auncient authorities, Councels Lawes and Decrees, and I would to God such lawes were nowe executed vpon such thinges, which are occasions & loade- stones to draw people to wickednes. I maruel that magistrates suffer them thus to continue, and to haue houses builded for such exercises and purposes, which offend God so highly, sith it came from the Heathen, Sathan being the author, as you haue prooued: For my part. I shall henceforth (Jesus Christ willing) absent my self from such places and Theatres, and shal prouoke others to doe the like also, &c. Yet I merueile much, sithe the rulers are not onely negligent & slow herein to doe, but the Preachers are as dumbe to speake and saye in a Pulpitte agaynst it. loose the tongue of the Preachers, in such godly sort (by the good deuout prayers of the faithfull) that both with the sworde and the worde, such vnfaithfull and barren trees shall be cut downe, to Gods great glorie, comfort and safetie of his people, and encrease of vertue and christianitie, which God graunt for his Christ Jesus sake. request and desire, let this suffice at this time, as touching this matter, and let vs goe forwarde to reason of some other matter. iudgement as touching Comedies, and suche lyke things, which Schollers doe manie times practise and use, both in the Uniuersities, and also in diuerse other good Schooles. perdendorum puerorum, &c. ) A teacher not of learning, but of destroying childre, which practise them in these Enterlude and Stage playes. For (sayth he) Quod mal e didicit, cae. teris quoq, insinuit : that euil which he hath learned, he doth also communicate vnto other &c. Notwithstanding, you shall understand that Cyprian speaketh here of him, that did teach & practise only this kinde of vaine pastimes and playes, and did allure children vp therein. But to shew you my minde plainly, I think it is lawfull for a Scholemaister to practise his schollers to play Comedies, obseruing these & the like cautions. First that those Comedies which they shall play, be not mixt with any ribauldrie & filthie termes and wordes (which corrupt good manners.) Secondly, that it bee for learning, and vtterance sake, in 593 Latine, and very seldome in Englishe. Thirdly, that they vse not to play commonly, & often, but very rare & seldome. Fourthlye, that they bee not pranked and decked vp in gorgious and sumptuous apparell in their play. Fifthly, that it be not made a common exercise publikely for profite and gaine of mony, but for learning & exercise sake. And lastly, that their Comedies be not mixt with vaine and wanton toyes of loue. These being obserued, I iudge it tollerable for scholers. Comedie? Plaie, in the which, calamities & miserable endes of Kings, Princes, and great Rulers are described & set forth, and it hath for the most part, a sadde and heauie beginning and ending. A Comedie hath in it, humble and priuate persons, it beginneth with turbulent and troublesome matters, but it hath a merrie ende. 
