 that as M. Phaer was not thee first founrder, so hee may not bee accoupted thee only owner of such termes. Truely I am so far from embeazling his trauailes, as that for thee honoure of thee English, I durst vndertake, too renne ouer theese bookes agayne, and too geeue theym a new liuerie in such different wise, as they should not set with M. Phaer his badges, ne yeet bee clad with this apparraile, wherewith at this present they coo furth atyred. Which I speake not of vanitie, too enhaunce my coonning, but of meere veritie, too aduaunce thee riches of oure speeche. More ouer in soo poinctes of greatest price, where thee matter, as yt were, doth bleede, I was mooued too shun M. Phaer his enterpretation, and clinge more neere too thee meaning of myne authoure, in slising thee husk and cracking thee shel, too bestow thee kernel vpon thee wyttye and enquisitiue reader. I could lay downe heere sundrye examples, were yt not I should bee thoght ouer curious, by prying owt a pimple in a bent: but a few shal suffice. In thee fourth booke, Virgil deciphering thee force of Mercurye among oother properties wryteth thus. Dat somnos adimitque, & lumina morte resignat. M. Phaer dooth English yt in this wise. And sleepes therewyth he geeues and takes, and men from death defendes. Myne enterpretation is this: Hee causeth sleeping and bars, by death eyelyd vphasping. This is cleene contrarie too M. Phaer . Hee wryteth, that Mercurye defendeth from death , I wryte that yt procureth death , which (vnder his correction) dooth more annere too the author his mynd, and too natures woorcking. For yf Mercurye dyd not slea beefore yt dyd salue, and procurd sleeping eare yt caused waking. Nature in her operations would bee founderd, thee fat were in thee fire, thee marcket were mard. Too lyke effect Chauncer bringeth, in thee fift booke, Troilus thus mourning. Thee owle eeke, which that hight Ascaphylo, Hath after mee shright al theese nightes two: And God Mercurye, now of mee woful wreche Thee soule gyde, and when thee list, yt feche. Againe Virgil in diuerse places inuesteth Iuno with this epithet on, Saturnia , M. Phaer ouerpasseth yt, as yf yt were an idle woord shuffled in by thee authoure too dam vp thee chappes of yawning verses. I neauer, too my remembraunce, omitted yt, as in deede a terme that carieth meate in his mouth, and so emphatical, as thee ouerslipping of yt were in effect thee chocking of thee poet his discourse, in suche hauking wise, ac yf hee were throtled with the chincoughe. And too inculcat that clause thee better, where thee marriadge is made in thee fourth booke beetweene Dido and Æ neas , I ad in my verse, Watrye Iuno , Althogh mijne authour vsd not thee epitheton, Watrye , but only made mention of earth, ayer , and fyere : yeet I am wel assured, that woord throughly conceaued of an heedeful student may geeue hym such light, as may ease hym of six moonethes trauaile: which were wel spent, yf that Wedlock were wel vnderstood. Thus Virgil in his, Æ neis , and Ouid in his Metamorphosis are so tickle in soom places, as they rather craue a construction than a traslation. But yt may bee heere after (yf God wil grace my proceedings) I shal bee occasioned, in my Fin Couleidos , too vnlace more, of theese mysteries. Which booke I must bee manye yeeres breedinge: but yf yt bee throughly effected, I stand in hoape, yt wyl fal owt too bee gratum opus , not Agricolis , but Philosophis. Now too coom too theym, that guesh my trauaile too be easye, by reason of thee libertye I had in English woordes (for as I can not deuine vpon such bookes, that happlye rouke in studentes mewes, so I trust, I offer no man iniurie, yf I assume too my selfe thee maydenhed of al wurcks, that hath beene beefore this tyme, in print, too my knowledge, diuulged in this kind of verse) I wil not greatly wrangle with theym therein: yeet this much they are too consider, that as thee first applinyg of a woord may ease mee in thee first place, so perhaps, when I am occasioned too vse thee selfe same woord els where, I may bee as much hyndered, as at thee beginning I was furthred. For example. In thee first verse of Virgil , I mak, season , long in an oother place yt woul steede mee percase more, yf I made yt short: and yeet I am now tyed too vse yt as long. So that the aduantage that way is not verie great. But as for thee general facilitiee, this much I dare warrant yoong beginners, that when they shal haue soom firme footing in this kind of Poetrie, which by a litle payneful exercise may bee purchast, they shal find as easye a veyne in thee English, as in thee Latin verses, yee and much more easye than in the English rythmes . Touching myne owne trial, this much I wil discoouer. Thee three first bokes I traslated by startes, as my leasure and pleasure would serue mee. In thee fourth booke I did task my self, and persued thee matter soomwhat hoatlie. M. Phaer tooke too thee making of that booke fifteene dayes. I hudled vp myne in ten. Wherein I coouet no prayse, but rather doe craue pardon. Fore lyke as forelittring biches whelp blynd puppies, so I may bee perhaps entwighted of more haste then good speede, as Syr Thomas More in lyke case gybeth at one that made vaunt of certeyn pild verses clowted vp extrumpere . Hos quid te scripsisse mones ex tempore versus? Nam liber hoc loquitur, te reticente, tuus. But too leaue that too thee veredict of oothers (wherein I craue thee good lyking of thee curteouse, and skorne thee controlment of thee currish, as those that vsuallie reprehend moste, and yeet can amend leaste) thee ods beetweene verses and rythme is verye great. For in thee one euerye foote , euerye word , euerye syllable , yea euery letter is too bee obserued: in thee oother thee last woord is onlye too bee heeded: As is very liuelye exprest by thee lawyer in empaneling a iurye.  1 Iohannes Doa:   Iohannes Den:   Iohannes Hye: --------- Richardus Roa:   Wilhelmus Fen:   Thomas Pye: Iohannes Myles:   Wilhelmus Neile:   Richardus Leake: Thomas Giles:   Iohannes Sneile:   Iohannes Peake. Happlye such curious makers, as youre lordship is, wyl accompt this but rythme dogrel : but wee may suite yt wyth a more ciuil woord, by terming yt, rythme peale meale , yt rowles so roundlye in thee hyrer his eares. And are there not diuerse skauingers of draftye poetrye in this oure age, that bast theyre papers wyth smearie larde sauoring al too geather of thee frynig pan? What Tom Towly is so simple, that wyl not attempt, too bee a rithmoure ? Yf your Lordship stand in doubt thereof, what thinck you of thee thick skyn , that made this for a fare wel for his mystresse vpon his departure from Abingtowne? Abingtowne, Abingtowne God bee wyth thee: For thou haste a steeple lyke a dagger sheathe. And anoother in thee prayse not of a steeple, but of a dagger. When al is goane but thee black scabbard, Wel faer thee haft wyth thee duggeon dagger. Thee therd (for I wyl present your lordship wyth a leshe) in thee commendacion of bacon. Hee is not a king, that weareth satten, But hee is a king, that eateth bacon. Haue not theese men made a fayre speake? If they had put in Mightye Ioue , and Gods in thee plural number, and Venus wyth Cupide thee blynd Boy , al had beene in thee nick, thee rythme had beene of a right stamp. For a few such stiches boch vp oure newe fasshion makers. Prouyded not wythstanding alwayes that Artaxerxes , al be yt hee bee spurgalde, beeing so much gallopt, bee placed in thee dedicatorye epistle receauing a cuppe of water of a swayne, or elles al is not wurth a beane. Good God what a frye of such wooden rythmours dooth swarme in stacioners shops, who neauer enstructed in any grammar schoole, not atayning too thee paringes of thee Latin or Greeke togue, yeet lyke blynd bayards rush on forward, fostring theyre vayne conceites wyth such ouerweening silly follyes, as they reck not too bee condemned of thee learned for ignorant, so they bee commended of thee ignorat for learned. Thee reddyest way therefore too flap theese droanes from thee sweete senting hiues of Po etrye , is for thee learned too applye theym selues wholye (yf they be delighted wyth that veyne) too thee true making of verses in such wise as thee Greekes and Latins , thee fathers of knowledge, haue doone; and too leaue too theese doltish coystrels theyre rude rythming and balducktoom ballads. Too thee sturring therefor of thee riper, and thee encouraging of thee yonger gentlemen of oure Vniuersityes I haue taken soo paynes that way, which I thought good too beetake too youre lordship his patronage, beeing of yt self oother wise so tender, as happly yt might scant endure thee typpe of a frumping phillippe. And thus omitting al oother ceremonial complemetoes beetweene youre lordship and mee, I comit you and youre proceedinges too thee garding and guiding of thee almightie. From Leiden in Holland thee last of Iune. 1582. Youre Lordship his loouing broother Richard Stanyhurst. stieflie tyed too thee ordinaunces of thee Latins, as what shal seeme too swarue from theyre maximes, they wyl not stick too skore vp for errours. In which resolution such curious Priscianistes dooe attribute greater prerogatiue too thee Latin togue, than reason wyl affurd, and lesse libertye too oure language, than nature may permit. For in as much as thee Latis haue not beene authors of theese verses, but traced in thee steps of thee Greekes, why should we with thee stringes of thee Latin rules cramp oure tongue, more than the Latins doe fetter theyre speeche, as yt were, wyth thee chaynes of thee greeke preceptes. Also that nature wyl not permit vs too fashion oure wordes in al poinctes correspondent too thee Latinistes may easely appeere in suche termes as we borrow of theym. For exemple: Thee first of, Breuiter , is short, thee first of, briefly , wyth vs must bee log. Lykewise, sonans , is short, yeet, sowning , in English must bee long: and much more yf yt were, Sounding , as thee ignorant generaly, but falslye dooe wryte; nay, that where at I woonder more, thee learned trip theyre penes at this stoane, in so much as M. Phaer in thee verye first verse of Virgil mistaketh thee woorde, Yeet sound and sowne differ as much in English, as solidus and sonus in Latin. Also in thee midest of a woord wee differ sootymes fro thee Romas. As in Latin wee pronouce, Orator , Auditor, Magister log : in English, Oratoure, Auditoure, Magistrat , short. Lykewise wee pronounce, Praparo, Coparo , short in Latin, and, prep ared and comp ared log in English. Agayne thee infallibelist rule that thee Latins haue for thee quatitye of middle syllables is this. Penultima acuta producitur, vt virt utis; penultima grauata corripitur, vt sanguinis. Honoure in English, is short, as with thee Latins: yeet dishonour must bee l og by thee formoure maxime: which is contrary too an oother groud of thee Latins, whereby they prescribe, that thee primatiue and deriuatiue thee simple and compound bee of one quantitye. But that rule of al oothers must be abadoned fro thee English, oother wise al woordes in effect should bee abriged. Moother , I make l og. Yeet graudmother must bee short. Buckler , is l og; yeet swashbuckler is short. And albeyt that woord bee l og by positio , yeet doubtlesse thee natural dialect of English wyl not allow of that rule in middle syllables, but yt must bee of force with vs excepted, where thee natural pronuntiation wyl so haue yt. For ootherwise wee should bannish a number of good and necessarye wordes from oure verses; as M. Gabriel Haruye (yf I mystake not thee gentleman his name) hath verye wel obserued in one of his familiar letters: where hee layeth downe diuerse woordes straying fro thee Latin preceptes, as Maiestye, Royaltye, Honestie, &c. And soothly, too my seeming, yf thee coniunction, And , were made common in English, yt were not amisse, although yt bee long be position : For thee Romans are greatly aduantaged by theyre woordes, Et , Que, Quoque, Atque : which were they disioincted from thee Latin po etrie, many good verses would bee rauelde and dismembred, that now cary a good grace among theym, hauing theyre ioynctes knit with theese copulatiue sinnewes. But too rip vp further thee peculiar propretye of oure English, let vs listen too Tullye his iudgemet, wherein thogh hee seeme verie peremptorie, yeet, with his fauoure, hee misheth thee cushe. Thus in his booke, intituled Orator , hee writeth, Ipsa natura, quasi modularetur hominum oratione, in omni verbo posuit acutam vocem, nec vna plus, nec a postrema syllaba citra tertiam . In this saying Tullye obserueth three poinctes. First, that by course of Nature euerye woord hath an accet . Next, one only: lastlye, that thee sayd accet must be on thee last syllable, as prop e , or on thee last saluing one, as Virt utis , or at thee furthest on thee therd syllable, as Omnipotes . Yeet this rule taketh no such infallible effect with vs, although Tully maketh yt natural, who by thee skyl of thee Greek and Latin dyd ayme at oother languages too hym vnknowen, and therefor is too bee borne wythal. As, Peremtorie , is a woord of foure syllables, and yeet thee accent is in thee first. So S ecundarie, ordinarie, Matrimonie, Patrimonie, Planetarie, imperatiue, Cosmographie, ortography , wyth manye lyke. For although thee ignorant pronounce, Imp eratiue, Cosmographie , Ort ograghy , geeuing thee accent too thee therd syllable, yeet that is not thee true English pronuntiation. Now put case thee cantel of thee Latin verse ( Sapiens dominabitur astris ) were thus Englished: Planetary woorckinges thee wismans vertue represseth : albeyt thee middle of planeta bee long with thee Romans, yeet I would not make yt scrupulus, too shorten yt in English, by reason thee natural pronoutiatio would haue yt so. For thee final eende of a verse is to please thee eare, which must needes bee thee vmpyre of thee woord, and according too that weight oure syllables must bee poysed. Wherefor syth thee po etes theymselues aduouch, Tu nihil inuita facies, dicesus Minerua. That nothing may bee doone or spoake agaynst nature, and that Art is also bound too shape yt self by al imitation too Nature : we must request theese grammatical Precisians , that as euery countrye hath his peculiar law, so they permit euerye language too vse his particular loare. For my part I purpose not too beat on euerye childish tittle, that concerneth Prosodia , neither dooe I vndertake too chalck owt any lines or rules too oothers, but too lay downe too thee reader his view thee course I tooke in this my trauaile. Such woordes as proceede fro thee Latin, and bee not altred by oure English, in theym I obserue thee quantitie of thee Latin. As Honest, Honor : a few I excepted, as thee first of apeered, auenture, aproched I make short, althogh they are long in Latin: as Appareo, Aduenio, Appropinquo : for which and percase a few such woordes I must craue pardon of thee curteous reader. For ootherwise yt were lyke ynough that soom grammatical pullet , hacht in Dispater his sachel, would stand clocking aganyst mee, as thogh hee had foud an horse nest, in laynig that downe for a falt, that perhaps I dooe knowe better then hee. Yeet in theese diriuations of termes I would not bee doomde by euerye reaching herrault, that in roaming wise wyl attempt too fetche thee petit degree of woordes, I know not from what auncetoure. As I make thee first of Riuer short. A Wrangler may imagin yt should bee long, by reason of Riuus , of which yt seemeth too bee deriued. And yeet forsooth riuus is but a brooke , and not a riuer . Lykewise soom English woordes may bee read in soom places long, in soom short, as skyeward, seaward, searowme . Thee difference thereof groweth beecause they are but compound woordes that may bee with good sense sunderd: and thee last of Sea , and Skye beenig common breedeth that diuersitie. Also thee self same woord may varye beecause of thee signification. Thee first of Felon for a theefe I make long, but when yt signifieth thee disease, so named, I hold yt better too make yt short. Agayne a woord that is short beeing deuided, may bee long in an oother place contracted. As thee first of, Leaues , yf you deuide yt in two syllables, I make short, yf you cotract yt too one syllabe I make yt long. So thee first in Crauing is long, and thee therd person of thee verb, too wyt, Craues , may seeme short, where the next woord following beginneth with a vocal, yet yt is long by contraction:and so diuerse lyke woordes are too bee take. And truely such nice obseruations that Grammarians dooe prescribe are not by thee choysest po etes alvvayes so preciselye put in executio: as in this oure authour I haue by thee vvay marckt. In thee fore front of thee first booke hee maketh thee first of Lauinum long. In thee same booke hee vseth yt for short. Likevvise dooth he varie thee first of Sichoeus . So in thee therd booke thee midest of Cyclopes soomtyme is made long, soomtyme short. And in the same booke thee coniunction, Que , is long. As Liminaq;, laurusque Dei totusq moueri . And in thee fourth: Cret esque Driopesque ferunt, pictique Agathyrsi : Also thee first of Italia is log: yeet in thee therd book Italus is short: as: Has autem terras, Italique hanc littoris oram. Touching the termination of syllables, I made a prosodia too my selfe squaring soomvvhat from thee Latin: in this vvise. A finita communia. B.D.T. Breuia: yeet theese vvoordes that eende lyke dipthoges are common: as mouth, south, &c. C common. E common: yf yt bee short, I vvryte yt vsualy vvith a single E as the, me yf log vvith tvvo, as thee mee. althogh I vvould not vvish thee quantitie of syllables too depend so much vpon thee gaze of thee eye, as thee censure of thee eare. F. breuia. G. breuia: soomtyme long by positio vvhere D may bee enterserted, as passage is short, but yf you make yt long, passadge vvith; D. vvould bee vvritten, albeyt, as I sayd right novv, thee eare not ortographie must decyde thee quantitye, as neere as is possible. I.comon. K.commo. L. breuia, preter Hebrea, vt Micha el, Gabriel. N. Breuia, yeet vvoordes eending in dipthogvvise vvould bee comon, as playne, fayne, swayne . O. comon, pr aeter o longu. P. Breu. R. Breu. except vvoordes eending lyke dipthonges that may bee comon, as youre, oure, houre, soure, succour, &c. As & Es comon. Is breu. Os comon. Vs breu. V common. As for M. yt is either long by position , or els clipt, yf thee next vvoord begyn vvith a vocal: as fame, name : for albeyt. E. bee thee last letter, that must not salue. M. from accurtation, beecause in thee eare M is thee last letter, and E dooth noght els but lenghe and mollifye thee pronountiati o. As for. I. Y. VV. in as much as they are moungrels, soomtyme consonates, soomtyme vocals, vvhere they further I dooe not reiect theym, vvhere they hinder, I doe not greatlye vveigh theym. As thee middle of folowing I make short, notvvythstanding thee VV: and lykvvise thee first of power . But vvhere a co;sonat immediatly follovveth thee VV, I make yt alvvayes log as fowling . This much I thoght good too acquaynt thee gentle reader vvythal, rather too discoouer, vvyth vvhat priuat preceptes I haue embayed my verses, then too publish a directorye too thee learned vvho in theyre trauayls may franckly vse theyre ovvne discretio, vvythovvt my direction. 
