 it will stand vpright, when I with Callicratides am ouerthrowne, but to shrinke in so good a quarrell, is in my opinion, more foule a disgrace then death if selfe. God knoweth I neuer vndertoke thys troublesome peece of woorke for any vaine glorie as Crassus did his Inuectiue againste Carbo , and repented him afterwardes, because it was a hatchet to hys owne libertie, setting many mens eyes aworke to watch hym; nor of any fantasticall ouerhardinesse, as he that hauing taken a Wolfe by the eare, neither letteth hym goe, for being assaulted; nor is able to master hym for wante of mighte: But as the Wrastler entring the liste, first tasteth his strength, by lifting some churlish peece of vveight at the armes end,  & therevvith as it vvere rebateth hys stomacke, for being too rough vvhen he comes to grapple; I first vveighed in my hands the aunciente Fathers of the Church, that the massinesse of theyr argumentes in thys matter might cause me not to deale so ouerthvvartlye & stubbornelye, as the Defendantes of Players haue deserued. Neuertheles I thought it necessarye to nettle one of their Orators aboue the rest, not of any set purpose to deface hym, because hee hath dealt very grossely, homely, and vncharitably vvith me, but like a good Surgeon to cut, & to seare, vvhen the place requireth, for his ovvn amendment. Which thinge I trust shall neither displease your honor, nor any of the godly, in the reading, so log as the person vvhom I touch is (as I heare by hys ovvne frendes, to hys repentance if he can perceiue it) hunted by the heauy hand of God, and become little better than a vagarant, looser than liberty, lighter than vanitie it selfe. The righte, for the recouery vvherof I framed these actions belongeth not to mee, but vnto God, vvhose manner is to beate dovvne the loftinesse of vsurpers, not vvyth the vvisdome of the world, or with preparation of speare & shield, but with the foolishnes of the Gospel, and the nakednesse of hys truth. Therefore it had bene as daungerous for me, in this simple Confutation of our Comedies, to play with my penne by seekinge fine pouders for deintie noses, as it is for the soldier to dally with his weapon when the battell ioynes. It is one thing to flourish, an other to fighte, one thing to bragge, another to come to handye gripes. Finding Playes of theselues, as filthy as the stables of Augia , impossible to bee cleansed before they be carried out of Englande, vvyth a stiffe streame, and the banishinge of them as vvorthy to be registred in the labors of Hercules as the conqueringe the monstruous wilde Bore, of Erymanthus , that wasted the countrey round about: If euer so notable a thinge bee brought to passe it must bee done by some Hercules in the Court, whom the roare of the enimy ca neuer daunt. Whiche persvvaded mee amongest all the patrones of vertue in her Maiesties court to dedicate both this  & my selfe vnto your honor, that your vvisedome might be a countenaunce to my study, your authoritie a buckler vnto my life. Agamemnon a valiaunt Captayne of the Greekes , thought verely, that if hee might haue but tenne suche as Nestor to take hys part, it vvould be no trouble to sacke Troy : I haue beene alwaies of this opinion, that if but one suche as Nestor , that is, your honor, doe no more then thruste out your hand to succour mee, let the wicked discharge their shot at my face, Playes vvill bee easely fired out: and I vvhen I sleepe shall be as safe, as the childe in his cradle, vvhose mother vvill not suffer a flye to bite him. Meane vvhile I most humbly craue pardon for my bouldnesse, in presuming, to crepe into your honours patronage: I make as much accounte of your honour, as the Atheniens did of Paralus their holye shippe, that vvas neuer lanched but vpon high,  & great affaires: The Gentlemen Players in the citie of London , are grovven in such a heate, that by their foming, their fretting, their stampinge, my frendes do perceiue how their harts vvoorke, and enforce me to bring to your honor no comon fraighte, but as much as my life and securitie hereafter shall be vvorth. If the prouidence of God, vvho many times scourgeth a ma vvith the sinne that he loued, haue ordeined those players vvhome I fed with fancies, to be a vvhippe to my back, and a dagger to my brest, the fault is mine ovvne, the punishmente due: But if it be the pleasure of the Almightie, rather in mercy to deliuer, then in iustice to confound;  & by your honorable patronage to snatch mee out of the iavves of those rauenous vvolues, that haue vvhetted their teeth to pull me downe; I shall learne to employ my study to the glory of God, and be bound to your honour vvhilest I liue. Thus vvishing a charitable minde to them, better successe vnto my selfe, plentye of happines to your honor; I leaue them and me to your honors consideration, and your honor to the tuition of God himselfe. and the Innes of Court. Two things (Gentlemen) I perceiue to be inuincible in ye world, both whiche, to my griefe, are quite against me, Fauour , & Eloquence : the one in Players, and that I feare: the other in you, and that peradueture wil stay my passag. I mistrust that the fauour, which Players haue gotte with the greater multitude, will make them preiudiciall to the cause I handle, for loue is so blinde, that it neuer sees any blemishe in the thing it liketh, but as iuy, euen by the smallest, and weakest proppes that it catcheth, findeth a way to reare it selfe. The eloquence that is in you, as I confesse it to be great, so were it not greatly to be doubted, if it were but indifferent in my selfe. Nowe sith my Rhetorike is litle, my Eloquence nothing, compared to you, whose continuall exercise, is ioyned to continuall studye: though the trueth be as sure on my side, as the succession of night is to the day, yet I holde my selfe vanquisht before you strike. or Pericles were the better wrastler, answered, that he coulde not tell: for, when I throw him (quoth he) he denies he was downe, and persuadeth the beholders to beleeue him: Such is the excellencie of your witte, if it be bent to contende with me for Playes, that howsoeuer I trip you, or fetche you ouer, you are able to say that I come not neere you, and make the Reader auouch it, againste the open testimony of his eyes. I woulde Readers considered yt when they come to the view of any newe booke, they are bidde by their frend as ghestes to a banquet: at a banket if any dish bee before you, which your stomacke abhors, It is a pointe of good manners, somewhat orderly to remoue it: In bokes if any thing bee offred that you cannot rellish, curtesy wils you, with a thankefull kinde of modestie to refuse it. Our fathers forefathers in older time, were wont to place Mercurie in their Temples amonge the Graces, whose meaninge was, that as Mercurie was counted the God of vtterance: and the three Graces, the Ladies of Curtesy: so placinge the shrines of them together, might teach vs to know that speech is desirous of frendlye eares, and writers haue great need of Gentle Readers. When Gentlemen reade with a minde to barke, their throtes are no narrow that nothing wil downe; whatsoeuer we speake is too rounde or too flatte, too blunte or too sharpe, too square or too crooked, one waye or other it standes a wry. The fayrest citie in the worlde may bee ouerthrowen, with lesse charge, lesse labor, lesse time, than it can bee builte: a bracke is sooner spiede than drawne together: bookes many times are speedily reprehended, but amended by leisure, at the Calendes of the Greekes . It is the propertie of some kinde of Dogges, to teare the skinne of the beast with woderfull stomacke, when it is deade and within the doores, which abroad they neuer durst open at when it liued: and diuers iollie sifters in these dayes can tosse, and turne, and within their owne walles make dishecloutes of writers, whose sight would be too hot for their presence if they mighte ioyne. Seeinge many bookes printed & few liked, I coniecture with my selfe that the reason is, that some ar curious, some froward, some idle. We know that counsell is as necessarie to our eares as light to our eies, the one is a lanterne to the bodie, the other a bright shining lampe vnto the soule. Receauing instruction, if your tooth bee too white, you may chaunce to sterue: if your nose be so fine that nothing will please you, but that whiche is sweete, you may well be copared to those nice kind of Dames which in platting of Garlands forget their thrifte, or to him whiche thinkes it impossible to quenche his thirst, if his drinke be not serude in a cup of golde: if you be contentious and ouerthwart, willinger to cauil, than to learne: contented to reade, but not to regard: to be taught, but not reformed: you are like vnto him that forsakes the Phisitian when he is cutte, and neuer permits him to finish the cure: if you be so slow, of your selues, that because writers many times doe not set downe euery thing that may be spoke, but onely pointe with their fingers to the place, where you may bee satisfied if you seeke it, you wil not trauell and study to fish it out, you are not much vnlike to naked birdes in the nest that euer lie yauning at the bill of ye dam, & search for no more then is put in their mouths. You know it is a notable point of folly for a man to toaste himself by his neighbours fire, and neuer bestirre him to keepe any warmthe in his owne chimnie: as great a madnes is it in manye Readers, when they are taught, not seeke to mainetaine it of their owne: whiche is, to contente themselues with the glorious blase of an other mas knowledge, whereby they outwardly get some colour in their cheekes, but within they are duskie, darke and obscure. Many thinges might bee spoken against Playes, for the vaine ostentation of a flourishinge wit, brauelie, for satisfieng the that are vnsatiable, largelie: for instructing of them that are vnlearned, plainly: which I haue omitted. For, to treade aloft among you as a tragicall Poet in my buskins, were as fondlie done as to throw water in the sea where it can not be seene: to dilate this discourse for the vnsatiable, were as much as to close vp the mouth of Curtius gulfe, that will neuer be stopt but with my life: to lay open euery thing to ye ignorant, were without iudgment to charge them beyonde theire strength, which are to be fed like childre, with a litle, and ofte. What effect my labour wil take amog you, I am not sure, yet hope the best, at all aduentures I haue committed it to the Presse. Seiramnes the Persian seeing many men wonder that he spake wisely, but nothing that euer he spake was regarded: tolde them that wordes were euer in his owne power, but successe was neuer within his reache. You may see if you please, that the counsel I bring is good and sounde, but if you despite it when it is read, I wil comfort my selfe as Seiramnes did: I haue my bokes in my study at commandement: you are out of my walke, & your owne men. I was very willing to write at this time, because I was enformed by some of you which heard it with your ears, that since my publishing the Schole of Abuse , two Playes of my making were brought to the Stage: the one was a cast of Italian deuises, called The Comedie of Captaine Mario : the other a Moral, Praise at parting. These they very impudetly affirme to be written by me since I had set out my inuectiue against them. I can not denie, they were both mine, but they were both pened two yeeres at the least before I forsoke them, as by their owne friends I am able to proue: but they haue got suche a custome of counterfaiting vpon the Stage, that it is growen to an habite, & will not be lefte. God knoweth, before whom to you all I doe protest, as I shal answer to him at the last day, when al hidden secrets shal be discouered, since the first printing of my Inuectiue, to this day, I neuer made Playe for them nor any other. Therefore it euer they be so shameles, and graceles to belye me again, I beseech God, as he hath giue me more wit, to spende my time well: so to sende to them more honestye, to speake a trueth. I coulde purge my selfe of this sclaunder in many words, both how I departed from the City of London, and bestowed my time in teaching yong Gentlemen in the Countrie, where I continue with a very worshipfull Gentleman, and reade to his sonnes in his owne house: but the men are so vaine, & their credite so light, that the least worde I speake is inough to choke them. He that repreheds a vice, & shunnes if not, snuffes the Lampe to make it burne, but puts in no oyle to nourishe the flame. Therefore as sonne as I had inueighed against Playes, I withdrewe my selfe from them to better studies, which so long as I liue I trust to follow. and my self to your iudgement, I leaue to trouble you any farther, crauing this at your hads before we parte, that if anye Player belie me in your hearing vpon the stage, you would rather consider of the person than of the speach, for a Player is like to a Marchants finger, that standes sometime for a thousande, sometime for a cypher, and a Player must stand as his parte fals, sometime for a Prince sometime for a peasant. Yours Stephen Gosson. hereafter by reading some parte of my simple trauels, chance to woonder, that I whiche heretofore haue not onely so fauoured, but written Playes, that my penne hath bene readier to defend them, then to deface them; now with alteration of minde so depely accuse that which so highly I esteemed. Whatsoeuer hee bee, if hoe weigh the reason that mooueth moe therevnto, I trust he will both allowe that which by my  Schoole of Abuse hath past against them: And thinke it necessary for me at this time, to renue my plea. When I firste gaue my selfe to the studie of Poetrie, and to set my cunning abroache, by penning Tragedies, and Comedies in the Citie of London: perceiuing such a Gordians knot of disorder in euery play house, as woulde neuer bee loosed without extremitie, it a sunder at one stroke, then to seeke ouernicely or gingerly to vndoe it, with the losse of my time and wante of successe. This caused mee to bidde them the base at their owne gole, and to geue them a volley of heathen writers: that our diuines considering the daunger of suche houses as are set vp in London against the Lord, might batter them thoroughly with greater shotte. But such is the queasinesse of our stomacke, that like vnto Traueilers at the Sea, being ready to cast, we thinke to finde remedy by chaunge of place, sprawling down from the Ship to the Cockboate, yet are neuer the neere, so longe as the humour workes within vs: & acknowledging the mischefe bred by playes we hope to auoid yt by changing their day yet suffer the still to remaine amonge vs. Wherein we may well be compared to children that holdinge yse in their handes for discomodities sake are vnwilling to keepe it; & for wantonnes, loth to let it go. Comodus a Romane Emperor, was so excellente in throwinge of his darte, that hauinge gotten Sundrie sortes of wilde beastes, as markes for the exercise of his hand, the whole cittie of Rome assembled together to behold him, neither sawe him throwe twise at one marke, nor giue any wound which was not deadly: And yt were to bee wished that euery man which taketh vpo him to rebuke sinne, should leuell so streight with Commodus, and sticke so sure, that as oft as he shootes at deformityes, he might hit them, and as ofte as he hittes, kill; So shoulde the readers with the Romanes see, neyther anye kinde of monster twice gaulde, nor anye vice recouer the first wounde. Neuerthelesse as some Philosophers are of this opinion that the heauens because they moue doe yelde a kinde of harmonie in theyr motion, yet yf you requeste to knowe the reasone, why we discerne it not by the eare, their aunswere is, that wee neuer heare it, because wee euer heare it. So the abhominable practises of playes in London else where, so zealously, so learnedly, so loudly cried out vpon to small redresse; that I may well say of them, as the Philosophers reporte of the moouing of the heauens, we neuer heare them, because we euer heare the. Whereby I gather, that the wisedome of man, is able to rule any thinge but man: for the sauage and brute beasts neither grudge to feede where they are appoynted, nor resist when they are driuen from those places, where they loue most of all to byte. But whether our eares be wilfully stoped, & our eyes muffled, that in hearing, we heare, and not vnderstand; in seeing, we see and not perceiue; or whether the deuill our ancient enemie hath stricken so deepe and so venemous a tothe into the hart of man, as hath infected, and wounded the soule to death, I know not well; 1 by the worde of God, that beinge watred with the Preachinge of the Gospell, if the fruite wee yeelde bee thornes and briers, it is a very earemarke of reprobates, and of such as are giuen ouer by the Lorde, to their owne sense, to follow destruction with full saile. The worde of God is liuelie, and mightie in operation: being liuelie, if it doe not quicken and stirre vs vp to a newenesse of life, it is a token that we haue no life, but are alreadie stone deade, in the workes of darkenes: being mightie in operation, both the plaiers and wee must be persuaded, that their idle occupation, hauing so stoute, so strong, so puyssante, so mightie an enemie as the worde of God, though the honour and authoritie of their Masters hold them vp for a time, yet in the end they must haue a fall. For neither strong holds, nor inuentions of men, nor any high thing that is exalted against the knowledge of God, shalbe able to stand, whe the foote of his Prophetes comes against it. Amongest all the fauorers of these vncircumcised Philistines I meane the Plaiers, whose heartes are not right, no ma til of late durst thrust out his heade to mayntaine there quarrel, but one, in witt, simple; in learning, ignorant; in attempt, rash; in name, Lodge; whose booke, as it came not to my handes in one whole yeere after the priuy printing thereof, so I confesse, that to it, before this time I aunswered nothing, partlie because he brought nothing; partly because my hearte was to bigge, to wrastle with him, that wanteth armes. Therefore considering with my selfe that such kinde of sores might bee launced to sone, I chose rather to let him ripen and breake of him selfe, that vomiting out his owne disgrace, & being worne out of fauour among his own friends, I might triumph in the cause & shedde no blood. Though some of his acquaintaunce haue vaunted to cut and hewe mee I knowe not howe: yet hauing greater regarde to the soules of many, then to the threatninges of fewe; to the honour of God, then to the pride of ouer bragging and busie Players; by Gods assistance I will proue vnto you, that stage Plaies are not to be suffred in a christian comon weale. Which I trust I shalbe able sufficietly to performe, if I giue you a tast both of the causes of Plaies, and of the effectes: of the causes, which I finde by reading; of the effectes, which I knowe by my owne experience. I hope that no Christia wilbe so shamelesse to say that the doctrine & inuentio of the Deuill, is to bee suffered in that commo weale, where the glad tidings of grace is truelie preached. For to mainetaine the doctrine and inuention of the Deuill, is a kind of Apostasie & falling from the Lorde. For God hath made vs to his owne likenesse, which 3 . likenesse consisteth not in lineaments and proportion of the body, but in holinesse and singlenesse of life. Therefore receiuing the doctrine and inuentions of the Deuill, betweene whome and God there can bee no truce, no league, no manner of agreemente, because the one is holy, the other impure; the one good, the other euill; the one light, the other darkenes: we forsake our God, forsakinge of him, wee loose his image and likenesse, loosinge his image, wee are not hys children, and consequently haue no part nor felowship with Christ in the world to come. That Stage Playes are the doctrine and inuention of the Deuill, may bee gathered by Tertullian, who noteth verie well that the Deuill foreseenge the ruine of his kingdome, both inuented these shewes, and inspired men with deuises to set them out the better thereby to enlarge his dominion and pull vs from God. And William Lodge in that patchte pamphlet of his wherein he taketh vpon him the defence of playes, little perceiuinge how lustely ye chippes flye in his face, whilst he heweth out timber to make the frame, confesseth openly that playes were consecrated by the heathens to ye honour of their gods, which in deede is true, yet serueth it better to ouerthrow them them establish them: for, whatsoever was consecrated to the honour of the Heathen Gods was consecrated to idolatrie, Stage Playes by his owne confession were consecrated to the honour of Heathen Gods, therefore consecrated to idolatrie. Being consecrated to idolatrie, they are not of God, if they proceede not from God, they are the doctrine and inuentions of the deuill. This will be counted newe learninge amonge a greate number of my gay countymen, which beare a sharper smacke of Italian deuises in their heades, then of English religion in their heartes. Neuerthelesse the godly perceiue how lamentable & damnable a case we stand in; lamentable, because we are so asotted with these delightes, so blinded with the loue, and drunken with the sweetnes of these vanities, that greedely we flocke together, and with our brainesicke assemblies not vnlyke to the Troyanes hale in the horse, whose mischiefe hath beene discouered by the Prophets of the Lorde, and whose bowels haue beene manye times gaged with the sword of his trueth: damnable, because we professe Christ, and set vp the doctrine of the deuill; wee holde with the hare and run with the hound, heaping vp iudgement vpon our soules by this hipocrisie. Certayne it is, that this life of ours is a continuall warrefare, a pitchte fielde, wherein, as the lickerous tounge of our mother Eue hath iustly prouoked the Lorde, to set the deuill and vs at deadly feude, so is it our part to bethinke vs of him, that neuer leaues nibling at our heele. Hee is called the Serpent, the enuious ma, the Prince of this world, the common enemie of Christe, and of man kinde. Being a Serpent hee is subtile; being enuious, he repineth at our estate; being a Prince, hee is mightie; being an enemy, hee is malicious; malice breedeth continuall discorde; continuall discorde, a perpetuall studye and desire to hurt: which the Apostle vnderstading, giueth vs a watche woorde to walke warely. For hauing an enemy so crafty conceited, so well appoynted, so enuious, so malitious, so willinge to mischiefe vs: no doubte but he hath sett vp many trappes, shott many nettes, bayted many hookes, to take vs, to tangle vs, to thrattle vs. Which is enough to make vs suspecte euerie pleasure that hee profereth. When Pyrrhus  4 sawe that the Romaynes coulde not be ouer throwne by force of armes, he buried the bodies of them that were slayne; he dealte very honorablie with hys prisoners returninge them home without ransome, and sent his Ambassadours to entreate of peace: wherby he made accounte to winne that with vndermininge, which open assalt could feeling such a terrible push, giuen to his breast by the chaunge of religion, and by the happy etrauce of her Maiestie to the crowne, hath played wilie beguilie euer since. Hee deales verye fauourably with vs now, hee entertayneth his captiues with all manner of curtesie, hee craueth no raunsome for our release, his Ambassadours haue bene a great while amonge vs. First hee sente ouer many wanton Italian bookes, which being traslated into english, haue poysoned the olde maners of our Country with foreine delights, they haue so hardned the readers harts yt seuerer writers are trode vnder foote, none are so pleasunte or plausible as they, that sound some kinde of libertie in our eares. This contempt of good bookes hath breede a desire of fancies & ioyes. For if it be as Ambrose sayth 5 that the decrease of vanitie is the increase of vertue: I may reason of the contrary, that the increase of vanity is the decrease of vertue. Therefore the Deuill not contented with the number he hath corrupted with reading Italian baudery, because all canot reade preseteth vs Comedies cut by the same paterne, which drag such a monstrous taile after the, as is able to sweep whole Cities into his lap. They which haue any experience in martial discipline, know yt the easiest way to conquere, is either to bribe ye Captaine, to betraye his Prince, or to allure ye Souldiers, to reuolte & forsake their Captaine. Our enemie whose experience is great by continuall practise had from the beginning tried his cunning vpon Christe but tooke the foyle: yet leauing nothing vnsifted that may serue his purpose, and seeing that neither riches nor preferment of this world, could moue our Captaine to fall forward and worship him, because we are commanded to followe our Captaine foote by foote which is Ircksome to performe, hee settes Comedies abroach and erecteth Theaters to make vs fall backwarde & flie the fielde. Happy saith the Prophet is he That walketh not in the  6 Counsell of the vngodly, nor standeth in the way of sinners, nor sits in the chaire of pestilence. The counsell of the vngodly is the cunning drift, the deepe search, the subtill cast of the Children of darknes which are sharpe sighted in all kinde of mischiefe. The way of sinners is the proceedings and practises of sinners. The chaire of pestilence is the Assembly of wicked worldlings. But if we flocke to Theaters to gase vpon playes, wee walke in the Counsell of the vngodly, because plaiyng is one of those politique hornes which our enemie dosseth against the Gospell; We stand in the way of sinners, because plaies are the proceedings & practises of the Gentiles in their Idolatrie; We sit in the chaire of pestilence, because we thrust our selues into the companie of them, which being ouergorged with the preaching of the word, begin to list at seuerer discipline, and worship the Deuill by falling backward. This Apostacy plungeth vs vp to the throat in sinne and wickednes & ringes a peale for reuenge in the eares of God, by whome wee learne that the reward of sinne is a bitter cursse. Sithince stag plaies are the doctrine of the Deuill; the Counsell of the vngodly; the way of sinners, the chaire of pestilence; the forerunners of a cursse procured to that lande wherein they floorish, howe can they bee suffered in this common weale wherein we professe the name of Christ, except we stand at defiance with Christianity, or proclaime open warre to our soules? Some curious sifter peradueture may iudge me to be streighter laced the I neede, or cast this 7 in my teeth, yt such christias as wil borow nothing fro the Getiles lest they stand in the way of sinners, must neither occupie ships, for they were inueted by Minerua; nor weare any line, because it was proper to Osyris; nor exercise almost any kinde of handycraft, for most of them were borowed of the Gentiles. To whome I aunswere 8 reuealed vnto them by God, for necessary vses and the benefite of ma; some were inspyred by the Deuill, which vnder the shew of indifferency shadow the coruptio of a priuy condition, by which they are subiect vnto vanitie. Those things that are inuented for necessarie vses, as, Shippes, clothing wollen or linnen, Manuary craftes, may be accepted of Christians without error, for they are the blessings of God bestowed vpon vs; but these things which are neither necessary nor beneficiall vnto man, yet cary in their Foreheaddes a manyfest printe of their first condition, as May-games, Stageplaies, & such like, can not be suffred amog Christians without Apostacy, because they were suckt from the Deuilles teate, to Nurce vp Idolatrie. God thinking him selfe not sufficiently honoured, except the outwarde conuersation of our life doe giue a testimony to the worlde of the inwarde holinesse of the minde, chargeth vs seuerely to auoide euery thing that hindereth the outwarde profession of Christianitie. Therefore the Apostles writing to the Churches of Antioch, Syria, Cilicia, iudged it a necessary Burthen to bee layed 9 Wherefore if ye outward vse of things indifferent, as meats, be to be tied to ye rule of charitie, and not to be taken, when they offende the consience of the weake; how much lesse ough we to ioyne with idolators in theire playes, which are nawghte of them selues, & offensiue to the godly? yf we be carefull that no pollution of idoles enter by the mouth into our bodies, how dilligent, how circumspect, how wary ought we to be, that no corruption of idols, enter by the passage of our eyes & eares into the soule? we knowe that whatsoeuer goeth into the mouth defileth not but passeth away by course of nature; but that which entreth into vs by the eyes and eares, muste bee digested by the spirite, which is chiefly reserued to honor God. This spirite of ours is already defiled with the idolatrye of the Gentiles, if wee be partakers of their sacrifices, and maketh vs stinke in the sight of God, for as he that steales but a trifle is guiltie of theft, so hee that alloweth the least parcell of offringes of the Gentiles is accessary to idolatry if not by ye quantitie of ye thing, yet by ye nature of the crime. Which being considered, I am forced to saye, that suche men as are erectors of Stage Playes among Christians, either see not that they communicate with the sacrifices and idolatry of the Gentiles, for lacke of knowledge; or seeing it, dissemble the matter for wante of zeale. Two sortes of sacrifice were vsed among the Heathens, the one, to the Gods of their countrey, the other to the Spirites of the deade, they committed idolatrye in them both. Amonge suche Idolatrous spectacles as they sacrificed to their 10 for the firste findinge out of wine. These Playes wer not set vp by the Gentiles of any blinde zeale within themselues, but by the motion of the diuell, as may be prooued by the originall of them in Rome. This kinde of Idolatrye was long practised among the Greekes, the Romanes not being acquainted with ye same. Therefore ye deuill spying his time to bring it into Italie, about 400\. yeares after ye building of Rome, in ye Consulship of Sulpicius & Stolon the inhabitantes beinge mightelie deuowred with a greate plague, the Deuill foreseeing the time whe the plague should cease, taught ye Romanes by the oracles of Sibilla to set forth plaies to appease yt ager of ye Gods, ye ye pestilence ceasing after this solemnising of their plaies, might nussle the in idolatrie and watonnesse euer after. For as ye wicked spirits which ye Gentiles worshipped appeared once fightinge in the plaine of Campania, to whet them to slaughter and bloudshead by this illusion: 11 be consecrated vnto them, wherein theire Adulteries, and Impurities were pointed out, that such as gaue credite to the same, might follow their example, and they that coulde not bee brought to beleeue it, yet seeing theyr Gods delight to bee worshipped so, might giue them selues Ouer to abhominable lust. Though the Romans in that horrible Plague that vexed theyr City fetcht the famousest Plaiers out of Hetruria, yet did not the Sicknes of bodie surcease, because the delicate phrensie of plaiyng entred, but the craftines of wicked spirits foreseeing that the pestilence shoulde haue 12 an end, tooke aduantage hereby to infect not the bodies, but the manners of the Citizes with a greater plague. Euerie Seafaring man is able to tell you that there is greater daunger in those stormes that forbid you to shoote into the Hauen, then in them that wil not suffer you to saile at al: which policy the Deuill vsed to peruert the Gentiles. For those wicked spirites which challenging a diuinitie to them selues, were worshipped of the Gentiles, neither regarded the smoke of sacrifices, nor showe of plaies, but the men that offered vp bothe to honour them. By this meanes the Deuill driuing them from the worship of the true God, as ships from the harbour where they shoulde ryde, helde them in greater perill of death then if they had worshipped no God at all. Sithince it is manifest by all Antiquities, if we search them, that plaies are the Sacrifices of the Deuill, taught by him selfe to pull vs from the seruice of our God, as ofte as euer wee set them vp in our Christian Cities, the Diuell, triumpheth and reioyceth therein as in thinges sacrificed by Christians vnto him. Because that as in the Church singing and praysing the Lorde together as hee him selfe hath instructed vs in his worde, is a signe by whiche the true God is assured that we sacrifice our hearts vnto him with the Calues of our lippes: So the Diuell perceiuing vs to aduaunce the offringes or sacrifices of the Gentiles, after the same manner of houses, of apparell, of Stages, of Plaies, that he instructed the Gentiles by his Oracles, hath greate cause to bee merrie, and to holde him selfe honoured thereby. Is it so? and shall wee say wee doe it not with the minde to commit Idolatrie? Truely this aunsweare is like to a drawght of colde water in burning Feuers, whereby the bodie is quieted for a time, but the sickenes can neuer be remoued. The noble Scipio Nasica perceiuing that the Citie cannot longe endure whose walles stande and manners fall, when hee sawe the whole Senate bent to builde vpp Theaters, and sett out Playes, with earnest persuasion drewe them from it. And Valerius Maximus flatlie affirmeth, that they were not brought in to Rome Sine pacis rubore , without a steine of disgrace to the time of Peace. that if any continued in that arte, they were depriued of the dignitie of other Citizens, and remoued by the Censors from their Tribe. Wherefore I beseech God so to touch the heartes of our Magistrates with a perfite hatred of sinne, and feare of Iudgement; so to stirre vpp some noble Scipio in the Courte, that these dausing Chaplines of Bacchus, and all such as set vp these wicked artes, may be driuen out of Englande, may bee shutt from the companie of the Godly, & as open professors of Idolatrie, separated from vs by Sea and Lande. If there be a zeale in authoritie, to banish them; a diligence in Preachers to pursue them; a generall consent in vs to loath them; I dare boldely auouch from my owne experience, that monstrous sinnes, with very light trauell; imminent dager, with very small troble; olde festred corruptions, in very shorte time wilbe displaced; the Churches in London more frequented, more furnishte, more filled; the diuine seruice of God more regarded, more reuerenced, more kept; and the vtter suppressing of a fewe, breed a sweete reformation in many thousandes. bee as ioyfull to vs as the houer of birth, because the ioy of safetie atchiued is sure, the condition of byrth vncertaine; and because wee are borne without pleasure, saued with gladnes: Both I shal think my study very well employed, and my louing cuntrimen of Englande shall haue cause to reioyce, if it please God by my trauell against Plaies, so make me a stay to the ryot of their expences, a discloser of the corruptio in their families, and a watchman againste the hazard of their soules. All which as I iudge to proceed of Stage Plays, so must I confute the opinion of them that holde the contrary. Yonge Master Lodge thinking to iest vpon star-toppes, and steale an ynche of his hight by the bare name of Cicero, allegeth fro him. yt a Play is the School-mistresse of life; the lookinge glasse of manners; and the image of trueth. But finding him selfe too weeke in the knees to stand it out, neither alleadging the place where Tullie saith it; nor bringing any reason of his owne, to proue it; hee flittes from this to the Etymologie of Plaies, fro thence to the inuentors, and so gallops his wisedome out of breath. It seemeth that Master Lodge saw this in Tullie with other folkes eyes, and not his owne. For to my remembrance I neuer read it in him, neither doe I thinke that master Lodge can shewe it me. For in his Tusculans second, third, and fourth booke, he misliketh playes, in his bookes of the common weale, he is sharpe set against them. 14 were set out at Pompeys charges, he telleth him that if any paine of bodie, or decaye of health withhelde him, hee attributeth it rather to fortune, then to his wisdome, but if he contemned those bables, that other men wonder at, and being not hindered with sicknes refused to see them of his own accord, he reioyceth greatly in his friedes behalfe, first, that he felt no greefe of bodie, next that he was perfectly whole in minde, because he foreslowed to come to those spectacles, which other me delight in without cause, I would it pleased master Lodge to remember that in cases of conscience no mans aucthoritie may stand for reason, it is therefore our duetie to weighe before we speake, whether the testimonies of other men will abide the hammeringe, when they come to be wrought by the worde of God, otherwise to take what soeuer they neither reason nor conscience doth allow, is as fonde and impertinent an enterprise, as to open our locke with the hatchet, and cleaue our wood with the key. that neuer spake them, I will first sette downe the matter, and the persons of both kindes of playes, then rippe vp euery part of this definition, that you may see how this gentleman like the Foxe at 15 emptie stomacke, when his heade will not suffer him to enter in. The argumet of Tragedies is wrath, crueltie, incest, iniurie, murther eyther violent by sworde, or voluntary by poyson. The persons, Gods, Goddesses, furies, fiendes, Kinges, Quenes, and mightie men. The ground worke of Commedies, is loue, cosenedge, flatterie, bawderie, slye conueighance of whordome. The persos, cookes, queanes, knaues, baudes, parasites, courtezannes, lecherouse olde men, amorous yong men. Therefore Plautus in his prologue before the comedie of the captiues, desiring to curry fauoure with his auditours, exhorteth them earnestly to marke that playe, because it shall cast no such stenche of impuritie into theire noses as others doe. There is in it (saith he) neither forsworne baude, nor harlot, nor bragging souldier. Why could he not giue this commendation to all the rest? because it was the practise of the deuill, to weaue in a threed of his own spinning. Why is this rather purged of filthines then the rest? because it is the iuglinge of the deuill, to turne himselfe sometimes to an Angel of light, to deceiue vs the sooner. The best play you can picke out, is but a mixture of good and euill, how can it be then the schoolemistres of life? The beholding of troubles and miserable slaughters that are in Tragedies, driue vs to immoderate sorrow, heauines, womanish weeping and mourning, whereby we become louers of dumpes, and lamentatio, both enemies to fortitude. Comedies so tickle our senses with a pleasanter vaine, that they make vs louers of laughter, and pleasure, without any meane, both Sees to temperance, what schooling is this? Sometime you shall see nothing but the aduentures of an amorous knight, passing from countrie to countrie for the loue of his lady, encotring many a terible monster made of broune paper, & at his retorne, is so wonderfully changed, that he can not be knowne but by some posie in his tablet, or by a broken ring, or a handkircher, or a piece of a cockle shell, what learne you by that? When ye soule of your playes is eyther meere trifles, or Italian baudery, or wooing of gentlewomen, what are we taught? paraduenture you will saye, 16 that by these kinde of playes, the authours instruct vs how to loue with constancie, to sue with modestie, and to loath whatsoeuer is contrarie vnto this. In my opinion, the discipline, 17 his schollers to lye, and not to lye; to deceiue, 18 friends, & how to their enemies; to their friends, for exercise; to their fooes, in earnest. Wherein many of his schollers became so skilfull by practise, by custome so bolde, that their dearest friendes payde more for their learning then their enemies. I would wish the Players to beware of this kind of schooling, least that whilst they teach youthfull gentleme how to loue, and not to loue; how to woo, and not to woo, their schollers grow as cunning as the Persians. to make a lawe, that yong men should euer after be taught simply as householders vse to instruct their families: so I trust, that when the Londoners are sufficiently beaten with the hurte of such lessos as are learned at Plaies, if not for conscience sake, yet for shunning the mischiefe that may priuately breake into euery mans house, this methode of teaching will bee come so hatefull, that euen worldly pollicy without any gramercy shalbe driuen to banish it. Sappho writing to her Louer Phaon, telleth him, that her study peepes 19 true this assertion is, appeareth by Mathematicians, which are solitary; musitians, whose mindes are as variable as their arte. This may suffice to persuade vs that no manner of goodnes can bee learned at a play, partly because the best is a mixture of good and eull, as shalbe showen more euidently by the formall cause thereof when I come to that place. The minde of it selfe is simple without mixture or composition, therefore those instructions that are giuen to the minde must bee simple without mingle magle of fish & flesh, good & bad where both are profred, the hereditarie corruptio of our nature taketh ye worst and leaueth the best. Upon this cosideratio 20 Aristotle vtterly forbiddeth yog men of Plaies till they bee setled in minde & immoueable in affection lest comming to the Stage to fetche Physicke for loue, they quench their heate with a pynte of water and a pottle of fire; partly because that whiche is learned, must be learned of the best, least the example of vngodly Masters, poyson vs rather the instructe vs. But whether Playes, for the matter; or Players, for their manners; be fitte Schoolmasters of honestie, I report me to them that by frequenting Theaters are very well acquainted with the argument of the one, the life of the other. If any goodnes were to bee learned at Playes it is likely that the Players them selues which committ euery sillable to memory shoulde profitte most, beecause that as euery man learneth so hee liueth; and as his study is, such are his manners; but the dayly experiece of their behauiour, sheweth, that they reape no profit by the discipline them selues; how then can they put vs in any good hope to be instructed thereby when wee haue the sight of such lessons, but an houre or two as they study and practise euerie daye, yet are neuer the better. Master Lodge Finding some peeuish index or gatherer of Tullie to be a sleepe, is very wel contented to winke for company, and thinking his worde so currant to goe for payment, woulde gladly persuade vs vpon Tullies credite that a Play is the Schoolmistres of life. Wherein I perceiue hee is no changeling, for hee disputeth as soundly being from the vniuersitie and out of exercise, as hee did when hee was there, and at his booke. giues to a Play, is, that it is a very Glasse of behauiour. The corruption of manners is there reuealed and accused. Which is easily confuted, by the circumstance of the place, of the person, of the manner, and of the end of accusation. For the place; no priuate mans life ought to be brought in question or accused, but where hee may pleade in his owne defence and haue indifferent iudges to determine the cause, to that ende receiue wee a couple of eares that both partes might be heard, both equally weighed, & therfore did Alexander in iudgement stop one eare with his finger reseruing it wholly for the defendant. At Stage Plaies it is ridiculous, for the parties accused to replye, no indifferency of iudgement can be had, beecause the worste sorte of people haue the hearing of it, which in respecte of there ignorance, of there ficklenes, and of there furie, are not to bee admitted in place of iudgement. A Iudge must be graue, sober, discreete, wise, well exercised in cases of gouernement. Which qualities are neuer founde in the baser sort. A Iudge must be immoueable, vncorrupted, vpright, neither turning to the right hand, nor to the left; the meaner sorte tottre, they are caried away with euery rumor, and so easily corrupted, that in the Theaters they generally take vp a wonderfull laughter, and shout altogether with one voyce, when they see some notable cosenedge practised, or some slie conueighance of baudry brought out of Italy. Wherby they showe themselues rather to like. it then to rebuke it. A iudge must neither be inflamed with choler, nor blinded wt affectio; The rudest of the people are sometime rauished with euery giewgawe, sometime so headie, that they runne together by heapes, they know not whither; and lay about with theire clubbes, they see not why. Which thing the auncient Philosophers considering called them a monster of many heades. If the common people which resorte to Theaters being but a assemblie of Tailers, Tinkers, Cordwayners, Saylers, olde Men, yong Men, Women, Boyes, Girles, and such like, be the iudges of faultes there painted out, the rebuking of manners in that place, is neyther lawfull nor conuenient, but to be held for a kinde of libelling, and defaming. Howsoeuer they face it out with their owne cardes, pretending that as the Painter in his shoppe expresseth 21 picture of his owne drawing, wherein you may behold the whole life of man, 22 another meaning: for as any man had displeased them, to reueng there owne cause they studied to present him vpon the stage, there did they ruffle, and taunt; scoffe, and nippe; thunder, and lighten, and spue vp theire counning to deface him. Whereupon grewe one of the lawes of the twelue tables, that no man should be so hardie as to write any thing, 23 whereby the good name of any bodie might be hurt; they woulde not haue the life and behauiour of the citizens, subiect eyther to a Poets inkehorne, or a Players tongue, but to the seate of iustice. 24 other famous writers, which hauinge curiously searched ye lawes of the Romaines, confesse in plaine words, that the ouerlashing of players was so restrayned. Whether this be the practise of Poets in these dayes you may perceiue by the drift of him that wrote the play termed the three Ladies of London, which in the Catastrophe like of playes? Loue answeres that she detesteth them, because her guttes are tourned outward, and all her secret conueighaunce, is blazed with colours to the peoples eye. Conscience like a kindharted gentlewoman doth alow them. throwes him selfe headlong downe the hill. For neither Loue disliked them, before he had maried her to Dissimulation, whose propertie is to say one thing and thinke another: nor Conscience allowed them, before he had spotted her with all abhomination, whose nature is to allowe that which is like her selfe, filthie, corrupt, spotted, and defiled. The writer of the plaie called London against the three Ladies confesseth in his prologe that he made it partly for enuie, partly for a vaine glorious minde. For enuie: because his stomack would not beare the commendations, that other men gaue to the three Ladies in his hearing. For vaine glorie: because he straue to do better himselfe, and misd the cushion; somewhat I graunt he bettered it in shewe, touching the substance he doth but cauill as I woulde declare, if it were not from the matter I take in hand. By these fewe you may gather of all the rest, and perswade your selues that as stages and Theaters are not allowed by the lawes of God, or man, to medle with disorders: so is it not the marke that theire authours shoote at when they fill those 25 roomes If any deformity be reprehended there. it is to be done by the players mouth, he that will shewe another man his fault, must purge him selfe first. For as they were forbidden 26 theire bodies: so haue they no grace in rebuking others, that nourish a canker in their owne soules. How are they able to pull vs vp that grouel as flatte in the dust as we? what credit, hath any good counsell in Players lippes, when it workes no amendment in themselues? Concerning the maner of rebuking whosoeuer taketh that office vpon him must do it secretly, of compassion, and in the spirit of meeknes. Secretly: because we ought not to defame the partie rebuked against the law of charitie, or the rule of Christ: the law of charitie, which couereth the multitude of offences; the rule of Christ which willeth vs to drawe our brother aside and tell him our minde. Of compassion: for he that rebuketh must be inwardly stricken with greefe of heart to see the maiestie of God offended, and the soule of his brother hazarded. person, confesseth that he did it with many teares, whereby he giueth vs to vnderstand how he pitied the offender, and lamented the damnable case he stood in. In the spirit of meeknes: 28 because we ought to consider our owne weaknes, which are subiecte to infirmities, and may be tempted as much as other. But when any thing is reprehended by Players vpon the Stage, it is openly blowne into the eares of many and made a by worde, it procedeth not of sorrow, or compassion towards him that hath offended, 29 Alcibiades; or of corruption, as Aristophanes dealt with Socrates Cleon in his Comedie named, The men at armes, bribed by Nicias and Demosthenes ( as some writers suspect) to do the like. It is not spoken in the spirit of meeknes, but with a scoffing, and iearinge spirit, altogether vnmeete for such a purpose. The white that rebukers ought to leuil at, is the recouerie of him that hath trodde awrie. So 30 Peter bidds Simon the sorcerer to repent that his sinne might be forgiuen him. So Paul comandeth the Church  31 might be safe in the day of the Lord. But neither the Poets which penne the playes, nor the Actors that present them vpon the Stage, doe seeke to doe any good vnto such as they rebuke, for the Poets intente, is to wreake his owne anger, as I shewed you of Eulpolis for their own profit, as the players in London; or followe the humor of their owne fancies, and youthfull delightes, as the studentes of the vniuersities, and the Inns of Courte. Therefore vpon the place, vpon the person, vpon the methode, vpon the ende of reprehention, I conclude, that a plaie, can bee no looking glasse of behauiour, and the rebuking of manners is as fit for the Sage, as the picture of Chastitie for the stues. Yet is Master Lodge very eager to force it vpon me, for Tullies sake, vsing his olde facion of disputing, compelled with hunger when reason is scante, either to flye to a blinde texte, or to plaie the woman & braule it out. He roweth on farther in this barge and holdes it harde that a plaie is the  Image of trueth. Wherein he fareth as mariners at Sea, who haue no more title to that they haue passed, and lefte behinde them; then to that which remayneth vntouched, and lyeth before them. As the other two properties which he posted ouer, are suffitiently proued, not to belong to Comedies, for which he clames them: so (God willing) you shall perceiue, that he entreth as boldely vpon this, without any commission to beare him out. The perfectest Image is that, which maketh the thing to seeme, neither greater nor lesse, then in deede it is . But in Playes, either those thinges are fained, that neuer were, as Cupid and Psyche plaid at Paules; and a greate many Coedies more at ye Blacke friers and in euery Playe house in London, which for breuities sake I ouer skippe: or if a true Historie be taken in hand, it is made like our shadows, longest at the rising and falling of the Sunne, shortest of all at hie noone. For the Poets driue it most commonly vnto such pointes, as may best showe the maiestie of their pen, in Tragicall speaches; or set the hearers a gogge, with discourses of loue; or painte a fewe antickes, to fitt their owne humors, with scoffes & tauntes; or wring in a shewe, to furnish the Stage, when it is to bare; when the matter of it selfe comes shorte of this, the followe the practise of the cobler, and set their teeth to the leather to pull it out. Fabii at the Theater, both amplified there, where the Drummes might walke, or the pen ruffle, when the history swelled, and ran to hye for the number of ye persons, that shoulde playe it, the Poet with Proteus cut the same fit to his owne measure; when it afoorded no pompe at al, he brought it to the racke, to make it serue. Which inuinciblie proueth on my side, that Plays are no Images of trueth, because sometime they hadle such thinges as neuer were, sometime they runne vpon truethes, but make them seeme longer, or shorter, or greater, or lesse then they were, according as the Poet blowes them vp with his quill, for aspiring heades; or minceth them smaller, for weaker stomakes. pleasure, the Golden Asse, the Aethiopian historie, Amadis of Fraunce, the Rounde table, baudie Comedies in Latine, French, Italian, and Spanish, haue beene throughly ransackt, to furnish the Playe houses in London. How is it possible that our Playemakers headdes, running through Genus and Species & euery difference of lyes, cosenages, baudries, whooredomes, should preset vs any schoolemistres of life, looking glasse of maners, or Image of trueth? forsooth 32 three and twentieth of Februarie last, They shalbe nowe purged, the matter shalbe good. him that hee may haue Playes, if hee please whose matter is good, simple, 34 man, which desireth to giue you a thing that is bitter, and vnpleasaunt; but with sweete & holsome confectios: So the Deuill, at Playes, wil bring the comfortable worde of God, which, because it norisheth of nature is very conuenient to carry the poyson into our vaines. in my dish at my first publishing the schoole of abuse, you shall see whether it be lawfull for Christians to play it, when I handle the representation of playes though theire matter be honest. As for that glosing plaie at ye Theater which profers you so faire, there is enterlaced in it, a baudie song of a maide of Kent, and a litle beastly speach, of the new stawled roge, both which I am compelled to burie in silence, being more ashamed to vtter them, then they. For as in Tragedies some points are so terrible, that the Poets are constrayned to turne them from the peoples eyes; so in the song of the one, the speache of the other, somewhat is so dishonest, that I can not with honestie repeate it. Neuerthelesse if they should altogether swepe of this donge from the Stage, and employ them selues soberlie to rebukinge of manners; as I haue already proued the Stage to be vnfitte for such a purpose, so I perswade my selfe, that the other is but the iugglinge of the deuill, who perceyuing his comedies begin to stinke, giueth vs a graine or two in the weight of the cause, to make vp his market, and as 35 Augustine noteth is contented sometime to be euill spoken of in Playes to bleare our eyes. He affordeth to vs as he did to Plautus some small number of plaies without loue or curtesane, yea with verie good matter, to maintaine the idolatry of the Gentils. 36 The number of the yeares wherein they florished amonge the Greekes, though they be reconed to be thirtene hundreth, yet if they had mounted to 37 thirtene thousande this is not enough to perswade vs that are Christians to do the like. For the playes of the Grecians are to be receyued among Christians, if their Gods be to be honoured, but theire Gods are by no meanes to be honoured, therefore theire playes are by no meanes to be receyued. Tertullian  38 teacheth vs that euery part of the preparation of playes, was dedicated to some heathe god, or goddesse, as the house, stage, apparrell, to Venus; Sacrarium Veneris, Venus chappell, by resorting to which we worshippe her. The Censors in Roome whose manner was once in fiue yeare straitly to examine, and redresse disorders, hauing a great care to auoyde all corruptions of manners, were verie painefull in racinge and destroying Theaters, which poysoned theire countrie with the lousnesse and dissolute behauioure of ye Greekes. Therefore when Pompey had built a stately Theater of stone at his owne charges, fearing that in time to come it would be defaced by the Censors sommoning the people to the dedication Theater, 39 or goddesses be to theselues no more hurtfull, then the names of other 40 men, that are dead: yet triuphing vnder those titles with the Gentiles, and attributing a kind of diuinitie vnto them, as the Gentiles did, is to be defiled with theire idolatrie. What is idolatrie, but to giue that which is proper to God, vnto them that are no gods? what is so proper vnto God, as worship to his maiestie? trust, to his strength? prayer, to his helpe? thanks, to his goodnes? setting out the Stage playes of the Gentiles, so we worship that we stoupe to the names of heathe idols; so we trust yt we giue our selues to the patronage of Mars, of Venus, of Iuppiter of Iuno, and such like, so we pray, yt we call for theire succour vpon the Stage; so we giue thankes for the benefits we receiue, that we make the ye fountaines of al our blessings, wherin if we thinke as we speake, we commit idolatry, because we bestow yt vpo the idols of ye Gentils, which is proper to God; if we make a diuorce betwene the tongue & the heart, honouringe the gods of ye heathens in lips, & in iesture, not in thought, yet it is idolatrie, because we do yt which is quite cotrary to ye outward profession of our faith. God tearmeth himselfe to be iealous, & iealosie misliketh the smallest iestures or signes of familiaritie, that are giuen to strangers. If Sidrach Misach, & Abednago had not knowne this, they might haue vailed and bended, to the Kings idoll, but because ye outwarde shew, must represet yt which is within, they would not seeme to be, that they were not: whose example is set dowe as a rule for vs to followe. A bodie would thinke it to be somewhat tollerable, to sitt at the table of Idolators, or to eat of ye meate that hath bene consecrated vnto idols, whe we throw not our bodies downe before the, yet is not yt to be suffred among Christians, as I proued before by ye Apostles, much les ought this to be suffred among vs, ye any should take vnto the ye names of yt idols, and sette vpon stages in theire attire, contrary to the counsel of Saint  41 Iohn which exhorteth vs to kepe our selues fro idols, wherein he doth not onely forbid the worshipping, but the 42 representing of an idoll. So subtill is the deuill, that vnder the colour of recreation, in London, and of exercise of learning, in the vniuersities, by seeing of playes, he maketh vs to ioyne with the Gentiles, in theire corruption. Because the sweete numbers of Poetrie flowing in verse, do woderfully tickle the hearers eares, the deuill hath tyed this to most of our playes, that whatsoeuer he would haue sticke fast to our soules, might slippe downe in suger by this intisement, for that which delighteth neuer troubleth our swallow. Thus when any matter of loue is enterlarded though the thinge it selfe bee able to allure vs, yet it is so sette out with sweetnes of wordes, fitnes of Epithites, with Metaphors, Alegories, Hyperboles, Amphthologies, Similitudes, with Phrases, so pickt, so pure, so proper; with action, so smothe so liuely, so wanto; that the poyson creeping on secretly without griefe chookes vs at last, and hurleth vs downe in a dead sleepe. As the Diuell hath brought in all that Poetrie can sing, so hath hee sought out euery streine that musicke is able to pipe, and drawe all kind of instruments into that compasse, simple and mixte. For the eye beeside the beautie of the houses, and the Stages, hee sendeth in Gearish apparell maskes, vauting, tumbling, dausing of gigges, galiardes, morisces, hobbi-horses; showing of iudgeling castes, nothing forgot, that might serue to set out the matter, with pompe, or rauish the beholders with varietie of pleasure. To seeke this, is, to spend our studies in things that are moore naturall, to spende our time so is to be carnally minded, but to be carnally minded 43 is death, howe then can wee looke to bee Partakers of the benefittes of Christ, which runne a contrary race to him? Where no promise is, there can be no fayth, through the whole course of Scripture as there is no promise for such as liue in the flesh, so hell and damnation is sharpely threatned, and shall wee flatter our selues with a wanne hope, to nourish the delightes of the fleshe while wee liue, neuerthelesse 44 the flesh to be enmitie against God, if they be enmity, pursuing them so greedely as we doe, wee bend our selues openly agaynst him, that payde the price of our rasome with the bloode of his sonne, O horrible ingratitude; we followe the pompe and vanitie of the wicked worlde, which we renounced in Baptisme, O danable apostacy. The heathens, that knewe not God, but naturally guided them selues by reason, iudged the rather to be beastes then men, which fixed their studies in wanton spectacles, and spending good howers in euill exercise, seemed to wroote in the earth like swine. Therfore Marius in an oration to the Romans reckoneth this vpp among the rest of his vertues to gett him credite, 45 that hee neither banqueted curiously, nor behelde playes: hauing before giue account of his bringing vp, howe hee was taught to suffer hunger & thirst, heate and colde, to beare all weather in the field, by the way of contempte hee setteth out a softe, a silken, a Courting kinde of life, fitter for women then for men, wherein he holdeth playes so vnfit for manly discipline, that attributing it for an ornament to his honour to mislike them, he priuily insinuates a reproach vnto such as loue them. Sithince you see eue by ye examples of the Romans, the playes are Ratsbane to the gouernement of commonweales, and that Players by the iudgement of them, are infamous persons, vnworthy of the credite of honest Citizens, worthy to be remoued from their Tribe: if not for religion, yet for shame, that the Gentiles should iudge you at the last daye, or that Publicanes and sinners shoulde presse into the kingdome of God before you, withdrawe your feete from Theaters, with noble Marius; set downe some punishment for Players, with the Roman Censors; shewe your selues to be Christians, & with wicked spectacles bee not puld from discipline, to libertie; from vertue to pleasure; from God, to Mammon, let nothing be acceptable in your eyes, that is not holy; nor sweete in your eares that is not heauenly; so shall you preuent the scourge by repentance, that is coming towarde you; and fill vp the gulfe, that the Diuell by playes hath digged to swallowe you. commonweale, that neither vertue might lacke an open friende, nor vice an enemy,  & happy no doubt were wee in Engeland; if as vertue is neuer commended in cloudes, so vice might bee touchte in the open Sunshine. But we are so generally giuen to flatter our selues, and Parasites so ready to couer our faultes, that beecause we loue our deformities wee defend them, and had rather excuse them, then shake them off. This makes many writers willinger to praise some, without deserte, than to rebuke any, vpon iuste occasion, for, to commend men vnworthely, is taken for curtesie: to dispraise though iustly, is thought for the most parte a poynte of enuy. Neuerthelesse sithince tongues are giuen vnto vs to speake, and eares vnto euery man to heare, that the one might teach, ye other be ready to receiue good Counsell, and receiuing it, practise the same in life: according to the measure of those giftes that God hath giuen mee, I will speake somewhat farther against Playes, requesting my countrymen to open their eares as they do their bottles, and shake out the dust of contentio that lyes within for corrupting good liquour when they haue it. And because wordes many times are as fruitelesse as addle egges, when conception is weake and without life. If any bee so captious as for the exercise of his witte to holde me Playe, and prepare him selfe to encounter me in any one of mine actions or in all, I must challenge the lawes of the tennis court at his handes, that is to take whatsoeuer I send him, right; and returne it to, faire aboue the line. Whatsoeuer he be that looketh narrowly into our Stage Playes, or considereth how, and which waye they are represented, shall finde more filthines in them, the Players dreame off. The Law of God very straightly forbids men to put on womes garments, garments are set downe for signes distinctiue betwene sexe & sexe, to take vnto vs those garments that are manifest signes of another sexe, is to falsifie, forge, and adulterate, contrarie to the expresse rule of the words of God, Which forbiddeth it by threatning a curse vnto the same. 46 All that do so are abhomination vn the Lord, which way I beseech you shall they bee excused, that put on, not the apparrell onely, but the gate, the gestures, the voyce, the passions of a woman? All which like the wreathinges, and windinge of a snake, are flexible to catch, before they speed: thinke this commandement of God to be restrayned to them, that goe abroade in womens attyre and vse it for iugglinge, to shaddowe adulterie. mouthed vessels, will receyue nothing without losse, except it bee slenderly powred in accordinge to the straightnes of theire owne makinge. These men must vnderstande, that, that can beare noe excuse, which God condemneth, such is the integritie, vniformitie, and simplicitie of trueth yt it is euer like it selfe, it neuer carrieth two faces in one hoode, that thinge is no where, nor at any time lawfull by the word of God which is not euer, and euery where lawfull. Though the heathen Philosophers which knew not the trueth, because they were ignorant in God the fountaine of trueth, according to theire owne facies held one thing to be sometime good, & sometimes euill: yet will not God be mocked to Philosophers dreames, Whatsoeuer he simply pronounceth, euill, can neuer be conditionally good and lawfull. I trust they will not haue God which is ye Author of all wisdome, al learning, all artes, to be ruder in setting downe to his people the precepts of life, then Philosophers are to giue to their scholers ye precepts of arte. They study in teaching of theire auditours, to write generally and vniuersally, and shall God in his tables be tyed to specifications, particularities, and exceptions? no, no, the same God that saith thou shalt not couet thy neighbours wife, saith thou shalt in no place, & at no time couet her; he yt forbiddeth thee to steale, comandeth that thou neuer steale; and he that chargeth thee not to put no womens garments, chargeth thee in no place, and neuer to put the on. Neuertheles we will wade somewhat further in this point, and see whether by ye Philosophers them selues it may be suffred. I trust they wil graunt me that euery lye is sinne, for the deuill is the father of all lyes, as oft as euer he lyeth, he 49 thickest fogge of his ignorance concerning God, pronounceth a lye to bee naught of it selfe, and to be fled. Let vs therefore consider what a lye is, a 50 ought not. This acte is discerned by outward signes, euery man must show him selfe outwardly to be such as in deed he is. Outward signes consist eyther in words or gestures, to declare our selues by wordes or by gestures to be otherwise then we are, is an act executed where it should not, therefore a lye. The profe is euident, the consequet is necessarie, that in Stage Playes for a boy to put one the attyre, the gesture, the passions of a woman; for a meane person to take vpon him the title of a Prince with counterfeit porte, and traine, is by outwarde signes to shewe them selues otherwise then they are, and so with in the compasse of a lye, which by Aristotles iudgement is naught of it selfe and to be fledde. Some other there are that take greater 51 Naziancen, Bucchanan, & such like, than euer those famous men did offer. It cannot bee denied that Gregory Naziancen one of the fathers of the Church, wrote a Playe of Christe; Bucchanan wrote an other of Iohn Baptist, to what ende? To be Plaid vpon Stages? neither Players nor their friendes are able to proue it. nubers, that the sweetenesse of the one might cause the other to continue, and to bee the deeper imprinted in the mindes of men: So Naziancen and Bucchanan perceiuing the corruption of the Gentiles, to avoyde that which is euill, and yet keepe that which is good, according to the true vse of Poetrie, penned these bookes in numbers with interloquutions dialoguewise, as Plato that were set out by the Papistes, and inueighing against the, thought it better to write the passion of Christ in nubers him selfe, that all such as delight in numerositie of speach might reade it, not beholde it vpon the Stage, where some base fellowe that plaide Christe, should bring the person of Christ into contempt. Scots to reade, that beholding therein, the practise of Parasits in Herods the punishment that followed: He might learne to gouerne his owne house, and beware what entreatie he giues to the Prophettes of God. If it shoulde bee Plaied, one must learne to trippe it like a Lady in the finest fashion, another must haue time to whet his minde vnto tyranny that he may giue life to the picture hee presenteth, whereby they learne to counterfeit, and so to sinne. Therefore whatsoeuer such Playes as conteine good matter, and set are in print, may be read with profite, but cannot be playd, without a manifest breach of of the playe of playes & pastimes, take heede how he reaso yt actio, pronutiation, agility of body are ye good gifts 54 is faulty, and followes not, for so might the Adulterer defend himselfe: the pricke of desire is naturally giuen vnto man by God, all sortes of apparell are his blessings, Ergo to couet another mas wife, to put on the apparell of a woma cannot be euill. Notwithstanding the one hath so little substance to vtter it selfe, the other so fewe sinewes in it, to giue it strength, that neither of both is to be allowed. Action, pronuntiatio, apparel, agility, musicke, seuerally considered are the good blessings of God, nothing hurtfull of their owne nature, yet being boud vp together in a bundle, to set out the pompe, the plaies, the inuetios of the Diuell, it is abhominable in the sight of God, & not to be suffred among Christias. Euery streame hath a taste of the spring from whence it flowes, sweete or sower; euery branch is partaker of the quality of the tree wheron it grewe, hote or cold; and euery play to ye worldes end, if it be presented vp on the Stage, shall carry that brand on his backe to make him knowne, which the deuil clapt on, at the first beginning, that is, idolatrie. The Godly can neuer like of that which in a diameter is opposit to the crosse of Christ, whosoeuer is in the way of God beholdeth no vanity, the perfect way of God is Christ, and shall we that professe ye name of Christ behold this vanitie? The preparation of Stages, apparrell, & such like as setteth out our plaies in shewes of pompe & state, is it that we wonder and gaze at, by Tullie it is flouted and laught to scorne, ye statelynes of the preparation drownes ye delight which the matter affords, therfore he doubteth not but Marius could very willingly absent himselfe from it, what delight (saith he) hath the sight 55 horse, or varietie of footemen & horsmen in some skirmish, those things yt made ye comon people wonder, would haue broght no delight at al to thee Macrin; succeding Antonius in the Romane empyre, & being at Antioche, gaue him selfe daily to beholding Playes, for which hee grewe into contempte among all his friendes, and is noted of infamy by Herodian.  56 The waste of expences in these spectacles that scarce last like shooes of browne paper, the pulling on, and this study to prancke vp theselues to please our eies, was longe agoe codemned by the heathe Cato, whose opinio is registred to be this, that such carefulnes of our bodies, is a carelesnes of our vertues. Shall Tullie, Herodian, Cato condemne this glittering, this pompe, this diligece in setting foorth of plaies, for vanity, for wantonnes, for negligence of honesty; and shall wee that uaute of the law, of the Prophets, of ye gospel, of God himselfe, so looke, so gaze, so gape vpo plaies, that as men yt stare on the head of M aedusa & are turned to stones, wee freeze vnto yse in our owne follies? If the liues and examples of these heathes haue no force to moue vs, whose wisedome when wee consider it, was so great, that they coulde not bee deceiued in so plaine a case; whose vertues so notable, ye they despised these vnsemely gaudes which yt skumme of all people haue in admiration; whose gouernment so politique, that riot and excesse was seuerely punished; yet let the commaundements of our God which are autentike; let the care of our soules that shall be iudged; let the threatnings of him that detesteth hipocrisie, pompe and vanitie, so strike our heartes, that we tremble & shiuer at the remembrace of folly past, & gather vp our wittes vnto amending. Haue we sinned with the Gentiles in representinge of theire Playes? let vs learne with true Christians to abolish them, it is incident to euery man to fall, proper to the gracelesse to continue it, carry no saile against the winde, chaunge of course is a safe rhode vnto the penitent. grownde, for some aduantage, and by counterfeyting a timerous kinde of flight, to droppe downe the cariage, as mony, prouision, and victuall by the way, that the Souldiers might stay theire pursute, and fall to ryfling. Whereby both they that were chased, haue recouered them selues, and they that were conquerers haue lost all, suddenly discomfited with newe supplye among all the stumbling blockes that our enemy the deuill hath cast in our way for foylinge him vtterly. Tragedies are the fittest deuises he could strew behind him, to stoppe vs of passage, and breake our order. Not that he meaneth to take his heeles, but to kill vs by subtiltie when we straggle. What bringeth disorder more then sinne? that playes are set out for a sinfull delight, may be gathered partly, by M aenander, partly by Terence, partly by ye manner of pening in these dayes, partly by the obiect of playes. By M aenander because Viues affirmeth 57 wantonnesse, wrote Commedies of loue, to feede their humor. By Terence 58 because he confesseth of him selfe, that al that he sought was but to close with the common people. By the manner of penning in these dayes, because the Poets send theire verses to the Stage vpon such feete as continually are rowled vp in rime at the fingers endes, which is plaucible to the barbarous, and carrieth a stinge into the eares of the common people. By the obiect, because Tragedies and Commedies stirre vp affections, and affections are naturally planted in that part of the minde that is common to vs with brute beastes. him, that in gouernement of Cities, giues all the authoritie to the worste men, which being well weighed, is to betraye the Citie, and the best men, into the handes of the wicked. But the Poetes that write playes, and they that present them vpon the Stage, studie to make our affections ouerflow, whereby they draw the bridle from that parte of the mind, that should euer be curbed, from runninge on heade: which is manifest treason to our soules, and deliuereth them captiue to the deuill. The Author of the playe of playes, spreading out his battel to hemme me in, is driuen to take so large a copasse, that his array is the thinner, and 59 fast together, that if Delight be restrained, Life presently perisheth; there, zeale perceyuing Delight to be embraced, of Life , bridled, Zeale leadeth life through a wildernesse of lothsomenesse, where Glutte scarreth them all, chasinge both Zeale and Delight from Life , and with the clubbe of amasednesse strikes such a pegge into the heade of Life , that he falles downe for dead vpon the Stage. Life beinge thus fainte, and ouertrauailed, destitute of his guyde, robbed of Delight, is readie to giue vp the Ghost, in the same place; then entereth Recreation, which with musicke and singing rockes Life a sleepe to recouer his strength. is drawne out of his heade, which the clubbe of amasednes left behinde. is restored to him againe, and such kinde of sportes for cullices are brought in to nourishe him, as none but Delight must applye to his stomache. Then time ye beinge made for the benefits manner of pastimes, Life chooseth Commedies, for his Delight, nor painful to his body; partly, because he may sit out of the raine to viewe the same, when many other pastimes are hindred by wether. Zeale is no more admitted to Life before he be somewhat pinchte in the wast, to auoyde extremitie, and being not in the end simply called Zeale but Moderate Zeale a fewe conditions are prescribed to Comedies, that the matter be purged, deformities blazed, sinne rebuked, honest mirth intermingled, and fitte time for the hearing of the same appointed, Moderate Zeale is cotented to suffer them, who ioyneth with delight to direct life againe, after which he triuphes ouer Death & is crowned with eternitie. These bugges are fitter to feare babes the to moue men. Neuertheles this is the substance of that which is brought for plaies, this is the piller of theire credit. Al other men yt subscribe not this but inueigh against them, by writing in bookes; or by tongue in Pulpits; do but crow as he tearmeth it, and speake against Commedies for lacke of learning S. Siprian, S. Chrisostome, S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, Isodorus, Tertullian fathers of the Church most excellently learned, cousels as the third of Carthage, the Synod of Laodicea, and such like, that condemned plaies, and ye skilfulst Deuines at this day in England which are compelled in Sermons to crye out against them, were now to be set to ye schole againe, if the mouth of this plaimaker, were any iust measure of their knowledge. Sithince al their force cosisteth 60 ouerthrow it, and so conquere ye rest without schirmish, like to ye Romanes who meeting the whole power of  Carthage vpon ye sea, & foyling it ther, thought it superfluous to proceed any further, or bring the Ramme to the walles, when Carthage was drowned in ye deepe. And as the Romans thought yt after Carthage was ouercome, no coutry was ashamed to be subdued; So I trust yt when I haue beaten theire captaine to the earth, by force of argumet, none of them all wil disdaine to be taken, or to crie out with testimony of good conscience, greate is the trueth, & it doth preuaile. Though it please not him to distinguish betwene delight, & delight, yet for the better vnderstanding both of that which is spoken in defence of plaies, and of that which by me shalbe brought against them, you must consider 61 yt there are two sortes of delight, the one belonging to ye bodie, the other to the minde, that, is carnall, this spirituall. Carnall delight is the rest of sensuall appetite in the thing desired whe it is felt. If this be not gouerned by ye rule of Gods word, we are presently caried beyond our selues, therefore ought we to followe the counsell of S. Paule , which exhorteth vs earnestly to 62 suppresse the same. Spiritual delight is the operation of vertue consisting in a meditation of the life to come purchased to vs by the bloode of Christ, & reueiled for our comforte in the word of God. A notable blessinge is pronounced on him whose delight is in the lawe of the Lord, and the Prophet  63 him selfe voweth solemnely to God, that he wil talke of his commandements, 64 walke in his wayes, and delight in his statutes. By the whole discourse it may be gathered, that the delight belonging to the bodie, is it, which this gentlema requireth as phisicke against the troubles and vexatiations of this life, which bewrayeth him to be sowste in that errour, that Aristotle For if the delight of this life, be to be sought as a remedie against the sorrous of the same, excesse of delight must be graunted to excesse of sorowe, as excesse of thirst, requireth excesse of drinke, excesse of hunger, excesse of meate; excesse of griefe, excesse of pleasure: but excesse of delight in this life is not to be sought, for feare of surfette; therefore to cure the anguishe of this life with such kinde of pleasures as life pursues, is to measure the remedie by oure owne appetite, which indeed is nothing els, but either to receiue that, that our sicke stomacke desireth, when it cannot iudge; as to eat chalke in the greene sicknes; in an ague pilchers; or as they that in some kinde of leprosie drinke poyson, which is altogether hurtful to good complexions, yet worketh it accidentally some ease in them. Being once shipped in this part of Philosophie he is carried too farre beyond his skill. For in making sorowe an enemie to delight without distinctio, it is easy, to finde where the shooe wringes him, and that want of learning which hee imputeth to other, may very well be attributed to himselfe. I graunt that sorowe and delight are contrarie, yet may a contrarie sometimes be the cause of his contrarie. As Rheubart, which all the Phisitians confesse to be hote, yet doe they finde it to coole in the hottest feuers, when it sweepes away choler, that causeth heate. 66 Though contraries of theire owne nature be vtter enemies, yet accidentally the one may begete the other, so delight many times may spring, waies as it is in act, or as it is remebred: sorrow as it is in acte, may bring foorth delight, whe it makes vs to thinke of the thinge we loue, such was the delight of the Apostles when they were whipte, they departed from the 68 Counsell with greate ioye, to see theselues accounted woorthy to suffer for the name of Christe. Sorrowe as it is remembred when it is paste, considering with our selues that wee were in trouble and escaped it, is also a cause of delight, so neas  69 comforteth his souldiers in the middest of their sorrowes, putting them in minde, that the remembrance thereof, woulde turne to delight another daye. Therfore vnder colour of an absolute conflict betweene sorrow & delight, to shake off the yoake of seuerer discipline which zeale bringeth in to gouerne life, is to iuggle vnder boarde, a secundum quid ad simpliciter , which Logicians doe knowe is so greate a faulte in disputing, as deserues to bee punished in their yongest scholers. By forcing vpon life a certaine necessity of carnall delyght, to set vp his Comedies, hee wrappeth himselfe in many inconueniences. For it hindreth the course of reason, it whets vs to wantonnes, it norisheth imperfections, and argueth a corruption in our maners, it hindreth the vse of reason three sundry wayes: 70 First, it withdraweth the minde from better studies, the minde like a stringe, being let downe, and pitcht, beneath his naturall compasse, to this key of carnall delight, which wee reape by Comedies, is very sore maymed and robbed of Souerainetie if delight bee greate. Next by reason of a contrariety when it exceedes, thus Aristotle drawing 71 out a streight line of the office of prudence, maketh it consist in giuing good counsell, to liue well; in which place hee counteth temperance, the Nurse; exceeding delight, ye corrupter of prudence. But Comedyes make our delight exceede, for at the many times wee laugh so extreemely, that striuing to bridle our selues, wee cannot; therfore Plato affirmeth yt great laughter 72 breedeth a great change, & yt old prouerbs peraduenture rose of this, much laughter is ye cognisace of a foole: where such excesse of laughter bursteth out yt we cannot holde it, there is no temperance, for the time; where no teperace is, ther is no wisdome, nor vse of reaso, when we shew our selues voide both of reason, and wisedome, what are we then to be thought but fooles? Last of all it is a blocke in the way of reason, because it locketh vp ye powres of the minde from doing their duetie, & like a kinde of drunkennes, maketh vs stagger, very vnfit, either to speake; or to walke as we shoulde in our vocation. It whets vs to wantones: because it breedeth a hunger, & thirst, after pleasure. For whe the thing which our appetite enioyeth canot bee receiued all at once, but by succession, or change, we gape after more, as hee yt hearing one halfe of a sentence, & delighteth in that, is very desirous to haue the rest. So in Comedies delight beeing moued with varietie of shewes, of euentes, of musicke, the longer we gaze, the more we craue, yea so forcible they are, yt afterwards being but thought vpo, they make vs seeke for the like an other time. It nourisheth imperfections, so long as it settes our heartes vpon thinges that are transitorie, vaine and shall perish in the twinckling of an eye, it argueth a corruption in our manners, because it is the windowe by which we looke into the secret corners of the soule, it is the very line, and lead, whereby our disposition is measured to bee roughe or smooth, streight or crooked, lawefull or vnlawfull, right or wrong. How shall wee knowe a man to be good, or euill, but by the goodnes or naughtines of his will? His will appeareth by the ende thereof, that is counted the end wherein it resteth, and the rest of our will, is the delight that wee reape in the thing we holde to be good. Thus we pronounce all them to bee vertuous, whome we see to delight in the workes of vertue; them to be wicked, whome we finde to reioyce in the works of wickednes. For as that is euill which rebelleth against reason and the lawes of God, so is that delight to be iudged euil that is fixed in the same, and the man likewise euill that so deliteth. Therfore I may well say the delight which springeth of Comedies (wherby superiority is giuen to affections and so rebellion raysed against reason, the lawes of God are broke which bid vs come out and departe from the doctrine of the Diuell)so marketh the corruption of our maners in our foreheaddes, that euery one that hath iudgmente may poynte it out. But to leaue ouer curiously to descant vpon this plainesonge of life and delight, either by Aquinas, or by Aristotle or by Philosophie her self, I exhorte you wt Paule to beware lest any man spoyle you through Philosophy, 73 and vaine deceite, after the traditions of men, and after the rudiments of the worlde, and not after Christ. And sithince we are commanded by the same Apostle, as we haue receiued Christ, so to walke in him, let vs bring the triall of our cause to the touch of Gods worde, and examine by that, what the life and delight of a Christian ought to be, then shall you see my generall proposition verie strongly confirmed, that Plaies are not to bee suffered in a Christian commonweale. Paule commandeth 74 a moneth, nor a yeare, but euer: the reason is added, that their modesty might bee knowne, and why should their modesty be knowne? because the Lorde is at hand: by whiche Particle the delight of this life is beate downe. Christe giuing vs to vnderstand the danger of these delights wherein wee laugh with the worlde, pronounceth 75 a woe vpon them, wo bee to you that laugh nowe, for ye shall weepe and lament. reioyce & delight at the last daye, which ioye is accomplished by this that wee are partakers of the crosse of Christe. Howe farre this delight is different from Comedies, is easie to bee seene with halfe an eye, and if Poets haue no surer gyrthes to their saddle the life and delight, it will be no trouble to vnhorse them, for a Christian knoweth 77 how to delight in death. Large is the groud I might trauace in this behalfe, yet for breuities sake I will passe it ouer, and shewe you the life of a Christian as I promised. our life, and that our life is layde vpp with Christe in God: therefore by the way of comparison, as Christ died, and after ascended vp to heauen, so he persuadeth vs to dye, that is to mortifie this flesh with the delights thereof, and to seeke after those thinges that are aboue, where Christ our life is. The 79 end of the death of Christ was, that we which liue in this worlde, should not liue to our selues, but vnto him; heere is all prerogatiue taken from vs, wee are nowe no longer our owne men, for if by the benefite of him wee liue, our life must be his and not our own. Our life is not his, excepte wee crucifie the flesh, with the affections and concupiscences of the same, wee crucifie not the affections of our flesh, when we resorte vnto, playes to stirre them vpp, therefore running to playes wee liue to our selues, and not to Christe, when we liue to our selues, it is no life. hath plowed such furrowes on my backe, as will neuer bee filled vp againe, because Comedis norish delight, and delight should neuer be taken fro life. common speach) if one poure on 80 steele with a ladell, an other comes and wipes it of with a fether. Neuertheless 81 heere it maye bee that my friendes of the vniuersityes will accuse me of that austeryty, which was used by some of the Godly long agoe, who perceiuing men in all thinges naturally to passe the boundes of modesty, and beeing desirous to lay some strong kinde of playster to this olde soare, allowed men to vse the blessinges of God, but for necessities sake, prescribing them nothing, but that whiche was necessarie: thus were they inioyned to abstain fro al maner of things, that might be spared. Which in deede is a harder yoake then the worde of God doth lay vpon vs: For after this rate, we should haue no more then one coate to our backes, nor the vse of many creatures which God hath ordeined for the seruice of man. Many thinges there are that the handes of God hath bestowed vpon vs not onely for necessitie, but for delight, as apparell, meates, flowers, metalles, and such like. Apparell as well for comelines as to keepe off the iniury of the ayre. Meats, aswell for delight, as for nutriment; otherwise had the prophet neuer reckoned it vp amonge the benefits of God, that hee giueth vs wine to make our 82 heartes glad, and oyle to make vs a chearefull countenance. The singuler beautie and sweetenes of flowers, the varietie of colours wherein one thing excelles another, had beene bestowed in vayne, if the Maiesty of God had not as well regarded our delight, as relieued our neede. This I take to bee the foundation whervpon the Authour of the Play of Playes buildeth his strongest reason, which is this, because wee haue eares to heare, eyes to see, and so foorth, Comedies presenting delight to both, are not so rashly to bee condemned. To whome I answere, that the 83 creatures of God may be vsed both for necessity, and for delight, so farre foorth as they are referred to that ende, for which they were made. God hath bestowed apparell, foode, flowers, Treasure, as golde, siluer, pearle, bewetifull and rich stones, as Diamoundes, Saphires, Rubies, Carbuncles, Turkies, Chrysolittes; beesides them, Yuorie, Iett, and marble, of these blessings some are both necessary and delightsome, some are only delightsome, nothing necessary: but to what end? That we might vse the well, & by these trasitorie benefits be led as it were by ye hand, to a cosideratio of those benefits that are layde vp for vs in the life to come. We are placed as Pilgrimes 84 in ye flesh by which as by a iorney we must come to our own home, therefor passing by the earth, and by the flesh it is our duety (as trauelers) to be carefull to vse the earth, and the flesh, and the blessings of both, so; that they may further, not hinder the course we 85 take in hande. vsed it not, by which counsell of his, all affections, all thoughtes, all delights, that may clappe any leade to our heeles, or drawe vs aside when wee shoulde runne forwardes still, vntill wee bee crowned, are cutte away. How are we thankefull to God, how lift we vp our mindes to meditate on the life to come, howe vse we these blessings, as helpes in the way we haue to trace, whe they are riottously wasted vpon Comedies, which drawe vs all backe to a sinfull delight? howe vse wee the worlde as though wee vsed it not, when our studies are so fixed vpon the worlde; how mightely Playes pull vs backe from our trauell, hath beene already declared by many strong reasons drawen from the foure causes of the same, therfore to holde them tollerable because they delight, is a reason altogether rude, and mishapen, hauing neither head, to bring it in, nor foote, to beare it vp. But as many which showting vp lustely in their youth, bewraie the greenenesse of their yeeres, by the rawenesse of their manners, and of the wiser sorte, are counted for boyes though they looke like me: so I trust yt all that haue iudgemet will measure ye reasons of life, & delight, rather by the substance, that is within; then by the outward shew howsoeuer they mout, or brag it out. Enter euery one into your selues, and whensoeuer you heare that playe a gaine, or any man els in priuate conference commend Playes, consider not, so much what is spoken to colour them, as what may bee spoken to confounde them. It is shame, to frequent playes, impudency to defend them; it is dangerous to fall in the enemies hande, present death to be prysoners to the Diuell; it is sinne in the Gentiles to set out Playes, in Christians it is a presumptuous sinne, because we see better wayes and take the worse, we knowe their corruption, and allowe them. All this hath beene sufficiently proued by anciente writers, and dayly reuealed by learned Preachers, yet will not my countryme leaue their Playes, because Playes are the nourishers of delight; wherein I perceiue they are like to the snake, cut of their head, they whiske with the tayle. I Thinke you maruaile why so many famous men in both vniuersities, haue made open outcries of the inconueniences bredde by playes, none of the by printing haue taken the paines to write any full discouery against the, I especially, which neither in age, wisedome, nor authority may be compared to them, with lesse learning, and more presumption, haue taken the charge vpon my selfe. They hold this opinio yt playes are not to be suffred in a Christian commonweale, but they do not throughly prosecute the same, because that finding the eares of their hearers stopte with the deafe adder, they beginne to shake the dust fro their shooes against them, and followe the cousell of God him selfe, which biddeth them throwe no pearles to swine. The thing they condeme, because it is euill; they beginne to bee mute because men are obstinate in opinions. What then? am I the boldest in all th copany? no. Am I more zealous the ye rest? God forbid I should rob any, of those titles of vertue yt they possesse, or challege yt to my selfe, which is due to them. What is the reason the yt I dare set in my foote before the rest? Because that if any of the shoulde write againste playes, that occupy your pulpits with learned sermons, whose knowledge & authoryty heerein is great. If I say, they shoulde speake but one worde against ye sleepines of Magistrats which in this case is necessary to bee touchte, they shall seeme streight to swerue from the texte, to speake without booke, and to vtter a great deale more then needs. But I, though my speach bee somewhat more free then theirs, shalbe excused for wante of iudgement, Sith I am rawe; or for childish aspiring, sith I am yonge. Beside this, hauing once already writte against playes, which no ma that euer wrote plaies, did, but one, who hath chaged his coppy, and turned himself like ye dog to his vomite, to plays againe. And being falsly accused my selfe to do ye like, it is needfull for me to write againe. These things wt indifferecy cosidered, will persuade the reasonable, yt I haue take this enterprise vpo me, not only without any malepart ouerhardines, but of necessity, because my experience hath taught as much as any, and made me able to say little lesse the any. Therfore as I haue already discouered ye corruptio of playes by ye corruptio of their causes, The Efficiet, the Matter, the Forme, the end, so will I coclude ye Effects yt this poyson works amog vs. The diuel is not ignorat how mightely these outward spectacles effeminate, & softe ye hearts of me, vice is learned wt beholding, sese is tickled, desire pricked, & those impressions of mind are secretly coueyed ouer to ye gazers, which ye plaiers do couterfeit on ye stage. As long as we know our selues to be flesh, beholding those exaples in Theaters yt are incidet to flesh, wee are taught by other mes exaples how to fall. And they that came honest to a play, may depart infected. Lactatius douteth whether any corruptio can be greater, the yt which is daily bred by plaies, because ye expressing of vice by imitation, brings vs by the 86 shadow, to the substance of the same. Whereupon hee affirmeth them necessary to bee banished, least wickednes be learned, or with the custome of pleasure, by little and little we forget God. What force there is in the gestures of Players, may bee gathered by the 87 Played at a banquette, by a Syracusian and his boy, and his dauncing Trull. In came the Syracusian not vnlike to Prologue of our Playes, discoursing the argumente of the fable, then entred Ariadne, gorgeously attyred like a Bride, and sate in the presence of them all, after came Bacchus dauncing to the Pipe, Ariadne perceiuing him, though shee neither rose to meete him, nor stirred from the place to welcome him, yet she shewed by her gesture that shee sate vpon thornes. loue, he placed him selfe somewhat neere to her, and embraced her, she with an amorous kind of feare and strangenes, as though shee woulde thruste him away with the litle finger, and pull him againe with both her handes, somewhat timorously, and doubtfully entertained him. lifting Ariadne from her seate, no small store of curtesie passing betwene them, the beholders rose vp, euery man stoode on tippe toe, and seemed to houer ouer the praye, when they sware, the company sware, when they departed to bedde; the company presently was set on fire, they that were married posted home to their wiues; they that were single, vowed very solemly, to be wedded. when no hurt is seene; so amorous gesture, strikes to the heart when no skinne is raced. Therefore Cupid is painted with bowe and arrowes, because it is the propertie of lust to wound alooffe. Which being well weighed. Sainte Cyprian had verie good cause to complaine, that players are spots to our 88 of playing to be so euil, and the inconueniences so monstrous that grew thereby, thinkes the maiestie of God to be stayned, ye honour of his Church defaced, when players are admitted to the table of the Lord. Neither was 90 learned fathers in the councell held vnder Constantius the emperor. Greate is the hardnes of our heartes when, neither fathers, nor counsels, nor God himselfe strikes vs with any shame of that, which euery good man is ashamed to remember. Mine eyes throughly behold the manner of Theaters, when I wrote playes my selfe, & found them to be the very markets of bawdry, where choise wtout shame hath bene as free, as it is for your money in the royall exchaung, to take a short stocke, or a longe, a falling bad, or a french ruffe. The first building of Theaters was to rauish the Sabines , and yt they were continued in whordome euer after, Ouide confesseth in these wordes. Scilicet ex illo solenia more Theatra nuc quoq; formosis insidiosa manot  91 As at the first, so nowe, Theaters are snares vnto faire women. And as I tould you long agoe in my schoole of abuse, our Theaters, & play houses in London, are as full of secrete adulterie as they were in Rome. In Rome it was the fashion of wanton yonge men, to place them selues as nigh as they could to the curtesans, to present them pomgranates, to play with their garments, and waite on them home, when the sport was done. In the playhouses at London, it is the fashion of youthes to go first into the yarde, and to carry theire eye through euery gallery, the like vnto rauens when they spye the carion thither they flye, and presse as nere to ye fairest as they can. In stead of poegranates they giue the pippines, they dally wt their garments to passe ye time, they minister talke vpo aloctastons, & eyther, bring the home to theire houses on small acquaintace, or slip into tauerns whe ye plaies are doe. He thinketh best of his painted sheath, and taketh himselfe for a iolly fellow, yt is noted of most, to be busyest wt women in all such places. This open corruption is a pricke in the eyes of them that see it, and a thorne in the sides of the godly, when they heare it. This is a poyson to beholders, and a nurserie of idelnesse to the Players. Most of the Players haue bene eyther men of occupations, which they haue forsaken to lyue by playing, or common minstrels, or trayned vp from theire childehoode to this abhominable exercise & haue now no other way to gete theire liuinge. A common weale is likened to the body, whose heade is the prince, in the bodie: if any part be idle, by participation the damage redoundeth to the whole, if any refuse to doe theire duetie, though they be base, as the guttes, the gall, the bladder, howe daungerous it is both to the bodie, and to the heade, euerie man is able to coniecture. We are commaunded by God to abide in the same calling wheirein we were called, which is our ordinary vocation in a commonweale. This is the standing, which as faithfull souldiers we ought to kepe, till the Lord himselfe do call vs from it. Be we neuer so base or meane in the sight of men, yet keeping our standing, liuing in our vocation, doing our duetie, we haue this comforte, that God is our captaine, God is our guide, it is giuen vs of God, yeelding our selues obedient to him, we can not but glister in his sight. If we grudge at the wisedome of our maker, and disdaine the callinge he hath placed vs in, aspyring somewhat higher then we shoulde, as in the body; when the feete woulde bee armes, the armes would be eyes; the guttes would be veines, the veines would be nerues, the muscles would be flesh, the flesh would be spirit, this confusion of order weakens the head: So in a commonweale, if priuat men be suffered to forsake theire calling because they desire to walke gentlemanlike in sattine & veluet, wt a buckler at theire heeles, proportion is so broken, vnitie dissolued, harmony confouded, yt the whole body must be dismembred and the prince or the heade can not chuse but sicken. Wherefore I hope ye wise will accompt it necessarie, that such as haue lefte theire occupations, eyther be turned to the same againe, or cut of from the body as putrified mebers for infecting the rest. Let them that haue no occupation at all, aske God forgiuenes for the time so euill spent, and apply them selues speedely to liue within the compasse of a common weale. Let them not looke to liue by playes, the litle thrift that followeth theire greate gaine, is a manifest token that God hath cursed it, that which is gotten ouer the deuils backe, is, spet vnder his belly, it comes running, and departes flying with the winges of an Egle in the aire. I haue showed you louing countrymen ye corruptio & incoveniences of your plaies, as the sclendernes of my learninge would afforde, being pulde from ye vniuersitie before I was ripe, & withered in ye countrie for want of sappe: if you prefer ye opinion of Lodge or any such like before ye infallable testimony of your owne senses, if I which for the loue I beare to your soules, & the duetie that I owe vnto my God, haue plainly declared what I reade by study, or finde by practise, concerning plaies, not as a picte Orator that with greatest skill; but as a welwiller, yt wt smallest ieoperdie might speake my mind; If your preachers whose learning is wonderful; zeale, vnspeakable; if ye auncient fathers of ye church, which haue lookte very narrowly into the cause, & in anguish of heart set downe theire iudgement; if the counsels of fathers which are not the Oracles of any one man but debated substantially by the heades of many, if the word of God, which is the finger yt pointes you out the way, which is the trumpete yt giueth ye surest soud, which is ye square, vnto which you must be fashioned, which is the written voyce of the God of Israell challenginge credit of it selfe, may not perswade you to leaue your plaies, the succese of my labour wil be leane, & ye hope of your amedment sterued to death: but if you be such as I take you for, glad to be taught, vnwilling to perish, louers of the Gospel, haters of libertie, champions in earth for the right of Christ, callegers to the deuill and all his workes, no spirit of sleepe shall muffle your eyes, no fat of selfe will, or ignorance shall couer your heartes, no parasite shall flatter you, in your sinne, no Lodge , no playmaker, no Epicure, no Atheiste, shall make you to surfette with these delightes. Playes are the inuentions of the deuil, the offrings of Idolatrie, the pompe of worldlinges, the blossomes of vanitie, the roote of Apostacy, the foode of iniquitie, ryot, and adulterie, detest them. Players are masters of vice, teachers of wantonnesse, spurres to impuritie, the Sonnes of idlenesse, so longe as they liue in this order, loath them. God is mercifull, his winges are spred to receyue you if you come betimes, God is iust, his bow is bent & his arrowe drawen, to sed you a plague, if you staye too longe. 
