 Streamer tolde the last Christmas, and whiche you so faine would haue heard reported by M. ferrers him selfe and although I be vnable to pen or speak the same so pleasantly as he coulde: yet haue I so neerly vsed bothe the order and woords of him that spake them, which is not the least vertue of a reporter, that I dout not but that he and M. willot shal in the reading think they hear M. Streamer speak, and he him self in the like actio, shal dout whether he speaketh or readeth. I haue deuided his oration into three parts, and set thargumet before the and an instructio after them with such notes as might be gathered therof, so making it book like and intituled Beware the Cat. But because I dout whether M. Stremer wil be contented that other men plovve with his oxen (I mean penne suche things as he speaketh) which perhaps he would rather doo him self, to haue as hee deserueth the glory of bothe: therfore I besech you to learne his minde heerin. And if he agre it pas in such sort: yet that he peruse it before the printing, and amend it if in any point I haue mistaken him. I pray you likewise to ask M Ferrers his iudgement heerin, and shew him that the cure of the great plague of M Streamers translatio out of the Arabique, which he sent me from Margets, shalbe imprinted as soon as I may conuenietly. And if I shal perceiue by your triall that M. Streamer allow my endeuours in this kinde: I wil heer after (as Plato did by socrates) pe out such things of the rest of our Christmas comunicatios as shalbe to his great glory, and no lesse pleasure to all the that desire such kindes of knowledge. in the mean vvhile i beseech you to accept my good wil and learn to beware the Cat. So shall you not only perform that i seek: but also please the almightie who alwayes preserue you Amen. Yours to his power, G. B. Ferrers then maister of the Kings maiesties pastimes, about setting foorth of sertain Interludes, which for ye Kings recreation we had deuised  & were in learning. In which time among many other exercises among our selues: we vsed nightly at our lodging to talke of sudry things for the furtherance of such offices, wherin eche man as then serued, for which purpose it pleased Maister Ferrers to make me his bedfellowe, and vpon a Pallet cast vpon the rushes in his owne Chamber to lodge Maister Willot and Maister Stremer, the one his Astronomer: the other his Diuine. And among many other things to long to rehearce: it hapned on a night (which I think was the twenty eight of December) after that M. Ferrers was come from the Court, and in bed: there fel a controuersie between maister Streamer (who with Maister Willot had already slept their first sleep) and mee that was newly come vnto bed, the effect wherof was whether Birds and beasts had reaso, the occasion therof was this. I had heard that the Kings Players were learning a play of Esops Crowe, wherin the moste part of the actors were birds, the deuice wherof I discommended, saying it was not Comicall to make either speechlesse things to speeke: or brutish things to commen resonably. And although in a tale it be sufferable to immagin and tel of some thing by them spoken or reasonably doon (which kinde Esope lawdably vsed) yet it was vncomely (said I) and with out example of any authour to bring them in liuely parsonages to speake, doo, reason, and allege authorites out of authours. M. Stremer my Lordes Diuine, beeing more diuine in this point the I was ware of, held the contrary parte, afferming that beasts and foules haue reason, and that asmuch as men, yea and in some points more. M. Ferrers him self and his Astronomer, waked with our talke and harkned to vs, but would take parte on neither side. And whe M. Stremer had for proofe of his assertion declared many things of Elephants that walked vppon cords, Hedghogs that knew alwaies what wether would come. Foxes and Dogges that after they had been all night a brode killing Geese and Sheep, would come home in the morning and put their necks into their collers. Parats that bewailed their keepers death. Swalowes that with Sellendine open their yung ones eyes, & an hudred things more which I denyed to come of reason, and to be but naturall kindely actions, alledging for my proof authoritie of moste graue and learned Philosophers. Wel quoth maister Stremer I knowe what I knowe, and I speak not onely what by hearsay of some Philosophers I knowe: but what I my self haue prooued. Why? quoth I then, haue you proofe of beasts & foweles reason? Yea quoth he I haue herd them and vnderstand them bothe speak and reason aswel as I hear and vnderstand you. At this M. Ferrers laughed, but I remembring what I had red in Albertus woorks, thought their might be sowhat more then I did knowe, wherfore I asked him what beasts or fowles he had heard, and where and when? At this hee paused awhile, and at last said. If that I thought you could be content to hear me, and wtout any interruptio til I haue doon to mark what I say: I would tel you such a story of one peece of myne owne experimeting, as should bothe make you wunder and put you out of dout concerning this matter, but this I promise you a fore if I doo tel it, that assoon as any man curiously interupteth mee: I wil leaue of & not speak one woord more. When we had promised quietly to heare? he turning him self so in his bed as we might best heare him, said as followeth. mine, which more rowmish within then garish wtout, standing at Saint Martins lane end, and hangeth partly vppon the towne wall that is called Alders gate, Elders, that is to say, auncient men of ye Citie which among them builded it, as Bishops did Bishops gate,   [  Bishops builded Bishops gate ] or els of eldern trees, whiche perchaunce as they doo in the gardins now there about. So while the comon there was vacant: grew abundantly in the same place where the gate was after builded, and called therof Eldern gate,   [  Why more gate. ] as Mooregate took the name of the feeld without it, which hath been a very moore. Or els because it is ye most auncient gate of the Citie, was therof in respect of ye other,   [  Why New gate. ] as Newgate called the eldergate. Or els as Ludgate taketh ye name of Lud who builded it, so moste parte of Heraldes (I knowe) [  Why Ludgate. ] wil soonest asset that Aluredus builded this, but they are deceiued. For he and his wife Algay builded Algate,   [  Why Allgate. ] which therof taketh the name, as Criplegate dooth of a Criple,   [  why Criple gate. ] who begged so much in his life (as put to the Siluer wether cock which he stole from Powles steeple) after his death builded it.   [ Poules wether Cock was Siluer ] But wherof soeuer this gate Aldergate took the name (which logeth cheefly to historyers to knowe) at my freendes house which (as I said) standeth so neer that it is ouer it, I lay ofte times and that for sundry causes. Sometime for lack of other lodging, and somtime as while my Greeke Alphabets were in printing, to see that it might bee truly corrected.   [  Against yung mens negligence ] And sure it is a shame for all yung men that they be no more studious in the tunges, but the world is now come to that passe, that if hee can prate a little Latin , & handle a Racket and a pair of sixsquare bowles: best learned in a whole Citie, which is the cause that learning is so dispised, and bagagicall things so much aduanced. While I lay at the forsaid house for the causes aforesaid: I was lodged in a Chamber hard by the Printing house, which had a faire bay window opening in the Garden, the earth wherof is almost as high as S. Annes Church top which stadeth therby. At the other end of the Printing house as you enter in, is a side doore and iij. or iiij. steps which go vp to the Leads of the Gate, wheras sotime quarters of men (which is a lothely & abhominable sight) doo stand vp vpon Poles. I call it abhominable because it is not only against nature: but against Scripture. For God commanded by Moyses,   [  God plageth abhomination ] that after the Sun went down: all such as were hanged or otherwise put to death shouldbe buried, lest if the Sun saw them the next day: his wrath should come vpon them and plague them, as he hath doon this and many other Realmes for the like transgressio. And I meruel where men haue learned it, or for what cause they doo it, except it be to feed & please the Deuils. some spirits Misanthropi or Molochitus . who liued by ye sauour of mas blood did after their sacrifices failed, in whiche men were slaine and offered vnto the put into butcherly heathen tirats heds to mangle and boile christen transgressors, & to set vp their quarters for the to feed vpon.   [  Good gostly counsail of Maister Streamer. ] And therfore I would cousail all me to bury or burn all executed bodies and refrain fro makig such abhominable sacrifice, as I haue ofte seen with Rauens or rather deuils feeding vpon them in this forsaid Leads. In the which euery night many Cats assembled, and there made such a noyse that I could not sleep for them. Wherfore on a time I was sitting by the fire with certain of the house: I told them what a noise & what a wawling the Cats had made there ye night before from ten a clock til one, so that neither I could sleep nor study for the. And by menes of this introduction: we fel in comunication of Cats. And some affirming as I doo now,   [  A wise man may in some things chauge his opinion. ] (but I was against it then) that they had vnderstading, for confirmation wherof one of the seruants tolde this story. Ther was in my countrie (quoth he) a man (the fellow was borne in Stafford shire ) that had a yung Cat which he had brought vp of a killing & would nightly dally and play with it.   [  A cat spake to a man in Kank wood ] And on a time as he rode through Kak wood , about certain busines, a Cat (as hee thought) leaped out of a bush before him and called him twise or thrise by his name, but because he made noe answere, nor spake (for hee was so afraid that hee could not) she spake to him plainly twise or thrise these woords folowing. Commend mee vnto Titton Tatton, and to Pus thy Catton, and tel her that Grimmalkin is dead. This doon shee went her way, and the man went forward about his busines. And after that he was returned home, in an euening sitting by the fire with his wife and his housholde: he tolde of his aduenture in the wood, and when he had tolde them all the Cats message:   [  A wunderful wit of a Cat. ] his Cat which had harkned vnto the tale, looked vpon him sadly and at the last said. And is Grimmalkin dead then farewel Dame, & therwith went her way and was neuer seen after. When this tale was doon: another of the company which had been in Yreland asked this fellowe whe this thing which hee had tolde happned, hee answered that hee could not tel wel, how be it as hee coiectured not past xl. yeeres for his mother knew bothe the man and the woman which ought the Cat that the message was sent vnto. Sure quoth the other, then it may wel be, for about the same time as I heard a like thing hapned in Yreland where if I coniecture not amisse, Grimalkin of whom you spake, was slain.   [  Grimmalkin was slain in Ireland. ] Yea sir quoth I, I pray you how so? I wil tel you Maister Streamer (quoth hee) that which was toulde mee in Yreland and which I haue til now, so litle credited that I was a shamed to reporte it, but hearing that I heare now, and calling to minde mine owne experience   [  Experienca is an infalible perswader. ] when it was: I doo so litle misdout it, that I think I neuer tolde, nor you euer heard a more likely tale. While I was in Yreland in the time that Mackmorro & all the rest of the wilde Lords were the kings enemies   [  Ciuil warre betwee the Kings subiects. ] what time also mortall warre was between the Filzharises & the Prior and Couent of the Abbay of Tintern , who counted them the Kings freends & subiects, whose neighbour was Cayr Macart a wilde Irish man, then the kings enemy, and one which dayly made inrodes into the countie of Vvashford ,   [ The fashion of the Irish warrs. ] and burned such Townes and caried away all such Cattell as hee might coe by, by means wherof, all the Cuntrie from Climine to Rosse became a wast wildernes and is scarce recouered vntil this day. In this time I say, as I was on a night at Coshery wt one of Filzberies churles: we fel in talke as we haue doon now of strauge aduentures and of Cats, and there among other things the Churle (for so they call all Farmers & husband men) told me as you shall heare.   [  A Churles tale. ] There was, not seuen yeres past, a Kern of Iohn Butlers dwelling in the Fassock of Bantry called Patrik Apore , who minding to make apray in the night vpon Cayer Makart his maisters enemy: got him with his boy, (for so they call their horse keepers be they neuer so olde knaues) into his Cuntrie, & in the night time entred into a town of two howses   [  this was an Irish town. ] and brake in and slue the people, and then took such cattel as they foud which was a Cow and a sheep and departed therwith homeward, but douting they should be pursued: (the Curre dogs made such a shril barking)   [  Irish Curs bark sore. ] he got hi in to a church, thinking to lurk ther til midnight was past, for there he was suer that no man would respect or seek him,   [  The wilde Irishe men were better then we in reuerencing their Religion. ] for the wild Irish men had Churches in such reuerence, til our men taught them the contrary, that they neither would nor durst either rob ought thence, or hurt any ma that took the church yard for sactuary, no though he had killed his father, and while this Kern was in the Church:   [  The olde Irish diet was to dine at night. ] he thought it best to dine for he had eaten litle that day, wherfore he made his boy go gather sticks and strake fire with his feres, and made a fire in the Churche and killed the Sheep, and after the Irish fashion layd it there vpon and rosted it, but when it was ready and that he thought to eat it there came in a cat   [  A malapart gest that cometh vnbidden. ] and set her by him, and said in Irish, Shane foel , which is giue mee some meat, he amased at this, gaue her the quarter that was in his hand, whiche immediatly she did eat vp, and asked more til she had cosumed all the sheep,   [  A Cat did eat a sheep. ] and like a cormorat not satisfied therwith asked stil for more, wherfore they supposed it were the Deuil, and therefore thinking it wisdome to please him killed the Cow which they had stolen, and when they had flaid it: gaue the Cat a quarter which she immediatlye deuoured, the they gaue her two other quarters, and in the mean while after the cuntrie fashion they did cut a peece which they set about the fire, and therin they set a peece of the Cow for them selues, and with the rest of the hide, they made eche of them laps to were about their feet like broges, bothe to keep theire feet from hurt all the next day: and also to serue for   [  Kerns for lack of meat eat their shoos rosted. ] meat the next night if they could get none other, by broyling the vpon coles By this time the Cat had eaten three quarters and called for more, wherfor they gaue her that which was a seething, and douting lest when she had eaten that, she would eat the to because they had no more for her: they got the out of the Church and the Kern tooke his horse and away he rode as fast as he could hie. When he was a mile or two from the Church: the moone began to shine, and his boy espied the cat vpon his maisters horse behinde him,   [ A Kerne killed Grimalkin. ] tolde him, whervpon the kern took his Dart and turning his face toward her flung it, and stroke her thorough with it but immediatly there came to her such a sight of Cats, that after long fight with them:   [  Cats did kill and eat a man. ] his boy was killed and eaten vp, and he him self, as good and as swift as his horse was had much to doo to scape. When he was come home and had put of his harnes   [  the Kernes Armour. ] (which was a Corslet of maile made like a Shirt, and his Soul couered ouer with gilt lether and crafted with Otterskin) all weary and hungry set him down by his wife and tolde her his aduenture, which when a Kitling which her wife kept scarce half a yeere had heard:   [  A Kitling killeth the Kern that slew Grim. ] vp she started and said hast thou killed Grimmalkin ? & therwith she plunged in his face, and with her teeth took him by the throte, & ere yt shee could be take away: she had strangled him. This the Churls tolde mee, now about xxxiiij. winters past, and it was doon, as he and diuers other credible men infourmed mee not seauen yeeres before,   [  A very straunge coniecture. ] wherupon I gather that this Grimmalkin was it which the Cat in Kank vvood sent newes of vnto ye cat which we heard of euen now. Tush quoth an other that sate by, your coniecture is to vnresonable, for to admit that Cats haue reason, & that they doo in theire owne language vnderstand one another, yet how shoulde a Cat in Cank wood knowe what is doone in Ierland ? wee knowe what is doon in the realmes of Fraunce, Flaunders & Spain , yea and almost in all the world beside, There be few ships but haue Cats belonging vnto them,   [  Cats cary newes. ] which bring newes vnto their fellowes out of all quarters. Yea quoth the other, but why should all cats looue to heare of Grimmalkin ? or how should Grimmalkin eat so much meat as you speak of? or why should all cats so labour to reuenge her death? Nay that passeth my cunning (quoth hee) to shew in all: how be it in parte coniectures may be made, as thus.   [  Bees looue and obey their gouernour. ] It may be that Grrmmalkin and her line is as much esteemed and hath the same dignitie among Cats: as either the humble or maister Be hath among ye whole hiue, at whose commaundement all Bees are obedient, whose succour and safegarde they seek, whose wrogs they all reuenge, or as the Pope hath had ere this ouer all Christendome, in whose cause all his clergie would not onely scrat and bite:   [  the Popes clergie are crueller than Cats ] but kil and burn to pouder (though they know not why) whome so euer they thought, to think but once against him. Which Pope all things considered, deuoureth more at euery mele then Grimmalkin did at her last supper.   [  The Pope a great waster. ] Nay said I then, although the Pope by exactions and other baggaicall trupery haue spoyled all people of mighty spoyles, yet as touching his owne person:   [  A little suffiseth him that hath inough. ] he eateth and weareth as little as any other man, though paraduenture more sumptuous and costly, and greater abundance prouided. And I heard a very proper saying, in this behalf of King Henry the seuenth. When a seruant of his tolde him what abundance of meat he had seen at an Abbots Table:   [  Such geastes a man may haue inouw. ] he reported him to be a great Glutto. He asked if the Abbot eat vp all, and when he answered no, but his Geasts did eat the most parte (ah quoth the King)   [  the wisdome of king Henry the Seuenth. ] thou callest him glutton for his liberality to feed thee and such other vnthankful churles. Like to this felow are all Ruffians, for let honest worshipful men of the Citie, make them good cheer or lend them money as they commonly doo: what haue they for their laboure? either foule reprochful names as dung hil churles, Cuckolde knaues, or else spiteful and slaunderous reports, as to be vsurers, and deceiuers of the common wele. And although that some of them be such indeed, yet I abhor to   [  the vnthankful are to be abhorred ] hear other of whome they deserue wel so lewdly to reporte them. But now to returne to your communication, I meruel how Grimmalkin as you tearm her, if she were no bigger: could eat so much meat at once, I doo not think (quoth he that tolde the tale) that she did eat all: although she asked all, but took her choice and left the rest by, as wee see in the feeding of many things. more then he can eat, yet wil he kil a Cow or twaine for his breakfast likewise all other rauenous beasts. Now that loue and fellowship and a desire to saue their kinde is among Cats: I knowe by experience. For there was one that hired a freend of mine in pastime to roste a Cat aliue, and promised him for his labour twentie Shillings, my freend to be sure: caused a Couper to fasion him into a Hogshed, in which he turned a spit wherupon was a quick Cat, but ere he had turned a while: whether it was the smel of the Cats wul that singed, or els her cry that called them: that if I and other hardy men (which were well scrat for our labour) had not behaued vs the better: the Hogshed as fast as it was hooped could not haue kept my Cosin fro them. Indeed quoth a wel lerned man   [  Some think this was maister Sherry. ] and one of excellent iudgement that was then in the company. It dooth appeere that there is in Cats as in all other kindes of beasts, a certaine reaso and language wherby they vnderstad one another.   [ Witches may take on them the liknes of other things. ] But as touching this Grimmalkin : I take rather to be an Hagat or a VVitch then a Cat. For witches haue gone often in that likenes, And therof hath come the prouerb as trew as common, that a Cat hath nine liues, that is to say, a witch may take on her a Cats body nine times. [  Ayeri spirits take on the dead mens bodies. ] By my faith sir this is strange (quod I my self) that a Witch should take on her a Cats bodie. I haue read that the Pithonesses could cause their spirites to take vpon them dead mens bodies, and the ayry spirits whiche wee call Demones , of which kinde are Incubus and Succubus , Robin goodfelowe the Fairy and Goblines, which the Miners call Telchines , could at their pleasure take vpon them any other sortes. But that a woman beeing so large a bodie, should strain her into the body of a Cat or into that forme either: I haue not much heard of, nor can well perceiue how it may be, which maketh me I promise you beleeue it the lesse.    [  Wise men dissemble their cunig. ] Wel maister Streamer (quoth he) I knowe you are not so ignorant heerin as you make your self: but this is your accustomed fashion alwaies to make men beleeue that you be not so well lerned as you be. Sapiens enim celat scienciam which apeered wel by Socrates .   [  Maister Stremer is well seen in tunges. ] For I knowe beeing skild as you be in ye tunges cheefly ye Calde, Arabik and Egiptian , and hauing read so many Authors therin, you must needs be skilful in these matters but where you spake of intrusion of a womas body into a Cat: you either play Nicodem , or the stubborn Popish coniurer, wherof the one would creep into his mothers belly again: that other would bring Christe out of Heaue to thrust him ito   [  transubstantiationers destroy christes mahod ] a peece of bread, but as the one of them is groce & the other peruers: so in this point I must place you with one of the For although witches may take vpon them Cats bodice, or alter the shape of their or other bodies yet this is not doon by putting their owne bodies therinto but either by bringing their soules for   [  How Witches transforme their shape. ] the time out of their bodies, and puttig them in the other, or by deluding the sight and fantasies of the seers. As whe I make a candle with the brain of an Horse and Brimstone, the light of the cadel maketh all kinds of heads appeer yet it altereth the form of no head, but deceiueth the right cocepcion of the eye, which through the false light receiueth a like forme. The quoth he that had been in Ireland, I canot tel sir by what means witches doo change their one likenes and the shapes of other things. But I haue heard of so many, and seen so much my self, that I am sure they doo it. For in Ireland (as they haue been in England)   [  Witches are reuerenced for fear ] witches are for feare had in high reuerece, and they be so cunning: that they can chaunge the shapes of thigs as they list at their pleasure, & so deceue the people therby that an act was made in Irelad, that no ma should buy any red swine. The cause wherof was this,   [  An act forbidding to buy red Swine. ] Witches vsed to sed to ye markets many red swine fair & fat to see vnto as any mought be, & would in that forme cotinew long, but it chanced the buiers of them to bring them to any water:   [  Sorcerers make swie of hay and other baggage. ] immediatly they found the returned either into wisps of Haye, Straw, olde rotten boords or some other such like trupery, by meanes wherof they haue lost their money or such other cattel as they gaue in exchange for the There is also in Ireland one nacion,   [  Men turned into wulves. ] wherof soe one man and woman are at euery seuen yeeres end turned into Wulues, and so continew in the woods the space of seuen yeers and if they hap to liue out ye time: they return to their own forme again: and other twain are turned for the like time into the same shape, which is a penance (as they say) enioyned that stock by Saint Patrick   [  A man prooued him self to haue been a wulf seuen yeeres ] for some wickednes of their ancestors & yt this is true: witnesed a man whom I left aliue in Ireland, who had performed this seuen yeeres penance, whose wife was slaine while she was a Wulf in her last yeer. This man told to many men whose cattel he had wooried, & whose bodyes he had assailed, while he was a wulf so plain and euident tokes & shewed such seares of wounds which other men had giuen him, bothe in his mannes shape before he was a wulf, and in his wulfs shape since, which al appered vpon his skin: that it was euident to all men, yea and to ye Bishop too (vpon whose grant it was recorded and regestred) that the matter was vndoutedly past peraduenture. And I am sure you are not ignorant of ye Hermit whom as S. Augustie writeth, a witch would in an Asses forme ride vpon to market. But now how these Witches made their swine, & how these folk were turned fro shap to shap whether by some ointment whose cleernes deceiued mens sights til either the water washed away the ointment or that the cleernes of the water excelled the cleernes of the Ointment, and so betraied the operation of it I am as vncertain as I am sure that it were ye spirits   [  Demones are the soules of couterfet bodies. ] caled Demones, forced by inchantmet wt wch mooued those bodies, til shame of their shape discouered, caused the to leaue them. But as for the transformasion of the wulfes, is either miraculus as Naamas lepry in the flock of Gehesie, or els to shamful, crafty, malicious sorcery. And as the one way is vnserchable: so I think there might means bee found to gesse how it is doon the other way.   [  Witches are by nature mallitious. ] For witches are by nature exceeding malicious: and it may chaunce yt some witches for displeasure taken wt this wuluish nation, gaue her daughter charge in her death bed,   [  When and to whome Witches teach their science. ] when she taught her the science (for til that time witches neuer teach it nor the but to their eldest and best beloued daughter) that she should at euery seuen yeeres ende: confect some ointment which for seuen yeeres space might be in force against   [  How men are chaunged into wulues. ] all other cleernes to represent vnto mens eyes the shape of a wulfe, and in the night season to goe her self in likenes either of ye mare or some other night fourme, and anoint therwith the bodies of some couple of that kinred which she hated, & that after her time   [  witih craft is kin to vnwritten verites for both goe by traditions. ] she should charge her daughter to obserue ye same & to charge her daughter after her to doo ye like for euer so yt this charge is giuen alwayes by tradicion with the science, and so is continued & obserued by this Witches ofspring by whom two of this kinred, as it may be supposed, are from euery seuen for euery seue yeers space turned into wulfes When I had heard these tales, and the reason of the dooing shewed by the teller. ah Thomas (quoth I, for yt was his name,   [  Many shrewd diseases doo breed in Newgate ] hee died afterward of a disease which hee took in Newgate, where he lay long for suspection of magik because he had desired a prisoner to promise him his soul after he was hanged) I perceiue now ye olde prouerb is true, the stil sow eateth vp all the draff You go & behaue your self so simply yt   [  the best lerned are not the gretest boasters. ] a man would think you were but a fool but you haue vttred such a proof of naturall knowledg in this your breef talke as I think, except my self and few more the best learned aliue, none could haue doon the like, you say your pleasur maister Stremer quoth he as for me I haue said nothing saue that I haue seen &   [  that a man seeth he may boldly say. ] wherof any man might coniectur as I doo. you haue spoken ful wel, quoth he yt gaue occasio of this tale, and your coniectures are right reasonable. For like as by ointments, as you suppose the Irish witches doo make ye form of swine and wolues appeere to all mens sight: so think I that by the like power English witches, and Irish witches, may and doo turn them selues into Cats for I heard it tolde while I was in ye Vniuersitie , by a credible Clark of Oxford how that in the dayes while he was a Childe: before the Officiall & accused for a witch which in the likenes of a Cat would goe into her neighbours houses & stele thece what she listed, w c coplaint was prooued true, by a place of the womas Skin which her accusers wt a fire brad that they hurled at her had singed whil she went a theeuing in her cats likenes So yt to conclude as I began, I think that the cat which you call Grimalkin whose name caryeth in it matter to cofirm my Coniecture. For Malkin is a womas nae as witnesseth ye prouerb. there be mo maides the Malkin I Think (I say) that it was a witch in a cats likenes and that for the wit & craft of her: other natural cats that were not so wise, haue had her & her race i reuerece among them, thinking her to be but a meer cat as they the selues were, like as we ly fooles long time for his sly & crafty iugling, reuerenced the Pope , thinkig him to haue been but a ma (though much holier the we our selues were) where as indeed he was a very incarnated deuil, like as this Grimmalkin was an incarnate witch. why the sir (said I) doo you think that naturall cats haue wit & that they vnderstand one another, what els maister Stremer (quod he) there is no kinde of sencible creatures but haue reason and vnderstanding wherby (in their kinde) eche vnderstadeth other,   [  Pithagoras opinion concerning soules. ] & doo therin some points so excell: that the cosideration therof, moued Pithagoras (as you knowe) to beleeue & affirm that after death, mens soules went into beasts, & beasts souls into men, and euery one according to his desert in his former body. And although his opinion be fond and false:   [  some beasts are wiser then men. ] yet that which drew him therto is euident and true, & that is the wit and reason of diuers beasts, and again the dul beastly brutish ignorance of diuers men, but that beasts vnderstand one another, and Fowles likewise, besid yt we see by dayly experience in marking them,   [  A Bishop vnderstood all kinde of creatures voices. ] the story of the Bishop of Alexadria by record dooth proue. for he found the mean either through diligenc so to mark them or els through Magik naturall, so to subtilitate his sencible power by dry drinkes & fumes, or els to augmet the braines of his power perceptible, by other naturall medicines, yt he vnderstood al kind of creatures by their voyces. For being on a time sitting at dinner in a house amog his freends: he harkned diligetly to a Sparow that came   [  A Sparow called her fellowes to a Banquet ] fleeing and chirping to other that were about the house, & smiled to him self to hear her, and when one of ye company desired to knowe why he smiled: he said at the Sparowes tale. For shee telleth the (quoth he) that in the highway not a quarter of a mile hence a sack of wheat is euen now fallen of an horse back & broken, & all the wheat run out, and therfore biddeth them come thether to diner. and when the geasts mused heerat, sent to prooue the trueth: they found it euen as he had tolde them. When this tale was ended the clock strook nine whervpon olde Thomas because he had far to his lodging: took his leaue and departed, the rest of ye company gat them also either to their busines or to their beds. And I went straight do my chamber before remembred,   [  Maister Stremer is alwaies much geue to study. ] and took a book in my hand to haue studied, but the remembraunce of this former talke so troubled me yt I could think of nothing els, but mused stil and as it were examined more narowely that euery man had spoken. night before had been occasion of all yt which I haue tolde you:    [  Cats assebled in the leads, ] were assembled again in the Leads which I spake of, where the dead mens quarters were set vp And after the same sort as they did the night before: one sung in one tune, an other in an other euen such an other seruice, as my Lords chappel vpon the scaffolde song before the King, they obserued no Musicall cordes neither Diatessaro, Diapente , nor Diapason , and yet I ween I lye, for one Cat groning as a Beare dooth,   [  Cats haue sundrie voices. ] when Doges be let slip to him, throwled out so lowe and loud a base, that in compariso of an other Cat which crying like a yung Childe squeiled out the shriking treble: it mought be wel counted a double Diapason . intent I might perceue ye better the cause of their assembly, and by their gestures perceiue parte of their meaning: I went softly and faire into a Chamber which hath a windowe into the same leads, and in the dark standing closely: I vewed through the trellice as wel as I could, all their gestures and behauiour, And I promise you it was a thing woorth the marking to see what countenaunces, what becks yea and what order was among them.   [  Cats keep order among the selues. ] For one Cat which was a mightie big one, gray heared, bristle bearded, and hauing brode eyes which shone and sparkled like two Starres, sate in the mids, and on either side of her sate an other, and before her stood three more, wherof one mewed continewally, saue when the great Cat groned, & euer when the gret Cat had doon:   [  Cats make curtesie with their necks and tailes. ] this mewing Cat began again, first stretching out her neck & as it were making beshens to the which sat. And often times in the middest of this Cats mewing: all the rest would suddenly, eche one in his tune braied forth, and incontinently husht again,   [  Note heer the painfulnes of the Author. ] as it were laughing at somwhat which they heard the other Cat declare. After this sorte I behelde them from ten til it was twelue a clock, at which time, whether it were vessel in the kitchin vnder, or some boord in the printing house hard by, I cannot tel, but some what fel with sueh a noise that all the cats gat them vp vpo ye house and I fearing lest any arose to see what was fallen, they would charge me with the hurling down of it if they found mee there I whipt into my Chamber quickly and finding my lamp burning:   [  The good Huswiues Candle neuer goeth out. ] I set me down vpon my bed, and deuised vpon ye dooings of these Cats, casting all maner of wayes, what might be coiectured therof to know what they meaned. And by and by I deemed that the gray cat which sat in the midst: was the cheef, & sat as a Iudge among the rest, and that the Cat which continually mewed: declared soe matter or made account to her of some what. [  Ernest desier banisheth sleep. ] By meanes wherof I was straight caught with such a desire to knowe what she had said: yt I could not sleep of all that night, but lay deuising by what meanes I might learn to vnderstand them.   [  Albertus Magnus teacheth many wonders. ] And calling to minde that I had read in Altus Magnus works, a way how to be able to vnderstand birds voyces: I mad no more to doo but sought in my library for ye litle book intituled De virtutibus animalium , &c. and greedely red it ouer and when I came to Si vis voces auium intelligere . & c. Lord how glad I was. throughly marked the discripsion of the medicen, and considred with my self the nature and power of euery thing therin, and how and vpon what it wrought: I deuised therby how wt parte of those things, & adition of other like vertue & operation,   [  A discriptio of the resurrection of the Sun. ] to make a Philtre to serue for my purpose. And as soon as restles Phebus was come vp out of the smoking Sea, & with shaking his golden coulored beames which were all the night long in Thetis moist bosome had dropped of his siluer sweat into Herdaes dry lap, & kissing faire Aurora with glowing mouth, had driuen fro ther h'aduoutrer Lucifer & was mouted so hye to look vpo Europa yt for al ye heiht of Mile end steeple he spied mee through the glasse windowe lying on my bed, vp I rose and got me abroad to seek for such thigs as might serue for my earnest busines which I went about,   [  Nothing may be hid from Freends ] and because you be all my freends that are heere: I wil hide nothing from you, but declare from point to point how I behaued my self bothe in making & taking of my Philtre , If thou wilt vnderstand (saith Albert ) the voices of birds or beasts, take two in thy company,   [  How to vnderstad Birds. ] and vpon Simon and Iudes day early in the morning, get thee with Hounds into a certain wood, and the first beast that thou meetest take and prepare with the hart of a Fox, and thou shalt haue thy purpose, and who so euer thou kissest shal vnderstad them as wel as thy self. [  Men and dogs fraid out of their wits in proouing an experiment. ] Because his writing heer is doutful because he saith Quoddam nemus a certain wood & because I knew three men (not many yeeres past) which while they went about this hunting were so fraid, whether with an euil Spirite or wt their own immagination I cannot tel, but hoe they came with their here standing on end, and some of the haue been ye woorse euer since and the hounds likewise,   [ An Hedgehog is one of the planaticall beasts and therfore good in magick. ] and seeing it was so log to S. Iudas day therfore I determined not to hut at all, but a coniecturing that ye best that they should take was an Hedgehog (which at that time of the yeer goeth moste abrode, and knowing by reason that the flesh therof was by nature ful of naturall heat, and therfore the principal parts beeing eate: must needs expulce groce matters and subtil the braine, as by the like power it ingendreth fine blood,   [  A medicin for the gout. ] so helpeth it much bothe against the Gout and the Cramp, I got me foorth toward S. Iohns wood, and wheras not two dayes before I had seen one, and see the lucky and vnlucky chaunce, by the way as I went I met with Hunters, who had yt morning kild a Foxe and three Hares,   [  The liberality of hunters. ] who (I thank them) gaue me an Hare and the Foxes whole body except the cace, and six smart lashes with a slip, because (wherin I did mean no harm) I asked them if they had seen any where any hedghog yt morning And heer saue that my tale is otherwise long, these wicked superstitious obseruation of foolish hunters, for they be like as seemeth me to ye papists, which for speakig of good and trewe woords: punish good & honest me. Are not, Apes, Owles, Cuckowes, Beares and Urchins Gods good creatures?   [  All creatures are good. ] Why then is it not lawful to name them? If they say it bringeth euil luck in the game:   [  to obserue times, dayes ar wordes: argueth infidilitie: ] then are they vnlucky Idolatrical miscreat Infidels and haue no true beleefe in Gods prouidence I beshrew their supersticious hartes, for my buttocks bear the burthen of their misbeleef, and yet I thank them again for the Fox & the hare which they gaue me,   [  He that seeketh findeth. ] for with those two Houndes at my girdle I went a hunting til indeed vnder a Hedge in a hole of the earth by the root of an hollow tree:   [  Albertus saith if a man when he prepareth any Medicin tell alowde why he maketh it: it wil be of more force. ] I found an hedghog with a bushel of crabs about him, whom I killed straight wt my knife, saying. Shauol swashmeth, gorgona liscud , & with the other beasts hung him at my girdle and came homeward as fast as I could hye But when I came in the close besides Islington commonly caled S. Iohns feeld A kite belike very hungry, spide at my back the skinlesse Fox, and thinking to haue had a morsel: strake at it, and that so egerly that one of his clawes was entred so deep, that before he could leuse it: I drew out my knife and killed him, saying Iauol sheleg hutotheca Iiscud and to make vp the messe, brought him hom with the rest, and ere I had layd them out of my hand: came Thomas whom you heard of before,   [  One good hap foloeth an other. ] & brought me a Cat which for dooing euill turnnes: they had that morning caught in a snare set for her two dayes before, which for the skins sake beeing flain:   [  Cats greace is good for the gout. ] was so exceeding fat, that after I had take some of the greace the inwards and the hed, to make (as I made him beeleue) a medicine for the gout, they perboyled the rest & at night rosted and farced with good hearbes, did eat it vp euery morsel,   [   A Cat was rosted and eaten.  ] and was as good meat as was or could be eaten But now mark, for when Thomas was departed with his Cat: I shut my Chamber doores to me, and and flaied my Irchin,   [  A solitary man is either a God or a beast. ] wishing oft for Doctor Nicholas or some other expert Phisition to mak the disseccion, for the better knowledge of the Anatomy. The flesh I washed clene, and put it in a pot, and with white wine, Mellisophillos or Melissa , commonly called Balme, Rosemary,   [  Par prior numerus impar posterior esto geb. ] Netes tung, foure partes of the first & two of the second, I made a broth and set it on the fire & boyled it, sitting on a Lembick with a Glas at the end ouer the mouth of the pot, to receiue the water that distilled fro it, in the seething wherof I had a pinte, of a pottel of Wine which I put in the pot. Then because it was about the Solsticium estiuale ,   [  Omne odus fiat in sua Planeta zoroast ] and that in confections the houres of the planets, must for the better operacion be obserued: I taried til te a clock before dinner, what time Mercury began his lucky reigne, and then I took a peece of the Cats liuer,   [  Omne totum totaliter malum Trismeg. ] & a peece of the kidney, a peece of ye milt & the whole hart, the Foxes hart and lights, the Hares braine, the kites mawe, and the Irchins kidneies, all these I beat in a morter togither til it were small, & then made a cake of it, and baked it vpon an hot stone til it was drye like bread.   [  Devs impari numero gaudet ] And while this was a baking: I took vij parts of the Cats greace, as much of her brain with v. heares of her beard, iij. black and two gray, three partes of the Foxes grec as much of her braine, with the hooues of his left feet, the like porcion of the Irchins greace and brain with his stones, all the kites brain,   [  Dextra bona bonis sinistra vero sinistris ] all the Marow of her boes, the iuce of her hart, her vpper beke and the middle claw of her left foot, the fat of the Hares kidneies, and the iuce of his right shoulder bone. All these things I punned to gether in a Morter by the space of an houre,   [  Calor solis est ignis Alichimistice distillationis. ] and then I put it in a cloth, and hung it ouer a bason in ye sun, out of which dropped within iiij. houres after, about half a pint of Oyle very fair and cleere. Then took I the galles of all these beasts and the Kites too and serued them likewise,   [  Maister Streamer varieth. from the Astronomers in his planet houres. ] keeping the licour yt dropped from them. At twelue a clock what time the Sun began his planeticall dominion, I went to dinner, and meat I eat none saue the boyled Irchin: my bred was the cake mencioned afore, my drik was the distillatio of the Irchins brothe which was exceeding strong and plesant bothe in taste and sauour. After that I had dined well my head waxed so heuy,   [  The intelligible diet. ] that I could not chuse but sleep, and after that I waked again which was within an houre:   [  There be many strange humours in many mes heads. ] my mouth and my nose purged exceedingly, such yelow, white and tawny matters: as I neuer saw before, nor thought that any such had been in manes body. When a pinte of this gere was come forth: my rume ceased, and my head and all my body was in exceeding good temper, and a thousand things which I had not thought of in twenty yeeres before:   [  The remebrac lieth in the noddle of the hed. ] came so freely to my minde as if they had been then presently doon, heard or seen. Wherby I perceiued that my brain cheefly the nuke memoratiue was meruelously well purged my imagination also was so fresh,   [  A good Philosopher. ] yt by and by I could shew probable reason, what and in what sorte, and vpon what matter euery thing which I had taken,   [  Exercise is good after sleep. ] wrought, and the cause why. Than to be occupied after my sleep: I cast away the carcas of the Fox, & of ye kite, with all the garbage bothe of them & the rest, sauing the tungs and the eares, which were very necessary for my purpose. And thus I prepared them. I took all the eares and scalded of the hear: then stamped I them in a morter,   [  Hote thigs purge the hed. ] & when they all were like a dry gelly: I put to the Rue, Fenel Lowach and leeke blades, of each a handful, and punned them a fresh then deuided I all the matter in two egall parts, and made two litle pillowes, & stuffed them therwith. And when Saturnes dry houre of dominion approched:   [  A good medicin for a kings eares ] I fryed these pillowes in good oyle olife, and layd the hot to mine eares, to eche ere one, and kept them therto til nine a clock at night, which holpe exceedingly to comfort my vnderstanding power. But because as I perceiued the cell perceptible of my brain intelligible, was yet to grosse, by meanes that the filmy panicle coming from dure mater , made to strait opilations, by ingrossing the pores and coduts imaginatiue,   [  What hindreth the imaginatiue power. ] I deuised to help that with this gargaristicall fume, whose subtil ascention is wunderful. I took the cat the Foxes, and the Kites tung, and sod them in Wine welneere to gelly, then took I them out of the wine, and put the in a Morter & added to them of new cats dung an ounce of Musterd seed,   [  The wholsomest things are not alwaies most toothsome. ] Garlike and Pepper asmuch, and when they were with beating incorpored: I made lossenges and trociskes therof And at six a clock at night, what time the suns dominion began againe I supped wt the rest of the meat which I left at dinner & whe Mercuryes reigne aproched which was within two hours after:   [  Mercury furthereth al fine and subtil practises. ] I drank a great draught of my stilled water & anointed all my head ouer with wine and oyle before described, and with the water which came out of the galles: I washed mine eyes,   [  The cheefest poit of wisdome, is to preuent incoueniences ] and because no humors should asced into my head by euaporation of my reins through the chine bone, I took an ounce of Alkakegy in powder which I had for a like purpose not two daies afore bouht at the Potecaries, and therwith rubbed and chafed my back from the neck down to the midle, and heatig in a frying pan   [  Heat augmenteth the vertue of outward plasters ] my pillowes afresh & laid them to mine eares, and tied a kerchef about my head and with my losenges and trociskes in a boxe, I went out among the seruants, among whom was a shrewd boy, a very crackrope, yt needs would knowe what was in my boxe,   [  The vngratious should be vngratiusly serued ] and I to sause him after his sawsines: called them Prescienciall pilles, affirming that who so might eat one of them should not only vnderstand wonders: but also prophecye after them. Wheruppon the boy was exceeding ernest in intreating me to giue him one,   [  Straunge things are delectable ] and when at last very lothely (as it seemed) I graunted his request: he took a losenge, put it in his mouth, and chewed it apace, by means wherof when the fume asceded: he began to spattle and spit, saying by Gods bones it is a Cats toord. At this the company laughed apace,   [  We laugh gladly at shrewd turnes. ] & so did I to, verifiyng it to be as he said, & that he was a Prophet. But that he might not spue to much by Imaginatio: I took a losenge in my mouth, and kept in vnder my tung, shewing therby that it was not euil. While this pastime endured: me thought I heard one cry with a loud voice, what Isegrim , and therfore I asked whose name was Isegrim , saying that one did call him, but they said that they knew none of that name, nor heard any that did cal. No quoth I (for it called stil) hear you no body? who is that called so lowd? we hear nothing but a cat (quod they) which mewes abooue in the Leads When I saw it was so indeed, and that I vnderstood what the cat said glad was I as any man aliue, and taking my leaue of them as though I would to bed straight,   [  Good succes of things make me ioyous ] I went into my chamber, for it was past nine of the clock, and because the houre of Saturnus colde dominion approched:   [  Saturn is a colde olde planet. ] I put on my gown & got me priuely to the place in the which I had vewed the Cats the night before. And whe I had setled my self where I might conueniently heer and see all things doon in the Leads where this Cat cryed stil for Isegrim .   [ There is great cuning in due applying of medicis ] I put into my two nosethrils two trosisques, & into my mouth two losenges, one abooue my tung the other vnder, and put of my left shoo because of Iupiters appropinquation & layd the Fox taile vnder my foot. And to hear the better: I took of my pillowes whiche   [  The cause of hearing ] stopped mine eares and then listned and vewed as attentiuely as I could, but I warrant you ye pelicle or filmy rime yt lyeth within ye bottome of mine eare hole,   [  The difference between voices and noyses. ] fro whence little vaines cary the sounds to the sences, was with this medicine in my pillowes so purged and parched, or at least dryed: that the least moouing of the ayre, whether stroke with breth of liuing creatures which we call voyces, or with the moouing of dead, as windes, waters, trees, carts, falling of stones &c which are named noyses, sounded so shril in my head by reuerberacion of my fined filmes,   [  The hermony of heauen excelleth all other. ] that the sound of them altogither was so disordered and mostrous: that I could discern no crie from other, saue only the Hermony of the moouing of the Spheres, which noyse excelled all other asmuch bothe in pleasantnes & shril highnes of sound: as ye Zodiack it self surmouteth all other creatures in altitude of place.   [  The Hermony of elemental mixtures. ] For in comparison of ye basest of this noyse which is the moouing of Saturn by meanes of his large compas, the highest voyces of birds, and the straitest whistling of the winde, or any other organ pipes (whose sounds I heard cofused togither) appeered but a lowe bace, and yet was those an high treble to the voice of beasts, to which as a mean, the running of riuers was a tenor: and the boyling of the Sea and the caterakts or gulfes therof a goodly base, and the rashing, brising and falling of the clowdes, a deep diapaso.   [  Chaucers house of fame. ] While I harkned to this broil, laboring to discern bothe voices and noyces a sunder, I heard such a mixture as I think was neuer in Chaucers house of fame, for there was nothing within an hundred mile of me doon on any side,   [  At euery hundred mile the aire reflecteth by meane of the roundnes of the worlde. ] (for from so far but no farther the ayre may come because of obliquation) but I herd it as wel as if I had been by it, and could discern all voyces, but by means of noyses vnderstand none. Lord what a doo women made in their beds? some scolding, some laughing, some weeping, some singing to their sucking children which made a woful noyse with their cotinuall crying, and one shrewd wife a great way of (I think at S. Albons) called her husband Cuckolde so lowd and shrilly: that I heard that plain, and would fain haue I heard the rest,   [  Heer the poeticall furie came vpon him ] but could not by means of barking of dogges, gruting of hoggs wauling of cats, rumbling of ratts, gagling of geese humming of bees, rousing of Bucks, gagling of ducks, singing of Swannes, ringing of pannes, crowing of Cocks sowing of socks, kacling of hes scrabling of penes, peeping of mice, trulling of dice, corling of froges, and todes in the bogges, chirping of crickets, shuting of wickets,   [  Many noises in the night which all men hear not. ] skriking of owles, flitring of fowles, rowting of knaues, snorting of slaues, farting of churls fisling of girles, with many things else as ringig of belles, couting of coines, mounting of groines, whispering of loouers, springlig of ploouers, groning and spuing, baking and bruing, scratching & rubbing, watching and shrugging, with such a sorte of commixed noyses as would deaf any body to haue heard,   [  Ouer much noyse maketh one deaf. ] much more me, seeing that the pannicles of mine eares were with my medisine made so fine and stif, and that by the temperate heat of the things therin, that like a taber dryed before the fire, or els a lute string by heat shrunk neerer, they were incomparably   [  Heat shrilleth all moist Instruments ] amended in receiuing and yeelding the shrilnes of any touching sounds. While I was ernestly harknig as I said to hear the woma (minding nothing els) the greatest bell in Saint Botulphes steeple, which is hard by, was tolled for some rich body that then lay in passing, the sound wherof came with such a rumble into mine eare:   [  All sudde things astonish vs ] that I thought all the deuils in hel had broken lose, and were come about me, and was so a fraid therwith that when I felt the Foxe taile vnder my foot (which through feare I had forgotten) I deemed it had been the deuil indeed. And therfore I cried out as lowd as euer I could: the deuil, the deuil, the deuil. But when some of the folke raised with my noise had sought me in my chaber and found me not there: they went seeking about calling one to a nother, where is he? where is he? I cannot finde Maister Streamer, which noise & stir of the was so great in mine eares, thought they had been deuils indeed which sought and asked for me. Wherfore I crept close into a corner in the chimney and hid me, saying many good praiers, noise was so terrible that I could not abide it: I thought best to stop mine ears, thinking therby I should be the lesse affraid. And as I was there about: sleep on ye chimny top, fel down into the chimney ouer my head, whose flittering in the fall made such a noice, that when I felt his feet vpon my head: I thought that the deuil had been come indeed and seised vpon me. And when I cast vp my hand to saue me and therwith touched him:   [  A ma may dye onely by imagination of harm. ] he called me knaue in his languege after such a sorte that I swouned for feare. And by that I was come to my self again he was flowen fro me into the chamber roof & there he sat all night, The took I my pillowes and stopped mine eares, for the rumble that the seruaunts made I took for the deuils it was so great and shril, and I had no sooner put them on: but by and by I heard it was ye seruants which sought for me and that I was deceiued through my cleernes in hearing. For ye bel which   [  We hate for euer whatsoeuer hath harmed vs ] put me in all this feare (for which I neuer looued belles since) tolled stil, and I perceiued wel inough what it was. And seeing that the seruants would not leaue calling and seeking til they had found me: I went down vnto them, and fained that a Cat had been in my chamber, and frayed mee. wheruppon they went to bed again, and I too mine olde place. By this time waning Cinthia , which the day before had filled her growing hornes:   [  The discriptio of the Moon at full. ] was come vpon our Heisphere, & freshly yelded foorth her brothers light which the reuerberation of Thetis trembling face, now ful by meas of spring, had fully cast vpon her, wherof she must needs lose euery day more and more, by meanes that the nepe abasing Thetis swollen face, would make her to cast beyond her those rades which before the ful: the spring had caused her to throwe short, like as with a Christall glasse, a man may by the placing of it either high or lowe, so cast the Sun or a   [  How to counterfet the Moon ] candle light vpo any round glasse of water that it shall make the light therof bothe in waxing and waning to counterfeit the Moon. For you shall vnderstand, cheefly you Maister Willot that are my Lordes Astronomer,   [  Astronomers are deceiued. ] that all our ancestors haue fayled in knowledge of naturall causes, for it is not the Moon that causeth the Sea to eb and flowe,   [  The sprig and neping of the Sea causeth the moon to wax and wane. ] neither to nepe and spring: but the neping and springing of the Sea is cause of the Moons bothe waxing and waning. For the Moon light is nothing saue the shining of the Sun, cast into the element by opposition of the Sea, as also the stares are nothing els but the sun light reflectted vpon ye face of riuers, & cast vpon the christalline heauen,   [  What the moon and starres be. ] which because Riuers alway keep like course, therfore are the starrs alway of one bignes, As for the course of the starrs from east to west is natural by meanes of the sonnes like moouing,   [  The Suns moouing is cause of diuers mouing of the Starrs. ] but in that they ascend & descend, that is, sometime come northward and some time goe southward: that is caused also by the sunnes beeing either on this side or on the other side his line likenighticall:   [  Why the poles doo not mooue ] the like reason foloweth for the poles not moouing, and that is the situation of chose riuers or dead seas which cast them, and the roundnes and egforme of the firmament.   [  I take this book to bee it that is intituled of the great Egg ] But let this passe which in my book of Heauen and Hell, shalbe plainly not onely declared: but bothe by reason and experience prooued, I wil come again to my matter. When Cinthea (I say) folowing her brothers steps had looked in at my chamber windowe,   [  The man is studios. ] & saw me neither in my bed nor at my book: she hied her apace into the south, and at a little hole in the house roof,   [  Light sercheth all things. ] peeped in and saw me where I was set to harken to the Cats. And by this time all the Cats which were there the night before: were assembled with many other, onely the great gray one excepted. Unto whom as soon as he was come all the rest did their beysance as they did   [  Good maners amog Cats. ] the night before. And when he was set: thus he beegan in his language, which I vnderstood as wel as if he had spoken English, A my deer freends and felowes you may say I haue been a lingerer this night,   [  The strange hap of Grisard ] and that I haue taried long but you must pardon me, for I could coe no sooner. For when this euening I wet into an ambry where was much good meat, to steale my supper:   [  Sweet meat must haue sower sauce. ] there came a wench not thinking I had been there, and clapped ye lid down, by means wherof I haue had much to doo to get foorth. Also in the way as I came hether ouer the house tops, in a gutter were theeues breaking in at the windowe, fel down into the streat, and had much to doo to escape the dogges,   [  Hagat and Heg are Witches which the Cats do worship. ] But seeing that by the grace of Hagat and Heg , I am now come, although as I perceiue by the taile of the great Beare, and by Alhabor which are now somwhat southward that the fifth houre of our night approcheth,   [ Cats are skilled in Astronomy. ] yet seeing this is the last night of my charge, and that to morrow I must again to my Lord Cammoloch (at this all the cats spred a long there tailes and cryed   [  Camolok is cheef Prince amog Cats ] Hagat and Heg saue him) go to now good mouse sleyer ([quoth] he) and that in time which my misfortune hath lost: recouer again by breefnes of thy talke. I will my Lord quoth Mousleyer , which is the   [  Gentlenes becometh officers. ] Cat which as I tolde you stood before the great Cat the night before, continually mewig, who in her laguage after yt with her taile shee had made curtesie, shrunk in her neck and said.   [  Mousleir telleth on her story ] wheras by vertue of your comission from my Lord Cammoloch (whose life Hagat and Heg defend) who by inheritance and our free election inioyeth the Empire of his traiterously murthered mother, the Goddes Grimolochin , greffier and cheef counseller my Lord Grisard with Isegrim and Poilnoer your assistants, vpon a complaint put vp in your high dees, by that false accuser Catchrat (who beareth me malice because I refused his lecherously offered delights) haue caused me in purging my selfe before this honorable company,   [  She purgeth her self by declaring her life. ] to declare my whole life since the blinde dayes of my kitlinghood, you remember I trust, how in the two nights passed, I haue declared my life for iiij. yeeres space wherin you perceiue how I behaued me all that time. Wherfore to begin where I left last:   [  Mousleer was caried into the cuntrey. ] you shall vnderstand that my Lord and Lady whose liues I declared vnto you last yester night, left the Citie and went to dwel in the Country, and caried me with them. And beeing there straunge: I lost their house,   [  Bird hunt was mousleiers mate ] and with Bird hunt my make, the gentlest in honest venery that euer I met with, when to a town where he dwelt called Stratford either stony, vpon Tine , or vpon Auon , I doo not wel remember which where I dwelt halfe a yeere, and this was in the time when Preachers had leaue to speake against the Masse, but it was not forbidden til halfe a yeere after.   [ Olde errors ar hard to be remooued. ] In this time I saw nothing woorthy to sertifie my Lord of: saue this. My dame with whom I dwelt and her husband were bothe olde, and therfore hard to be turned from their rooted beleefe which they had in the masse, which caused diuers yung folke cheefly their sonnes, and a lerned kinseman of theires to be the more ernest to teach & perswade them. And when they had all moste brought ye matter to a good point:   [  A sudden disease. ] I cannot tell how it chaunced: but my dames sight failed her, and she was so sick: that she kept her bed two dayes. Wherfore she sent for the parish Preest her olde gostly father,   [  Cats aradmitted to all secrets. ] and when all wer voyded the chamber saue I & they two: she tolde him how sick she was and how blinde, so that she could see nothing, and desired him to pray for her and giue her good counsaile.   [  A ioly perswading knaue. ] To whom he said thus, it is no meruaile though you be sick and blinde in body which suffer your souls willingly to be blinded, you send for me now: but why send you not for me when these new herericks teach you to leaue the catholicke beleef of Christes flesh in the Sacrament? Why sir (quod shee) I did send for you once,   [  Railing and slandring are the papist Scriptures ] and whe you came they posed you so with holy write, and Saints writing: that you could say nothing but call them Hereticks, and that they had made the new Testamet them selues. Yea quoth he, but did not I bid you take heed then, & tolde you how God would plage you? Yes good sir, quoth she you did,   [  A tru cole prophet. ] and now to my pain I finde you to true a Prophet, but I beseech you forgiue me and pray to God for me & what soeuer you wil teach me: yt wil I beleeue vnto the death. Well (quod he) God refuseth no sinners that wil repent, and therfore in any case beleeue yt Christes,   [  gostly councel of a popish confessor. ] flesh body, soule, and bone is as it was born of our blessed Lady, in the consecrated host & see that therfore you woorship it: pray and offer to it. For by it any of your freends soules may be brought out of purgatory, which thes new heretickes say is no place at all,   [  No such perswasio as miracles chefly in helping oe frb greef. ] but when their soules fry in it: they shal tel me aother tale. And yt you may know all yt I say is true & that the masse can deliuer such as trust in it, from all maner of sinnes: I wil by & by say you a masse that shall restore your sight and helth. Then took he out of his bosome a Wafer cake,   [  veritas querit angulos. ] and called for Wine, and then shutting the door vnto him, reuised him self in a surples and vpon a table set before the bed: he laid his Portuse and therout he said masse. And when he came to the leuation: he lifted vp the cake and said to my dame   [  A yung knaue made an olde woas maker. ] (which in two dayes afore sawe nothing) wipe thine eyes thou sinful woman and look vpon thy maker. With that shee lifted vp her self and saw the cake, and had her sight and her helth aswel as euer shee had before. When mas was doon: she thanked God and him excedingly, and he gaue her charge that shee should tel to no yung folks how she was holpe, for his bishop had through out the dioces forbidden them to say or sing any masse but comaunded her that secretly vnto olde honest men and women:   [  Olde folk are lighter of credit then yug. ] shee should at all times moste deuoutly reherse it. And by reason of this miracle many are so confirmed in ye beleef, that although by a common law,   [  Cats hear many priuy night masses. ] all masses vpon penaltie were since forbidden: diuers haue them priuily and nightly said in their chambers vntil this day. Mary sir (quoth Poilnoer ) this was either a mightie miracle:   [  Sorcerers make folk blinde. ] or els a mischeuous subteltie of a magesticall minister. But sure if the Preest by magicall art blinded her not afore, and so by like massicall sorcery cured her again.   [  why masses may serue wel. ] It were good for vs to hire him or other preests at our deliuerye to sing a mas before our kitlings, yt they might in their birth be deliuered of their blindenes, & sure if I knew that preest: it should scape me hard but I would haue one litter of kitlings in soe chaber where he vseth now to say his priuy night masses. What need ye ([quoth] Mouslear ) it would do the no good   [  Deuout kitlings that heard mas so yug ] For I my self vpon like consideratio kitned since in a other mistresses chaber of mie, where a preeste euery day said mas but my kitligs sawe nought ye better: but rather ye worse.   [  Flatterers are diliget when they spi a profit ] But when I heard yt the Lord with whoe I went into ye countrey, would to Lodon to dwel again: I kept the house so wel for a moneth before, that when my Lady when she went caried me with her. And when I was come to London again: I went in visitation to mine olde acquaintance, & when I was great with kitling because I would not be vnpurueyed of a place to kitten in: I got in fauour & housholde with an olde gentlewoman a widdowe,   [  The trade of an olde gentlewoman. ] with whom I passed out this whole yeere. This woman got her liuing by boording yung gentlemen. for whom she kept alwaies faire weches in store for whose sake she had the more resorte,   [ Crowes wil to caraine. ] & to tel you the trueth of her trade: it was fine and crafty, and not so daungerous as deceitful.   [  whores ganing and good hostices, make many gentleme make shamefull shifts. ] For when she had soked from yung Gentlemen all that they had: then would she cast them of except they fell to cheting. Wherfore many of the in the night time would goe abrode, and bring the next morning home with them some times money, sometime Iewels, as ringes or chaines, somtime apparel, and somtime they would come again cursing their il fortune, with nothing saue per aduenture drye blowes or wet wouds,   [  All is fish that come to net. ] but whatsoeuer they broght my dame would take it, and finde the meanes either so to gage it yt she would neuer fetch it again: or els melt it & sel it to ye Goldesmithes. And not withstading that she vsed these wicked practises: yet was she very holy and religious,   [  A catholik quean. ] & therfore although that all Images were forbidden: yet kept she one of our Lady in her cofer and euery night when euery body were gone to bed, & none in her chauber but she and I, then would she fetch her out, and set her vpon her Cupborde and light vp two or three wax candels before her,   [  Images canot see to hear with out light. ] and then kneele down to her, sometime an hole houre saying ouer her bedes, and praying her to be good vnto her, and to saue her and all her geasts bothe from daunger and shame,   [  Our Lady is hired to play the baud, olde wome leoue their cats. ] and promising that then shee would honor and serue her during all her life. While I was with this woman: I was alway much cherished and made of, for on nights while she was praying: I would bee playing with her bedes, and alway catch them as she let them fall, & would somtime put my head in the compas of them,   [  the Image laughed to see the Cat play with her dames beades. ] and run away with them about my neck, wherat many times she took great pleasure, yea and so did our Lady too. For my dame would say somtimes to her, yea blessed Lady, I knowe thou hearest me by thy smiling at my Cat. And neuer did my dame doo me any hurt saue once,   [ Loue is loiterers occupation. ] and that I was euen with her for, and yt was thus. There was a getleman one of her bourders much enamored in ye beauty of a marchatmans wife in the Citie,   [  An honest wife. ] whom he could by no meas perswade to satisfie his lust, yea when hee made her great banquets, offred her rich apparel,   [  Quid non mortalia Pectora cogis, auri sacra fames. ] & all kinde of Iewels pretious which comonly wome delight in yea and large sumes of money which corrupte, euen the Gods them selues: yet could he by no means alter her mide, somuch she esteemed her good name and honesty. Wherfore forced through desire of that which he could not but log for, & so much the more, because it was moste ernestly denied him: he brake his minde to my dame, and intreated her to aid him to win this yung womans fauour, and promised her for her labour whatsoeuer she would require.   [  All is not golde that glistereth. ] Wherupon my dame which was taken for as honest a woman as any in the Citie, found the meane to desire this yung woman to a dinner, & against she should coe: my dae gaue me a peece of a pudding which she had filled full of mustard.   [  Mustard purgeth the head, and pepper makes one neese. ] Which as soon as I had eate, wrought so in my head that it made mine eyes run al ye day after, & to mend this: she blew pepper in my nose to make me neese. And when the yung wife was come, after that my dame had shewd her all the comodities of her house (for women delight much to shew forth what they haue)   [  Women are glorius. ] they set them down togither at the table, none saue only they two, and while they were in gossips talk about ye behaueours of this woman, and that I came as I was accustomed and sate by my dame. And when the yung woman hearing me cough and seeing me weep cotinually: asked what I ayled, my dame,   [  Women can weep when they wil. ] who had teares at her comaundement sighed, & fallen as it were in a sodain dump, brast foorth in weeping and said. In faith maistres I think I am the infortunatest woman aliue, vpon whom God hath at once powred foorth all his plagues,   [  There is no deceit the craft of an olde baud. ] for my husband the honestest man that liued, he hath taken from me, and with him mine heire & onely sonne, the most towardly yung man that was aliue, and yet not satisfied heerwith: loe heer mine onely daughter which though I say it:   [  A shameful life shamfully set forth. ] was as faire a woman and as fortunately maried as any in this Citie he hath (for her honestie or crueltie I cannot tel whether) turned into this likenes wherin she hath been abooue these two monethes, continually weeping as you see,   [  Tears mooue yung mides lightly. ] and lamenting her miserable wretchednes. The yung woman astonished at this tale and crediting it, by meanes of my dames lachrimable procestations and deep dissimulation: asked her the more ernestly how and by what chance, and for what cause as shee thought shee was so altered.   [  Women are orators by nature ] Ah (quod my dame) as I said before, I cannot tel what I should think, whether excuse my daughter and accuse God: or els blame her and acquite him. For this my daughter beeing as I sayd fortunately maried, and so belooued of her husband: and loouing again to him (as now wee bothe to late doo, and euer I think shall rue) was looued exceedingly of another yung man, who made great sute and laboure vnto her.   [  All wome ought abooue all things to esteem their honesty ] But shee as I think all wome should, esteeming her honestie and promise made vnto her husbad the day of their mariage: refused stil his desire, but because he was importunate: she came at the last and tolde me it And I thinking that I had doon wel:   [  Sharp woords and threatning answeres wil soon cool hot. Adulterers. ] charged her in any case, which ful oft since I haue repented, that she should not conset vnto him, but to shake him of wt shrewd woords and thretning answers. She did so, alas alas the while, and the yung ma seeing none other boot: went home & fel sick, and loouing so honestly and secretly, that he would make none other of his counsel,   [  It is as much pity to see a woman weep as to see a goos go barefoot. ] forpined and languished vpo his bed the space of three daies, receuing neither meat nor drink, and then perceuing his death to aproche: he wrote a letter which I haue in my pursse, and set it by his boy to my daughter, if you can reed you shall see it, I canot but my daughter heer could very wel, and write to, Heerwith my dame wept apace, and took the letter and gaue it this yung woman who red it in forme folowing. may not liue he desireth licence to dye. Cursed be the woful time wherin mutuall looue first mixed the masse of my miserable carcasse. Curssed be the houre that euer the fatall destinies haue ought for me purueyed. Yea cursed be yt vnhappy houre, may I say, in which I first saw those persing eyes, which by insencible and vnquenchable power inflaming my hart to desire, are so blide of al mercy, as wil rather with rigor cosume my life: then rue my greef with one drop of pitie. I sue not to you my deer vnloouing looue for any kind of grace the doutful hope wherof dispaire hath long since (with ye powring showers of cruel words) vtterly quenched. But this muche I desire which also by right me thinketh my faithfull looue hath wel deserued that sith your fidelitie in wedlock (which I can and must needes praise as would to God I could not) wil suffer my pined corse no longer to retain the breth through colde cares wholy consumed: yet at the last which is also an ofice of freendship before the Gods meritorious. Cum visit him who if ought might quench looue, should not looue, whose mouth these three dayes hath taken no foode, whose eyes the like time haue taken no rest, whose hart thes three weekes was neuer mery, whose minde these three monethes was neuer quiet, whose bed these seuen nights was neuer made: and who (to be breef) is in all partes so infeebled: that liuing he dieth, and dead a while he liueth. And whe this sily ghoste shall leaue this cruel and miserable prison, in recompence of his looue, life and death: let those white and tender hands of yours, close vp those open windowes, through which the vncomfortable light of your beauty shone first into his hart. If you refuse this to doo: I beseech the Gods immortall, to whom immediatly I goe, that as without any kinde of either loue or kindenes, you haue caused me to dye: so that none other caught with your beauty, doo likewise perish, I besech (I say) the iust Gods, that either they chaunge that honest stony hart or els disfigure that faire merciles fauour. Thus for want of force either to indite or write any more, I take my leaue, desiring you either to coe and see me dye, or if I be dead before to see me honestly buried. Yours vnregarded aliue. G. S. Whe the yung woman had read this letter:   [  A tender hart is easily parted. ] she took it again to my dae, & with much to doo to with holde her swelling tears she said, I a sory for your heuines much more for this mans, but moste for your daughters, but what did shee after shee saw this letter? Ah (quoth my dame) shee esteemed it as she did his sutes before she sent him a rough answere in writing.   [  Womans answeres are neuer to seeke, ] But ere euer the boy came home with it his maister was dead. Within two dayes after my sonne in law her husbad dyed sudainly, and within two dayes after as she sate heer with me lamenting his death: a voice cried a lowd, ah flinty hart repent thy crueltie, and immediatly (oh extreme rigor) she was chaunged as you now see her.   [  Note the craft of a Baud. ] Wherupon I gather that though God would haue vs keep our faith to our husbands yet rather then any other should dye for our sakes we should not make any conscience to saue theire liues. For it fareth in this poit as it doth all other,   [  All extremities are to be forsaken. ] for as all exstreities are vices: so it is a vice as apeereth plainly by the punishment of my daughter to be to extream in honesty, chastety or any other kinde of vertue.   [  Euil communicatio confouddeth good vertues. ] This with the talke of my dame in the diner time so sank it to the yung womans minde: that the same after noon she sent for the gentleman whom she had erst so constantly refused, and promised him yt if he would apoint her any vnsuspected place: she would be glad to meet him to fulfil all his lust,   [  Cats are malicious. ] which he appointed to be the next day at my dames house, where when they wer all assembled: I minding to acquite my dame for giuing me mustard:   [ Women are afraid of their owne shadowes. ] caught a quick mouse, wherof my dame alwaies was exceedingly a fraid, and came with it vnder her clothes, and there let it goe, which immediatly crope vp vpon her leg But Lord how she bestired her the,   [  The Cat payeth her dame for her mustard. ] how she cried out, & how pale shee looked, and I to amed the matter making as though I leaped at the mouse: all to bescrat her thies and her belly,   [  It is an vnnaturall Child that wil hurt her mother ] so that I dare say she was not whole agai in two monethes after, and when the yung woma to whom shee shewed her ponced thies, said I was an vnnaturall daughter to deale so with my mother nay (quoth she) I cannot bla her, for it was through my counsel that she suffered this sorow, and yet I dare say she did it against her wil,   [ Let yung Women take heed of olde baudes. ] thinking to haue caught the mouse, which els I dare say would haue crept into my bellie. By this meanes was this innocet woman other wise inuincible: brought to coit whordome. Shortly after this yung woman begged me of my dae, and to her I wet and dwelled with her all that yeer.   [  Cats haue lawes amog the, which they keep better the we keep ours ] In which yeer, as all ye cats in the parish can tel, I neuer disobeyed or transgressed our holy law refusing the concupiscientiall company of any Cat nor the act of generatio although sometimes, it were more painful to me then plesant, if it were offered in due and conuenient time. Indeed I confesse I refused Cachrat :   [  He that dispiseth those that looue him shalbe dispised of them that he looueth. Cats doo long whe they bee With kitten. ] & bit him and scrat him, which our law forbiddeth. For on a time this yeer whe I was great with kitling: which he of a proud stomack refused to help to get: although I ernestly wooed him therto what time he loued so much his own daughter Slickskin yt all other seemed vile in his sight, which also esteemed him as much as hee did the rest, that is neuer a whit. In this time (I say) when I was great with kitling, I found him in a gutter eating of a Bat, which he had caught that euening and as you knowe, not only we but also women in our case doo oft long for many things: so I then longed for a peece of ye Kermouse, and desired him for sauig of my kitten: to giue me a morsel, although it were but of the letherlike wing. But be like an vnnaturall rauenous churle:   [  There be churles among cats aswel as among christian folks ] eat it all vp, and would giue me none. And as men doo now a days to their wiues, he gaue me bitter woords, saing, we longed for wantonnes & not for any need   [  It is the conseit of a thing, and not the thing it self that is longed for. ] This greeued me so sore, cheefly for the lack of that I longed for: that I was sick two dayes after, and had it not been for good dame Isegrim , who brought me a peece of a mouse, and made me beleeue it was of a back:   [  Churles must be churlishly serued. ] I had lost my burden, by kitning tenne dayes before my time. When I was recouered & went abrode again about three dayes: this cruel churl met me, & needs would be dooing with me to who whe I had made answere according to his desert & tolde him withall which he might see to by my belly what cace I was in.   [  Sauery is a hot herb prouokig lust in cats. ] Tush there was no remedy, I think he had eaten sauery, but for all yt I could say: he would haue his wil, I seeing that and that he would rauish me perforce I cryed out for help as lowd as euer I could squalle, & to defed my self til succour came: I scrat and bit as hard as euer I could & this notwithstadig had not Isegrim , & her sonne Lightfoot coe ye sooner (who bothe are heer & can witnes he would haue marred me quite.   [  A law for adulterie amog cats. ] Now whether I might in this case refuse him & doo as I did wt out breach of our holy lawe which forbiddeth vs females to refuse any males not exceedig the number of x. in a night: iudge you my Lords to whom the interpretation of ye lawes belongeth Yes surely ([quoth] Grisard ) for in the iij. yeere of the raigne of Glascaion , holden in Catwood, as apeereth in the recordes they decreed vpon that exception forbidding any male in this case, to force any female and that vpo great penalties But to let this pas, wherof we were satisfied in your purgation the first night: tel vs how you behaued you wt your new mistres, [  After one a clock at midnight the goblins go abrode, and assoon as any cock croweth, which is their hour that is at three they retire hoeward diuers me delight in diuers fond things. ] and that as breefly as you can for loe where Corleonis is almost plain west, wherby you knowe the Goblins houre opprocheth. After I was come to my yung mistres, quoth Mousleyer , she made much of me thinking I had been mine olde dames daughter, and many tales she tolde therof to her gossips. My Maister also made much of me because I would take meat in my foot: & therwith put it to my mouth & feed. In this house dwelt an vngracious felowe, who delighting much in vnhappy turnes: on a time took iiij. walnut shels, and filled them ful of soft Pitch, and put them vpon my feet, and the put my feet into cold water til the pich was hardned, and then he let me goe.   [  A Cat was shooed. ] But Lord how strang it was to me to goe in shoos, & how they vexed me For when I ran vpo any steep thing they made me slide & fall down. Wherfore all that after noon,   [  All things are not meet for al kinde of people. ] for anger that I could not get of my shoos: I hid me in a corner of the garret which was boorded, vnder which my maister and Mistres lay. And at night when they were al in bed: I spyed a Mouse plaing in the flower, & when I ran at her to catch her:   [  Naturall delight expelleth melancholy. ] my shooes made such a noise vpon the boords: that it waked my Maister who was a man very fearful of sprites. And when he with his seruaunts harkned wel to the noise,   [  The fearful are alwaies suspetious. ] which went pit pat, pit pat, as it had been the trampling of an horse: they waxed all afraid & said suerly it was ye deuil. And as one of the an hardy fellowe, eue he yt had shooed me, came vp staires to see what it was: I went downward to meet him and made such a ratling, that when hee saw my glistring eyes: he fel down backward, & brake his head crying out ye deuil the deuil, ye deuil, which his maister and all the rest hearing ran naked as they were into the street, & cryed the same cry wherupon the neighboures arose & called vp emong other an olde Preest, who lamented much the lack of holy water, which they were forbidde to make, how beit, he went to church & took out of the Font some of the Christning water and took his Chalice and a wafer vncosecrat and put on a Surplesand his stole about his neck, & fet out of his chamber a peece of holy Candle which he had kept two yeere and heerwith he came to the house and with his Candle light in the one hand and a holy water sprickel in the other hand, and his Chalice & wafer in sight in his bosome and a pot of Fot water at his girdle: vp he came praing toward the garret, and all the people after him. And when I saw this, and thinking I should haue seen some mas that night as many nights before in other places I had: I ran towards them thikig to meet them. But when the Preest heard mee come, and by a glimsing had seen mee: downe he fel vpon the that were behinde him w c with his chalice hurt one,   [  Preests haue been good coniurers of such kind of spirits. ] with his water pot an other and his holy candle fel into an other Preests breech beneath, who (while the rest were hawsoning me) was coiuring our mayd at the staire foot and all to besinged him, for he was so afraid with ye noyse of the rest which fel: that he had not the power to put it out.   [  A meet pillow for a Magitian ] When I saw all this busines: down I ran among the where they lay on heaps but such a fear as they were all in the: I think was neuer seen afore. For the olde preest which was so tumbled among the that his face lay vpon a boyes bare arse,   [  Feare taketh away the sences ] which belike was fallen hedlong vnder him was so astonished: then when the boy (which for feare beshit him self) had al to rayed his face, he neither felt nor smelt it nor remooued from him.   [  A lyer ad a dooer of shrewd turnes ought to haue a good memory. ] Then went I to my dame which lay among ye rest God knoweth very madly, & so mewed and curled about her, that at last she said I ween it be my Cat. That hearing the knaue that had shooed me, and caling to minde that erst he had forgot: said it was so indeed and nothing els. That hearig the preest, in whose holy breech the hooly candel all this while lay burning: he took hart a grace,   [  One hardy man encorageth many cowards. ] and before he was spyed rose vp and took the candle in his hand and looked vpon me and al the rest of the company, and fel a laughing at the hansome lying of his felowes face. The rest hearing him: came euery man to him self and arose & looked vpo me and cursed ye knaue which had shood me, who would in no case be a known of it. This doon they got hot water & dissolued the pitch,   [  Silence is the best freend that shame hath. ] & plucked of my shooes and then euery man after they desired ech other not to be acknowen of this nights woork for shame departed to their lodgings, and all our houshold went to bed again. Whe all ye Cats and I to for company,   [  The Author laughed in cats voices. ] had laughed at this apace: Mousleyer proceeded and said. After this about iij. quarters of a yeer, which was at whitsontide last, I played another prank and that was this. The Gentleman who (by mine olde dames accepted & retaind of my mistres, came often home to our house, & alwaies in my Miasters absence was dooing with my Dame. Wherfore desirous yt my maister might knowe it,   [  A wanton wife and a back door wil soon make a rich man, poor. ] for they spet his goods so lauishly between them, that not withstanding his great trade of Merchandise: they had vnweeting to him almost vndoon him alredy. I sought how I might bewray the which as hap would (at the time remembred) afore: came to pas thus, while this Gentleman was dooing with my dame my Maister came in so sodainly, vp his hose, but with them about his legs ran into a corner behinde the painted cloth, and there stood I warrant you as stil as a mouse. As soon as my maister came in, his wife according to her olde wunt:   [  None see outwardly so louing as Whores. ] caught him about the neck and kissed him and deuised many means to haue got him foorth agai but he beeing wery sat down & called for his diner, and when she saw there was none other remedy: she brought it him which was a mes of potage and a peece of Beef, wheras she & her franio had broke their fast with Capos, hot Uenso mary bones and all other kinde of dainties.   [  Sine baccho et cerere friget venus. ] I seeing this, and minding to shew my Maister how he was ordered got behind the cloth and to make the man speak I all to pawed him with my clawes vpon his bare legs and buttocks, & for all this he stood stil and neuer mooued. But my Maister heard me & thinking I was catching a mouse: bad my dame go help me who knowing what beast was there: came to the cloth, & called me away saing come pus, come pus, & cast me meat into the flower. But I minding another thing, & seeing that scratching could not mooue him: sudainly I lept vp & caught him by the genitalls with my teeth, and bote so hard, that whe he had restrained more then I thought any man could: at last he cryed out & caught me by the neck and thinking to haue strangled me. My Maister not smelling but hearing such a Rat as was not wunt to be about suche walles: came to the cloth and lift it vp and there he found this bare arst Gentleman strangling me, who had his stones in my mouth. & whe I saw my maister I let goe my hold, and the Gentleman his and away I ran immediatly to the place where I now dwel, and neuer came there since so that how they agreed amog them I cannot tel, nor neuer durst go see, for feare of my life. Thus haue I tolde you my good Lords all things that haue been doon and hapned [  Ther be falce accusers amog al kind of creatures. ] through me wherin you perceiue my loyaltie and obedience to all good lawes and how shamlesly and falsely I am accused for a transgressor, and I pray you as you haue perceiued: so certefie my leige great Camoloch (whose life both Hagat & Heg preserue (of my behauior when Grisard, Isegrim and Poylnoer the comissioners had herd this declaratio,   [  Iustices should cherish the innocents accused. ] and request of Mousleyer : they praised her much. And after that they had commaunded her with all the Cats there to be on Saint Katherins day next insuing at Catnes, wheras the say Camoloch would holde his court they departed & I glad to haue herd that I herd,   [  Trauaile and watching maketh sound sleeping Cats are in quesitiu of newes. ] and sory that I had not vnderstand what was said the other two nights before: got me to my bed & slept agood. And the next morning when I went out into the garden: I heard a straunge Cat ask of our Cat what Mousleyer had doon before the comissioners those three nights To whom our cat answered, that she had purged her self of a crime that was laid to her charge by Cachrat ,   [  Mousleier was Six yere olde. ] & declared her whole life for vj. yeeres space wherfore in ye first two yeers as we said: (said she) she had v. Maisters, a preest, a Baker, a Lawyer, a Broker and a Butcher, all whose priuy deceits which shee had seen: shee declared the first night,   [  Cats chaunge their dwellings often. ] In the next two yeers she had seuen maisters, a Bishop, a Knight, a Pothecarie, a Goldesmith, an Usurer, an Alchimist, and a Lord, whose cruelty study, craft, cunning, niggishnes, folly, waste and oppression: she declared the second night, wherin this dooing was notable.   [  Men ought to ly vvith their vviues. ] Because the knight hauing a faire Lady to his wife, gaue his minde so much to his book that he seldome lay with her. This Cat pitying her Mistres, and minding to fray him from lying alone, on a night when her Maister lay from her got to his mouth,   [  A nigard is nether good to him self nor to any other. ] and drue so his breth, that she almost stifled him. A like parte shee played with the Usurer, who beeing rich & yet liuing miserably & fainig him poore she got one day while his tresure Chest stood open, and hid her therein, wherof hee not knowing: lockt her in it. And whe at night he came thither again and heard one stirring there,   [  The deuil delighteth to dvvel amog mony. ] & thinking it had been the Deuil: he called the Preest and many other persones to come and help him to coniure, and when (in their sight) he opened his chest: out lept she, and they sawe what riches he had, and ceassed him therafter. As for what was doon and said yesternight, bothe of my Lord Grisards hard aduenture,   [  All in this book is nothig in coparison of that the Cat tolde afore. ] & of Mousleyers bestoweing her other two last yeeres, which is nothing in comparison of any of ye other two yeeres before: I need not tel you, for you were present and heard it your self. This talke loe I heard between these two cats, and the I got me in, and brake my fast with bread and butter, & dined at noon with common meat,   [  Grose meates make grose wits ] which so repleted my head again, and my other powers in the first digestion, that by night time: they were as groce as euer they were before. For whe I harkned at night to other two cats which as I perceiued by their iestures, spake of ye same matter I vnderstood neuer a woord.   [  Wunders are incredible. ] Lo heer haue I tolde you al, cheefly you my Lord a wuderfull matter, and yet as vncredible as it is wunderful, notwithstandig when I may haue conuenient time:   [  In coparison of a diamond: christall hath no colour. ] I wil tel you other things which these eyes of mine haue seen, and these eares of mine haue heard, and that of misteries so far passig this: that all which I haue said now shall in commparison therof, be nothing at all to be beleeued. In ye mea while I wil pray you to help to get me some money to couay me on my iourney to Cathenes , for I haue been going thither these fiue yeeres,   [  Pouertie hindreth many excellent attempts. ] and neuer was able to performe my iourney. When Maister Ferries had promised that he would: euery man shut vp his shop windowes, which the forsaid talke kept ope two houres longer the they should haue been. I knowe these things wil seem meruelous to many men, that Cats should vnderstand and speak, haue a gouernour among them selues, and be obedient to their Lawes, and were it not for the approoued authoritie of the Extaticall Author of whom I heard it: I should my self be as doutful as they. But seeing I know the place and the persons with whom hee talked of these matters, before he experimented his wunderful and strage confections: I am ye lesse doutful of any trueth therin. Wherfore seeing he hath in his oratio prooued that cats doo vnderstad vs and mark our secret dooings, and so declare them among them selues, that through help of the medicins by him discribed, any man (may as he did) vnderstad the: I would counsel al men to take heed of wickednes, and eschue secret sins and priuy mischeuous counsels: lest (to their shame) all the world at length doo knowe therof. But if any man for dout heerof, doo put away his Cat: then shall his so dooig testifie his secret noughty liuig, w c he is more a shamed his cat should see: then God and his Angels, w c see, mark and beholde all mens closest doigs. And that we may take profit by this declaratio of Maister Streamer : let vs so liue bothe openly and priuely that nether our own cat, admited to all secrets: be able to declare ought of vs to ye world saue yt what is lawdable and honest. Nor the Deuils cat which wil we or nil we: seeeth and writeth all our il dooings, haue ought to lay against vs afore the face of God, who not onely with shame but wt euerlastig torment, wil punish all sinne and wickednes. And euer when yu goest about any thig: call to mind this prouerb Bevvare the Cat , not to tye vp thy Cat til thou haue doon: but to see yt nether thine owne nor the deuils cat (which cannot be tied vp) finde any thing therin wherof to accuse thee to thy shame. Thus dooing thou canst not doo amis but shalt haue such good reporte through thy Cats declaration: that thou shalt in recompence of maister Streamers labour who giueth thee this warning, sing vnto God this Himne of his making. Who giuest wit to Whales, to Apes, to Owles: And kindely speech, to fish, to flesh to fowles. And spirit to men in soule and body clene: To mark and knowe what other creatures mean Which hast giuen grace to Gregory no Pope: No King, no Lord, whose treasures are their hope But sily preest, which like a Streamer waues: In ghostely good, despisde of foolish knaues. Which hast (I say) giuen grace to him to knowe: The course of things abooue and heer belowe. With skil so great in languages and tunges: As neuer brethde from Mithridates lunges. To whom the hunter of birds, of mise and rats: Did speak as plain as Kate that thrumeth hats. By meane of whome is openly bewrayed: Such things as closly were bothe doon and said. To him graunt Lord with helthy welth and rest: Long life to vnlode to vs his learned brest. With fame so great to ouerliue his graue: As none had erst, nor any after haue. FINIS. Imprinted at London at the long Shop adioyning vnto Saint Mildreds Church in the Pultrie by Edward Allde. 1584.  
