 of worthy vertues, the seeds by you first carefully sowen, and with renoune continually reaped: your own dexterity sheweth, the fauour of the worlde reporteth, and Nobility in you deserueth the same: but if into these your inuitable giftes, I should by eger and singuler pursuite, attempt more then your fauourable welliking pleaseth, of your honorable modesty should easily be vnregarded, by the worlde misliked, and accused: yet presuming your Honourable goodnesse, more then my owne worthines, doe Dedicate this famous and excellent historie of Ladye Egeriaes aduentures to your acceptation. No doubt, a princely and tragicall discourse. Although thorow myne owne vnmeetnes, the outward phrase as growing vppon harsh, heathy, rough and vnsauory ground, yet digging more deeper, inestimable treasures are discouered. Now lastly, assuring your excellent courtesie, with perfect iudgment of a direct playne meaning, to lenifie my bouldenes, as perswaded to shewe some sparke of humble gratitude. Although my vnskilfulnes therin, vnable to reach and attain the heighth of my duety. This committing your Ladiship to honorable daies, continuall blessings, quietnesse, peace and renowne. Your honours in humble duety. VV. C. disdaine the trauels of other men, yea the antiquitie of auncient monuments, vtterly neglect and dispise: laughing in their own shadowes, esteeme nothing, which themselues repute euill, well handled: these Mules of Asia , ietting in the Lions skins of Archadia , strike euery man with their mischieuous tayles: their belching throats spewing out continual venome, vnable to disgest sweete and wholesome siropes: Seeing nothing delighteth them, but that which best pleaseth them. I would they were knowne by them selues, either with Poliphemus monstrous eye in their countenance: Or Oephilus horne in their browes, woulde bee more marked, and their outragious throtes lesse poisoning being shunned. To the good honest discreet Reader therfore, I commit this worthy history, the firste part of Ladie Egeriaes aduentures without imbelishing, faithfully set downe to the fruitfull reading. Expect the other two parts, with as much expedition as time may giue leaue. confusedly blinded thorow daungerous delights, stopped from ye right course, persue the marueiles of wandering vanitie, cloked vnder false felicity, deny the steps and right paths of honourable renowne, in which their auncesters before walked: vnpluming the swift wings of Golden Fame: Especially, and the rather, if Nature in nuptial life put on the vizarde of beauty, burning as light torches in the dazeling eyes of suspicious men, sodainely entised, ledde foorth with affectioned allurements, easely carried, or rather caught in the Fowlers snare by the sound of pleasant whistles. Whether it be false fetches of deceiuable flatterers or immoderate education intermingled with ouermuch lust and libertie, or distempered with the sweete sauce of amorous inclination, or their hearts moystened with venomed practises of stubborne will, or vnstayed sences feeding on sundry other imperfections, or in that wit growing by good aduise is absent, experience instructing her lawes by long continuaunce, can not at euery wish be graced: nor at euery becke bended either which approching young greene yeeres, no happy benefites nor gentle fauours of Fortune discouered, left in the end at randoms as vnfertil rough groundes without Culture: On the contrary happeneth to others, regarding the Discipline of Predicessors education, binde their affections, tye togeather the courses of Nature, walking in the straight precincts of sober moderation, daylie aduaunce the Noble rich houses of royal estate, from which the first descended, refuse headlong to drop into the fulsome stincking Cabins of bare Pesaunts, or match the societie of base borne Brats, depinging a pattern of glorious imitation, good gouernement perswading, skilfull Uertue instructing, become most happy, continually claime and peaceably recouer the inestimable price of rare pearles, beset in magnificent countenaunce of continent grauitie, march foorth to honorable regarde, neuer retyring to foule ougle shame: these timely seasonable plants straitlie springing vpwarde (preserued by good guyding) will at no time crooke nor bende downwarde, are like the glimsing Orient sunne stil moouing, charely passeth a course without impeachment of the blacke cloud or furious storme: All which approouedly is knowne to fall out, in the renowned dayes of young Duke Lampanus of Hetruria , hauing in the first brunt and entraunce of his Dukedome, many mischieuous calamities thorow slipperie sleights of false subiectes, contrary to the last will of Duke Wafrian his Father cast vpon him, attempting the preferment of Lord Olesus his Brother, twins of equal age and birth, by meanes wherof, vntrusty friends on both sides: greate disquietnes and Ciuill discention styrred vp. The Dukedome at length thorow wise heads and careful Counsellors, respecting as wel their owne priuate safetie as hurlie burlie like to insue, a greater inconuenience, cut off the cauiling wit and clyming minde of Lord Olesus , deseruedly put him to death: concluded, set down, the inheritable right to Lampanus and his heiers successiuelie for euer. Wheras heretofore Lampanus in his aduerse wretchednes found no consolacion, so now somewhat reuiued his benummed spirites and dead sences, in the downefal of his traiterous Brother. But principally taking a deeper roote and more lustie courage in the faith and approoued trustines of beutiful Egeria his deare wife, who on her behalfe altogeather imployed a dutiful care, to adorne and set foorth her husbandes Princely house and scepter, with surpassing glory, and riche renowme of vertue, beseeming a famous Prince, but cheefly she so worthely exercising her degree, raigned, excelled, and worthely abounded in all Princely qualities: besides which, had such sure defence (notwithstanding) her incomparable beautie against ye filthy rabble of loose Louers canoned the walles, and well inured rampart of her chastitie. For that when Duke Lampanus minde diuersly dispersed in the hurlie burlies of his Dukedome, in sharp conflictes and bitter skirmishes by popular inuasion. Nothing at al solaced his befraughted mind, afflicted with continual passions of care, as the true chastitie of Duches Egeriaes honorable Nobilitie at home: but as rest and subiection of his people increasing at length more and more: So Lampanus began to acquaint him selfe with more familier fauour, attached with such hot broyles of Egeriaes loue: could not stay his sliding steps in one sacred cotentmet, fearing least others should loue yt which him selfe liked, or that Egeria fauored that, which hee falsly suspected: his rouling eyes neuer satisfied with wholesome naturalitie, partly of him selfe ledde with leuitie, but cheefly incensed, thorow faithles falsehood of one Andromus , being of such prompt pregnancy, aduanced from lowe and poore parentage to the Dukes Court: made worthy not onely as one of his secreat Counsel, but renowmed in all dignities next vnto his person, closely stuffed the Dukes insaciate conceited head, with such false driffes deepely graued: yea as it were coniured the spirite of ielousie in the Dukes minde, against the good and gratious Duches Egeria . These vniust occasions of griefe setled, and vnkindnes planted, coulde for no good oportunitie offered, euer after be raced. Lampanus suncke into the bottome of dispaier, fetching many deepe sighes, with moste displeasaunt countenaunce, vttereth these wordes: Ah my vntrusty Wyfe and Lady, wounding my hidden loue, inforceth me to complaine: her treacherous infidelity, hath gaged my honour, discharged my person from renowme, possessed dishonor to my scepter: who is able to distribute nourishments of ioyes to my consuming sorrowes. Oh, I launce foorth in the greedy gulfe of dolourous desolation, my staffe of Marshall prowes is cracked in shivers: am I not led into voluntary seruitude? disceitfully bereft from the freedome of nuptial life? sacrificed a slaue into the handes of traiterous verlets? Duke Lampanus not taking fast footing, placed vpon the top of a lofty mountayne, throweth him selfe downe vpon al pernicious aduentures: as a light codgel cast into a main stream without returne, caried into a Million of Myles: For as Lampanus reeling too and fro with Magical imaginations, so this false flatterer Andromus , hardened in shamelesse audacities, intercountered him with a new onset, as if he very well may thinke and say: sithens waspes haue free recourse to builde nests in Bulles noses, or if Spiders leaue to webbe any more in thatcht houses, learne to drinke the cleare brooke springes: or the Scorpian loathed to bath the Bustards blood, beginneth to scratch the Elophants eye. I wil shortly alter your affections, diet your smell with a more quicker sent, and season your stomacke with sharper sauce, building his bower aloft, somtimes sleepeth, sometimes casteth his eyes downeward, viewing how practises take place, sometimes smyleth that boxes so charely weare cheapened: at last espying the swoord of sedicion swinging in the eare, began to laugh aloude, but fearing his pastime would turne to peace, vomited out this Oration following. If protesting of loyal duety vnto your worthy maiesty, can make publication of an honest man, if sorrowfull sighes powre out incessant floudes, blering the sharpe sight of my eyes, sodainely mooue you into mutation, and change vnlooked for, in that neuer touched or found guilty of traiterous crime: assuring you the rather to regard my infallable faith in disclosing trueth, shall conuert mortall poisons to precious ointments, abolish frantick lecherous fits, from princely chastitie: euer and besides the hazarding of my credit. In regard of true obedience, an vnspotted subiect, no wrinckle of disloyalty euer founde in my person: besides which, our mutual companionship tasting the pleasaunt ioyes and delightsome sweetes of tender youth, concorded with infringeable amitie, am to respect carefull guidaunce to your person, nearely looke into your espousall bed. For be it knowne, if ignoraunce hath hitherto couched those iniurious wrongs, which continually approche, wounding and scarring your dignitie, the aforesaide premises considered, will not reuolt to proceede, making declaration that Lorde Trauenna an ancient enemy, to your Crowne and dignity, familiarly is crept into secrete and hidden fauour with Duches Egeria , your honourable Spouse: vnder shadow of seruiceable duetie, bereueth your Maiestye from the fruite of true continencie. What disgestment may this be: yea, a painful Corsey to our stomacks, hauing consecrated our liues to your protection, moste redily imploy our wisdomes in the negotiations of your Dukedome: by which nothing can bee brought to good passe, or straight direction finish perfect effects, except trecherous causes first reuealed, suppressed and reuenged, otherwise, your selfe sodenly intrapped, and we vnfortunatelie depriued of a wise and puisaunt prince, your subiects hearts withdrawne, al which preuented, whilste trueth to my singuler credite hath vnmuffled the facions of her face, your fauourable grace warned, intreated, and obteined, agreeable to our humble petitions, wil proceede in present iustice. the Duches to prison. The Duke tickeled in the eare, began to scratch as though he had beene venomed with the creeping of a wild worme. For these swasible argumets did so insaciate and withdraw his flexible fonde minde, tainted with a filthy natural pestilence of ielousie. A most vnhappy discease, once persing the outwarde sences with softe foote by little and little penitrateth the deep secreates of the tender heart. Especially where superfluous loue went before, a incurable gaule followeth after. The Duke for a litle space, so battered in the brains, as one cast into an extasie, deuoided from present vse of speech, or as iustly may be spoke, catcht in a fools net, neglected the inuestigatio of honest truth, chooked with sweete bayte of flattery: his minde tossed with a roring whirlwind. A harde thing then to gather green leaues on this saples Oke, or sweet colloured flowres on the dead fallowe the winding Worme Rixipa with the nebbes of her forked heade, did so nible and gnaw his guts, as though he had beene purged with some bitter Coloquintida , yet at length after reuolution of innumerable thoughts, vttereth these words. After trial made, plaine euidence taking place, I wil trench these Treasons from my Court, as fulsome marish slime from sweet Medowes and pleasaunt springs. I sweare by my scepter, I wil with merciles mind deliuer these mischeeuous malefactours into the maine streame of terrible iustice. Duke Lampanus vnable to disgarboyle and vnlace the broyling heate of stomach, with extreame outrage called for Taratus , Lorde high Marshal, supported with strong garryson of best tryed Marshal souldiers, to apprehend and keep in safe custody Lorde Trauenna : The Dukes sharpe commaundement put into bytter execution, the Lord Trauenna beholding the weather so vnstable, such sharpe haylstones tumbling vpon his head battering and bruising the vniuersal spirites of lyfe, cast into a sudden amaze: The noble guiltles Duches Egeria oppressed with lyke miserable wo and mortal mishap, beholding her selfe a spectacle of dishonour to the world, although before the supernal Iudge a cleare, perfect, and quiet conscience without stayne or blotte of defamation: yet perplexed with sundy thoughts assayling her tender Noble brest, in the time of her imprysonment ouercome with fearful conceit of wanne death, by the furious frownes of her husbande Lampanus discheereful countenaunce: wryteth these verses with the blood of her mariage finger betweene two Oyster shelles. blood of her mariage finger. Shall guiltles cause sharpe shaftes shoote out, to glaunce at hazards ayme, Expell repulse, and scall no more to view our present shame, Friend Faith disclose the truth, Disdain hath wrought my smart, Dispayre leaue off thy murmuring fits, sweet ioy come ease my hart. If Fraud should loose at large, the brydle of his will, Then loue may bash to speake for taunts, to vtter out her skill. Let due reuenge march on with speede, my pleasant lyfe to kill, Do not deny to search the depth, of falshoodes cruell hate, Deare spouse let truth safegarde to cleare, my noble fame and state. Duke Lampanus after receit of Duches Egeriaes pitiful Letters, paynted with the freshe colours of true amitie, mitigated and expelled some part of tyrannical purpose, which he before intertayned and nourished in a most vnquiet stomack, bethought with him selfe not long to foster such forgeryes, and that Andromus the flatterer, either vpon wilful falshood, or ignoraunt mistaking, poysoned his itching eares, sent a hasty messenger, inuiting Lorde Andromus to his presence, vpon whose appearaunce the Duke persueth his flatterie as followeth. Cause constraineth as well to accuse, as discredite and exclaime on thy false inducementes and pestilent perswasions, least hereafter ouermuch applying my wits to beleeue your whole stocke, race and lynage, may be continually deluded: now is prefixed before mine eyes your prone readines, to work mischeefe with cruel sweet flattery, deliuer the world to ticklishe temptation, tasting hony, to prouoke others greedily to bayte on poyson. As I determine to way these causes in equal ballaunce of equitie, perceiuing your practise, circumuention and effusion of innocent blood, by fraude to saciate the greedy worme of priuate appetites. The imprisonment of my Spouse Lady Egeria , hapneth nothing so pleasaunt to your stomaches: as sharpe eger tormentes which I determine to laye vpon your demerites, lothsome and bitter to be sustayned. Wherefore abolishing the vaile of blind beliefe, wil esclarish my vnderstanding with deeper consideration: Lord Andromus the flatterer, wonderfully thorow the Dukes thundring voyce amazed, perceiuing his hateful moode, the daungerous ditch which easily he might leap into, with blushing countenance, bashfully began to speake. If remorce and scruple of good conscience, (most puissant  & roial Duke) may reuiue my complaint, safelie conduct mee into your grace and fauoure: no such battred breach, either of accusation, or discredit, shal in any behalfe scarre or wounde the tip of honour. My pure heart and inuiolable spirit of fidelity neuer blemished, can not now learne the dedication of soule and bodie to voluntary vilany, besides the sharpe tortures for such expiable offences, in the frowning wrath and violent displeasure of a mighty prince iustly to be indured, neither can equal faith, which hath euermore matcheably concorded our meete ages, permit any such ingratitude to nessel within any secreat corner of my stomach, your magnificent wysedome and high vnderstanding, so wel acquainted in worldly affayres, narrowly taking view vpon fals inducements, and cauiling conueiaunces, wil be moued, nor inforced on either side. Wherfore I know your mighty puissaunce not amazed, franckly wil tread and equally trace out the playne path, which by me first thorowly paced to your treadinges. I humbly beseech you (Oh noble Duke) notwithstanding sinister slaunders, that misbeleefe with draw not your present safegarde, from most trusty friendes, into the maine perill of traiterous enemyes. For if search of these causes, diligently fedomed to the bottome, and bored to the pyth, more pernicious conspirations, would haue euent then presupposed, either by vniuersall promulgation, or secreat opinion: if not other wayes stayed, the alteration of examinations, contrarietie and vnlykelihood in causal circumstance, the defectiue impossibilities by inquisitours vnplayn dealinges: All which, yeeldeth aboundaunt effectes to the iust maintenaunce of my expected desire. Aboundaunt matter yeeldeth daunger to your person, if not duely preuented, an open gappe to your Dukedome: besides al which; a mortal pryuie hatred lurking in their hearts against vs your long approoued freends, which onely tender the welfare and most prosperous preseruation of your royal person: why shal adulations miscarry your noble minde. Doe not thinke (Oh noble Duke) that I in disfauour of singuler contentment, wil deliuer the worlde to ticklish murmuration, committing such an action that reprochfully may bashe me with dishonourable slaunders, during the passage of this transitory vayn life: I wil neuer make such acceptation of my selfe, presently to pleasure priuy desires, that obloquy shal neuer depart my honour and house, shal I now tast hony? and euer after drink deadly poyson? notable defamed to the worlde, a shadow of perpetual suspicion impayre and blemish my good daies with immortal ignobilitie. Why shoulde the thirst of yre and rage so furiously inflame me, to bleare the reputation of a royal Duches, vnto whome I stand obliged in al humble seruice? These causes onely excepted. Although I thought to vncouch the cloaked couertures and darke clouds hanging ouer the state of your seigniorie: yet my minde neuer was so alienated from gratitude to wishe the imprisonment of my Lady and mistresse, vnto whom I dedicated my humble spirits, neuer could be surprised or chaunged, by any straunge discourses of mortal men. But no pleasure coulde affect me, her beauty besides your selfe ministring pleasaunt delights to others, perceiuing a frozen heart opposed to a melting minde? How could I dissemble such a greefe, how could I finishe a dutiful contentment in your seruiceable affayres: If paynted vizardes shoulde haue beene pulled from their faces by others, silence closing my lips, your displeasure had fallen out so haples, as the same neither by oportunity, or iust occasion coulde be reiterated. If I disprooued and polluted with the breach of dishonesty, a vtterer of false speeches, a deuiser of fabulous driftes: Let me be rewarded as a traytour thrown out as an open reuenge to the view of the world: yea let me taste the most bitter and vntasteful Cup that can be tempered for my desertes: Wherefore (Oh noble Duke) clarifye your vnderstanding more clearer then the glistering crystal. For if I Andromus be found a flatterer, or one that hunteth after Princely fauour, vilanously aspyring and gaping after dignities and promotions, let him perish, otherwyse lincke and knit him, in the fast bond, which tender age and common familiarity, hauing experience, one towardes an other, in perfect natural friendships. VVhen Andromus had once agayne inchaunted the Duke within the lystes of his cirkle, his head burned more hotter with heate of ielosie then before, entring into sodaine eager persuite of the matter, by Letters missiue, commaunded Lorde Tarratus high marshal, to bring foorth the Duches and Lord Trauenna seuerally to be examined, before the counsel and Iudges: The Duches in making her aunswere, after long and secreat causes, debated and layde to her charge, besides the clearing her selfe by particuler ministration of certayne articles: as purgations, sharpe glisters, and bytter Syrrops ouercome at last, louinglye did imbrace and kisse, her husband Duke Lampanus liuely picture, which hanging about her necke, by a fayer chayne and rundle of Gold, powring out many bitter teares, to the wonderful greefe and admiration of those, that behelde, humbly desired pardon of the councell and Iudges, to vse some wordes in her owne behalfe, so that she might not abuse their pacience, it imported great waight, that as she was an innocent, hauing a guiltlesse heart, an obsolute conscience, freely discharged, from al those iniust accusations, cleare her selfe. Moretus the iudge in the name of the whole counsel and Iudges, stoode vp and sayd. Worthy Duches, sithens you are publiquely defamed and accused, it is contrary to law and iustice, that you priuately should be condemned. We therefore yeeld you our free authoritie, openly to honest your honorable, and ancient credite: the harmelesse Duches in most seuere bold countenaunce, with sundry fayre amiable syrtes in her cheekes, her browes beset lyke the precious Salopyn , of Affrica , her white yuory trembling handes like the dryuen snow, her body euen framed and fashioned of the fine Virgin waxe, spake as followeth. If the accomplishment of my owne wil, (Right honorable Lords) might prepare proofe sufficient to mooue your affections, or if vnmeasured greefe of heart, could atchieue a vertuous motion, bende your attentions, readilie to heare: eyther if Noble blood of predicessors, or the institution of a right posterity, might increase good grace to your spirites, I woulde nothing doubt, but the ornament of your wisedome, easely can repel these false aduentures to my person, discouer the presumption of my vnequals, which thorow vnruly raping, bethinke how to cut of the sweet verdure, and tender greennesse of my young yeares: you Noble Senatours, arme me from their hurtes, defend and garde me, from their dreadful conspiracies, succoure and support me with honorable iustice, they do assault me, with misery, they vsurpe tyrannical villany against me. These flatterers by exercising their iniuries, wold eate vp, deuour and scatter the seigniory of our Dukedom, they open a wyde gap of diuision betweene me and my Lord, prepare entraunce for them selues, but I wishe seperation of soule with a thousand torments from my body, if euer I ouerturned my spousal chastetie, the which I haue alwayes carefully kept, religiously preserued, to my deare Lord and husband without violation: if then these my wordes can molifie your hearts, chaunge your mindes, moderate your sentences, I must repute you merciful men, equal Iudges with al discretion, sounde searchers of truth, wherfore haue mercy vpon me I say, haue mercy vpon the simplicity of a weake woman, traiterously abused. These wordes of the good Duches, so netled the counsellours and Iudges eares, altogeather perswaded of her vertuous direct dealinges, with one consultation agreed to be the pretexed vengeaunce of some aspyring traitour, peruerting and vnquieting the Dukes mind, but one of the Iudges named Moretus , in the name of al the rest, spake as followeth. Your modesty (noble duches) ouertaketh vs willing to prostrate our selues before the Lord our Duke, fauourably to infranchise you within the priuiledge and lyberty of his good grace and wel liking. Humilitie doth illustrate and gloriously aduaunce your cause with open trueth, gyueth euidence without impeachment, to stay vs from extremitie of Law: if it were in vs, to molifie the harde minde of our Lorde and Duke, whose heade no doubt marcheth in many fantasies against you: we had addressed our affections, to iustifie a good work. In the meane while, were it no lesse then notable wisdome, to reprooue fond vanitie, as surging sensualities, disframing and perplexing your accustomed good order, and gouernment, leaue you in the wyde mouth of misery without consolation, your affections hazarded with sodaine ouerthrow: penured with compunction, extenuated with teares, euery howre in danger of disspoyle. But let discretion, a most seruiceable handmayde to pacience, aduauntage to staye you from slippery slydinges, againste the incountring assault of frowning tribulation: the Heauens neuer so cleare, then after they be scoured from raynie influences, what more puerer then Golde, burnished, beaten, and tryed. Wherefore (Noble Duches) resolue this a comfort to your mind, beeing a deceitful action, a colourable trumperie, your enemies can not escape condigne torment, they are within the lystes of due vengeance: the Gods wil neuer excuse so wretched a wickednesse. When Queene Lassana in Affrica , vnculpable, accurssed, reiected and detested before her husband the King, Vry the spirite of contagion had quiet possession of her enemies, bereft from supernal felicities to infernal tormentes. Camera Queene of Egypt , hauing a hundred thousande sorrowes lodged in her chaste minde, by rigour of temerarious iustice, rent and torne a sunder, by wylde Horses, made a dolourous example, euen in the hower of Death, an host or army of wayward angry Waspes with sharpe stinging Daggers in their Tayles in open viewe, destroyed and subuerted her ennemyes. An exployte of worthye warning againste al false periured accusers, a sodayne seuerity againste suche which exercise the greeuous cryme of tyrannical fury, flattering Princes eares by infringing, violating holy and ciuil constitutions, set downe by good lawmakers. Let me not forget the noble Egiptian Pantaron , a wholsome law maker, that who so euer vowed a false testimony, shoulde be led and slayne as a Calfe in the shambles, his skin flawed, his head set vp as a signe of a vilanous murtherer, a rauisher of holy chastity, his corpes throwen to the Kinges houndes, greedely to be deuoured and eaten, shoulde feale smartful terrour, without supportation. Infinite examples might be recouered among the radiant florishing Ladyes, inspyred with aboundant gyftes of vertue. I could tumble out manyfolde warninges, but chiefly prefixing before your eyes, the misery, teares, immeasurable anguishes of Lady Alana , a Paragon and myrrour of continual continencie: her portion was vexation, and vnrestfulnes, insatiable, bereft from chast integrity and renowmed honor. Such proofe appeared by rare and exquisite prudence, notwithstading Agonions death, staied her cogitations, vpon the fauourable Gods. For that greedy Beares as Lieutenaunts of iustice, deuoured her enemyes. As correction of reason seemed colde in the eyes of men, so rigour of reuengement, appaled contempt, vnbrydeled liberty, and lawles luste was thorow iuste punishment thralled. For if right by immortal meanes, were not mayntained: violence, dissimulation, deceitful flatteries would florish among mortal men, to the subuersion of Monarchies, inquietaions of Kinges houses, terrible cryes in iudgement seates, destruction of Cities, continual ouerturning of common wealthes: Wherefore honourable Ladye, if righteous honesty of your cause be founded vpon a sure rocke, mercye shal be gayned. For malice, extremitie, vanquished by modesty, thraledome depriued by liberty: this resting our selues vntil the Dukes minde and pleasure be further knowne herein. vertuous instructions. After this Oration pronounced, the Duches expressed true signes of holy humility, and precious pacience, pulling from her Golden lockes certayne sumptuous oriental pearles, and rich iewels, hanging in most beautiful brightnes: gaue them to Iudge Moretus , saying. I doe not (honorable and wise Iudge) impart these gifts and gentle rewards as a bribe, couertly to balance my cause, but as proofe of good wil, and remuneration for your vertuous instructions, lessoning me to rest and prepare my selfe within the wel warded walles of peaceable tranquilitie: whether I be solaced with longer ioyes of vital mortallities, or quickly resolued into the dunghil of death, short paynes consumate, innocencie shal infinitly mortalice my cause. Wherefore whatsoeuer hapneth, no mutation shal aduersly reiect my prefixed purpose. euery ones opinion what were best to be atchiued for Duches Egeria and Lord Trauennaes enlargement. The Councellers and Iudges foorthwith, conuayed them selues into a secreat place, euery one deliuered his opinion, measuring out a direct platforme for her inlargement. Al which proceeded as wel of true loue to vertue, as plaine opinion of her innocencie. But after long and manye consultations what was expedient to be finished in these waighty affayres, with general voyce concluded to write to the Duke, aswel attempting an alteration of his discontented minde and purpose, as by the same means, bewray the falsehood and flatterie of Lord Andromus . If vnfayned affections that subiects bear to the wayghtie affayres of common wealth (can mooue Right Soueraigne Duke) or the pursuing of a Duches innocencie, gaine estimation to your person, or merciful memory of holy vow, coniuncting your inseperable loue one with an other, ratifie our supplications, we assured of your vertue, wisdome,  & circumspection, may vnamazedly set downe our iudicial opinion and sound sentence before you, as wel by louing admonishment, as request, lenifie honorable Egeriaes cause, your nuptial spouse, polifie and colocate those confracted arteries in right course, stretch foorth your shryncking sinewes, knit these vnioynted bones in Anathomical description. For why should your Noble grace halt a decreeped man, hauing liuelie limmes to vse and inioye. Why shoulde you be dismembred, hauing al the partes and frames of natural proportion reedified in your person: whilst you may raunge and rule with inestimable glory and renown: why should you dedicate your selfe a pointing stocke of infamie to foraine enemies, a domestical contempt to your owne subiectes. Let naturall regarde perswade you to medicinable helpes, driue out these pernicious poysons, which vnnatural subiectes haue lodged in your brest, inchaunting you with intermingled drenches. Which except you reforme their fradulent suggestions: the whole state of your seignorie may fal to ineuitable hazarde. These premises considered, lieth vs vpon to ingender a better contentation, that speedely you frequent the chaste conuersation of noble Duches Egeria , whose honorable vndefiled foote steppes we haue made good trial of, to the hope of your fauour, her speedy deliuerie and iuste discharge of our dueties: so that dispatching this good Duches from her cruel conditions of lyfe, by lawful liberty. No greater fruites of liberal bounty, in lew of our true seruice, can yeelde better satisfaction then our requestes graunted. Lady Eldorna to his presence, by whose flatteries the Dukes letters were obtayned for Egeriaes arraignment. These Letters receiued by the Duke, nothing coulde preuaile to enlarge her seruitude. For Lorde Andromus the flatterer, brought Lady Eldorna his Sister into presence for a view, whose fresh loue, incomparable beautie, nursed hidden confirmations, and assiduat ioyes, conforming  & fashioning him to a new assent: his appetite extenuated fro ancient grace of roial Egeria , she wholly disfauoured in his sight, did thinke time forslowed, vntil the tender thread of her life, which thorow honorable and Princely tract of time, had before beene spun and reeled, were quite cut off. The Dukes minde obscured with thicke fogges of flattery, ouerwhelmed into a pernicious gulfe, of palpable darknes: his disease of ielousie proouing incurable, coulde neither thorow earnest loue of his Duches be helped, nor thorow fidelity by long seruice, of learned Councellers and graue Iudges perswaded. Oh it is a world to beholde when flattering deceiuers can temper delicate drincks, after euery mans appetite, by cunning art couer rapinous extorcion, stop wisedomes eares by false inchauntments, subuert true conscience by wrongful insinuation, ambition trameling the deepest waters snareth the waightiest fish. False Andromus neglected babling Fame, sounding her trumpe of terrour thorow al the parts, Prouinces, Ilands, Townes and Cities in the Dukedome of Hetruria . The Duke on the other side, mistrusted not vulgar reportes of populer men, neither feared the ouerthrow of his Dukedome by such a diuision, nor regarded the pacient penetenciarie mind of good Egeria , sendeth foorth by wryting, a sharpe edict for arraignment, sentence of death, against Duches Egeria and Lord Trauenna , deputing Andromus the flatterer to interview the speedy dispatchment hereof. The tenure of the Dukes letters as followeth. If wild spreading yuie, ruinate the wals of my house: yea reching within the windowes of my secreat chamber. Were it not necessary to be vnrooted and plucked vp? If in pleasant Gardens one ouerspreading weed, disorder and deforme odyferous gallant flowers, requisitly are they to be destroyed. If attempts be at the firste tollerated, at last wil prostrate and dissolue my person, preiudice and hurt the natural estate of my people and subiects. And although beauty and many ornaments in Egeria might easely styrre vp, and inflame a mopish minde to beholde her fayned holinesse. Yet one filthy staine exulcerateth and blemisheth all the rest: One wrinckle in Apelles Tinsel, blurred the costly Tables of Bacchus . Doth not one vnsauery corner pester a whole House: One loathsome odour, ouercome many costly and precious oyntments: Why are you then so blindly conducted into the centree of Egeriaes deceits, plagued with her dissembling wordes: allured with her pestilent poysons: inuested within the seigniorie of her shadowes: what doe you repute her a demieGod? do you think her a spirit of heauen? Is she twise and thrise blest, and my selfe a thousand times abiured: As I am fully determined to punishe her nefarious lyfe: so the blew Cloudes of her lewd liuing, shall neuer hereafter obscure my kingdome: Let it not therefore (Oh noble Counsellers and Iudges) breed no discontentment in you, if I purpose to leauel the shadowing hilles of Salpina , with the lowe fruitful valeis of Latropos . Why do you imagine that I can be ouercome with any mans flatterie, my wits lightly caried, deceiued and mocked without good and due proofe. All which great iniurie to my person, impeachment to my Dukedome, imperfection to my people: If you perseuer in this sinister iudgement, how can your dueties be discharged: How can you directly proceed, to win the price and garland of my fauour, a remuneration to your seruice: The performaunce of my pleasure herein, shal neuer deuoyde me from requital, doubting nothing but vpon present processe. I bid you farewell. against Duches Egeria and Lord Trauenna, the woful cry of the whole Dominion against Andromus the flatterer. After this sharpe glyster, the Counsellers and Iudges participated their seuerall affections a like: All their ioyes conuerted, to sorrowful mourning, their indissolluble amitie, altered to sodaine misaduentures, their pleasures to gadding fantasies. Euery one distract in vnderstanding, ready to cast him selfe headlong into the solitary desarts of dispaier. The Duches and Lorde Trauenna , according to the Dukes straight precept called foorth, were tryed vpon the proofe of their accusation. Lord Andromus the flatterer with two others, Helluos , and Syugaron , base Gentlemen, did sweare by the immortal power, that the filthy fact of Treacherie was perpetrated and committed, betweene Egeria and Lord Trauenna , againste the Dukes person. After this detestable votarie protested, Moretus the Iudge, frowning his browes, grinning his teeth, cryed out. Oh wretched betrayer of innocent blood. Although they sipp and taste a little of bitter mortal sops: yet I feare not, but hastely they shall swallow downe euerlasting sweet syropes. Let vs put on mourning vailes, a good woman is taken from vs, Oh Hipocrites, Oh Deuilles and Feendes of impietie, as fountaines of teares, burste out, bedewing the Counsellers cheekes. So Moretus fell downe starke deade, coulde hardly be recouered for a long space. The like clamour and piteous lamentation was in the whole Region rounde about. Crying wo worth the time, that such a pestilent wretch as Andromus shoulde liue. In the middest of this mone making, and sorrowfull sighing, Lorde Trauenna desired the Counsellers and Iudges, to vtter some speeches in his owne behalfe, handeling and preferring the Testimony of a good conscience, for all posterities following. Thinke not Right Honorable assemble, vain words, and balauncing speech, at this sodaine moment, shal put in hazard the euerlasting destruction of my spirit: Or the keene sharp two edged knife, which fatal foes haue fearefully drawn out, mooue me to impatience: Or vituperious shames, which mercilesse manquellers with mortal burthens loade me, craue pitty at their handes. No, no: innocencie doth disswade my offensiue minde. Knowing this pleasure and worldly contentations must pay a tribute. I am not ignoraunt, my tender body, which here liued delicately, must bee discharged: wee muste seeke after a ghostly contemplacion, neuer fauouring oure desires: we must take our iourney and marriners voiage, to ye hauen of true protection. When the odious Winters are ouerpast, the gallant gladsome sweet Sommers approch. After bitter afflictions and sorrowful taste, assured felicitie is expected: this life is a wandring voyage, protruding vs, to many inordinate aduentures, a mercilesse sea, which oftentimes vomiteth vs into the mouth of prying Pyrates, dashing vs vpon infraction of dangerous shipwrack. And sithens duety tieth mee inexcusably to solemnize an honourable memoriall of this afflicted vertuous Ladye Egeria , absolutely deliuer out a true discharge of her chastetie, a preseruation of mine owne credite and honesty, wel knowing her corpes sacrificed, a sauorie immolation, shal cry out, for swift execution of vengeaunce, vpon the heads of iniust betrayers. For if euer I presumed her worthy maiestical person, let this Ghost of mine be deliuered a Pasture for infernal Wormes to gnaw vpon. Or if my sences had beene arrogantly saciate with any such impious infection, the exercising of her good vertues, might easely appal my detestable desires: yea and disclose the same, in regarde of her safegarde and my confusion. But my ready inexceptable obeysaunce to her commaundement, which is the well condicioned nature of a trusty seruaunt, commenceth exceptable thrale vpon vs both. I perceiue the estate of her calling, the race of her family, the royaltie of her degree is neglected, nothing respected, but quite forgotten. It is manifest, although this noble Duches Egeria , safely would mayntaine her honor, lul you a sleepe, with pitiful cryes, yet direct circumstaunce shal publishe a manifest veritie. But wo woorth the villaine which firste attempted the ignomye of Egeriaes good name, the vtter subuersion of her renowne, with craftie charmes, flattering incensing, and misleading Duke Lampanus , yt gods wil not slow to requite these vilanies. these spitefull speaches blazed, in euery corner, coast, and Countrie. If her inculpable demeanours, brought in question thorowe my misusage: Or if foes enuiously thyrsting to sucke my blood, shoulde frownce to indamnifie my good Lady Egeria , let a dubble death for her deliueraunce be layd vpon my life: let my sorrowes be twise imbrued, to deminishe her paines: let the price and ransom of her pietie, rest vpon my carrion carkas, a graue and pit to finish Lady Egeriaes sorrowes: if this may guide you to plaine euident truth, no man hereafter may pretend cause of ignoraunce. This as a witnes of my last will, hauing enioyed this worlde twentie sixe yeares, sufficiently approouing the vanities thereof, although a heauy spectacle, yet willing to resigne this life to a more better hope. And as my yong forepassed life, not without excuse, so wil I neuer blush, or couer my face, as one suspected or blotted of any such cryminal desert, of which I am now condemned. Fare ye more better then my selfe. Andromus the flatterer. would, for inward sorrow vtter any one worde. Humaine greefe powred downe fro his eyes streams and flouds of aboundaunt teares, manifesting intier good wil, and louing affection hee bare to truth and iustice, whom renowmed parentage with honourable education, nursed and fostered to ripe age, in a short moment, deliuered to cruel vnnatural death. An other iudge named Alphoes , stood vp in iudgement place and sayd, gracious Duches  & honorable Lord Trauenna , we can not release nor help your miseries, behooueth vs precisely to fulfil the Dukes commanndement, deuoyde our selues from blame, the neglect wherof, incur seuere penaltie of contempt, much hindring vs, nothing furthering you, wrapped in your miseries, inflicted with the like sharpe rod of punishment: It were not vnmeet (Lord Trauenna ) for the luker and gain of condigne estimation and honorable fame, to challenge combat with Andromus , run a course of marshal war, in fauour of vertuous innocencie, an aduocate and true refuge approouing, reuealing to the world your gyltles perfection, for Andromus deuices in presence of vs al, haue spit foorth most vile words of despite, blemishing  & ouerthrowing your credite, so safgard, salue, purge, & notifie before the face of men, your true intention & direct dealings, frame to the same effect, a supplication to the Dukes maiesty, and your meet motion herein taking repulse. We the estates of this realme here present, wil eternally Chronicle your veritable indeuour in the same. Lord Trauenna coforted in this counsel, thought euery month a day, vntil attempt were giuen to ye fauor of his suit,  & that Andromus his enemy prouoked. These inuentions subtilly shaped, lay soking for a more suple temperature. A hiue of hornets in ye mean while buzzed in Andromus ears,  & a fardle of suspicions, lodged in his head. combate with Andromus the flatterer. Nothing doubting but franke libertie, and familiar demeanor you beare to marshal prowes, (Right noble Duke) giueth place to equity, fauoreth honest attempts, squareth and measureth out an honorable glorious meanes, for wel deseruers, reuerteth and causeth your conceits to a more better and setled opinion. If your royal person were venoumed thorow my counterfait seruice, let me be attached with the scourge of sinister penal iudgement: so that reasonable desires first fauoured, forwardnes and wil both burning in the entrals of my hart, in trial of my honesty: your permission may haue free accesse, to fight with ye mischieuous varlet & false flatterer Andromus , in disproofe of his hidden  & cloaked falshood. The eternal power wil not smile at my vniust quarrel: if his ground work wel layd, and foundation sure, his intent perfected ye better: the aduantage or displeasure hereof weighed, considered, is leuied on either of vs, & also disgorge out of our stomacks, ye rancoured filth of enuie: marchandize repentaunce for naughty actions of a deare price. For he that dare commit these wrongs openly, is not abashed to auow them openly. He that launcheth in the puddle of discorde, knoweth a clear passage to escape. Wherfore (oh Noble Duke) let the holy fountaine of merciful pittie streame out, mooue you to graunt our requestes. Lord Trauenna. The Duke receiuing this supplication, thought a very deadly bane, prepared against Lord Andromus , yet the euacuation of his request, would greatly preiudice honour. For that popular wits raunging with implacable fury, if not politickly suppressed, feared common assemblies  & fantastical factions. Furthermore foreseeing the euil successe, yt Andromus had serued but a sorry saint, if foyled therein, greatly tendring his debilitie, the rather for the especial loue, which lurked in his brest towardes fayer Eldorna , on whose poysoned sweetnes, he now bayted and fed vpon: would rather apply with courtesie to her humour, then extract her fresh daintie blood with vnkindnesse. Duke Lampanus dissembling an outward respect to honor. Although in deed a net of fradulent couen, with pleasaunt smyling countenaunce made motion to Andromus , as wel for expressing of fame, as publishing of faith, to combat with Trauenna. Andromus astonished in the Dukes request, loth to performe his motion, stroken into sodaine dumpes, as one that had lost his speeche, by meanes of some continuall catar and rewme distilling from his busie braines. After great pause and long stay, spake to the Duke. perceiuing it, appointeth one Necto, a slaue in his steed: and proclaymeth the day of combat. I wil not refuse the accomplishment of any thing, in satisfaction of your commandement. As it is not vnknowne to your worthy maiesty. Although your will and pleasure seemeth straunge and vniust: yea a disfauourable aduenture, a true subiect shoulde hazarde with a false traitour, the will hereof in you, a moste vnkind discourtesie: the performaunce in my selfe, verie difficult. This Andromus sometimes mum, sometimes ouer talcatiue, sometimes lustie, sometimes a coward, so that swinging betweene fraud and feare, represented an offer. The Duke procuring a day of combate, published thorow out the whole Land, as followeth. By Lampanus in long suffering of deuine fortune, Prince, Duke, and cheefe Ruler in all the partes and dominions of Hetruria . Whereas ye determined purpose, of ye valiant handy Noble Gentleman, Lord Andromus : ye eternal power moouing happy euent, is to defend him selfe against ye miserable condemned catiffe Trauenna , a fable for the worlde to gaze on, an infamous repulsed wretch, of notable dishonor, harbouring long treasons against my person, subiects, and dominion in his heart: in excuse of his lewde life, chalengeth against my good subiect, Lord Andromus , for his best aduauntage, open warre. Unto whose supportation in fauour of auncient prowes I haue yeelded. But as touching Egeria , no combate shal preuaile or acquite her disgrace, no liberty of speech can molifie, intreat, or make intercession in her cause, neither gaine of mortal benefites pardon her offences. Lampanus did reckon no paines ill bestowed in blasphemy and execration of Egeria , thinking to bring her in hatred with common sort of people thereby. And also very much thyrsted after Egeriaes blood, by vnchaste young Eldorna : euery day sealed the Dukes lips, with so many loue kisses, as her suit coulde neither be frustrated, nor at no time forgotten: her intisement interchased his minde with vnreuocable wronges, both he and Andromus , rouing in an vnity of mischiefe, with plausible speeches flattered, and priuily did wage one Necto , a slaue ful of pouerty, sore broken in labours, yet a lusty tall fellow, glad to enter the Dukes fauour, to the accomplishment of any exploite for gaines: in receit of one thousand florence, tooke vpon him the name and person of Andromus , to fight combate with lord Trauenna , being of equal proportion and stature. Had choyce in the Kings armery, fitting him selfe for his own defence, in the surest and best coat: and the like passage into the Dukes stable, for choyce of the most couragious courser. Necto in surest  & seemliest order thus furnished, the vse of the mony comforting his wife and children, committed him self to ye freendship or malice of fortunes fate. In name of Andromus , summoned lord Trauenna , to a vow and discharge his challenge. The Lord Trauenna ioyful of these newes, as well in al respects appointed, aduanced him selfe, reioycing that comely vertue woulde increase and adorne shyning honour in his person. Nothing doubting the due execution of his aduenture, was borne in a noble familie, valiant, wel exercised in feates of armes, reputed the goodliest Gentleman in the vniuersal country of Hetruria . His courting delights with al coyes and trickes, resting in fantasie of vayne youth, now layd aside: inwardly comforted with inuiolable vnspotted mind, closed vp in true and simple faith against the driftes of mortal attemptes: besides which, put on liuelyhood and inuincible firme approoued magnanimitie of body. And sithens it is neither against honour nor honesty, but rather moouing the comfortlesse creature Duches Egeria , to the common opinion of good hope, whollie despising this vaine life, desired doleful death hastely to finishe her calamities. Lord Trauenna the night before the combat tryed, in most delicate sweet voyce, in the hearing of the Duches, beeing both Prysoners within the Castle of Olerna , a wal betweene their seueral lodginges, song these Uerses. the hearing of Duches Egeria, she being (as it were) dismayed, wishing death to finish her calamities. Reuenge shall prooue, and truth in time appeare: If price may prayse, the ioyes of my minde, Then bytter springes, shall chaunge to waters cleare: Go packe dispaier, thy sight I do disdaine, My simpathy, shall make me glad and faine. Conceit dislodge, thy paynes with pleasures fill, Dispoyle conuay, thy selfe from flattering feares: Aduise go stay, the steps of wandring will, Hazard baskes, in sops of bytter teares: No coward Captaine, wins a stately fort, No rotten Barke, ariues a pleasant Port. Abuse pursues, a Prince to ouerthwart, Pale death doth threat, his venoume seedes will sow: Assuraunce tels, the secreats of my hart, That right shal rap, the frontiers of her foe, Consult no more, darke shal not hinder light, You secreat depths, march on in open sight. Oh sacred Heauens, infraunches my desire, To lenifie, Andromus spitefull mayne, Can wishe dispose, my centre to aspire, Can pliant will, take pitty on her payne. Clime vp the top, of flatterers vamering wall: Aduenture on, with hasty steps to pitch his cruell fall. Good lucke conduct, each mind for to content, Debate at large, a signe for our defence, Yerke sighing sobs, to purpose lewdly bent That life to death, may soone dispatch vs hence. If Lady Egeria, euer liued so, Let graueled graue, be a cradle for her wo. Stay beauty braue, clyme vp thy steps no hyer, Suspicion leaue, to vex such worthy wights, Chast Dame, disgorge thy selfe from gallant tyer, Go gaze and veiw, who list thy proud delights, Flie out good fame, spread on thy golden wing, Complaint frame out, this eleagy to sing. Shal motion meet, such a cruell deed, Can pride ambush, the host of haplesse foes, Oh hagard heart, do not refuse to bleed, The plant a Dock, vnroot a smelling Rose. To root the grape, destroyes the perfect Vine, VVho saues the sap, that pils the sallage ryne. Repentaunce softly comes, with foule renowne, Leasure lurkes, with griefly face to swage, Exployt lyftes vp aloft his worthy crowne, and slaundrous sleights, disgest thy sodayne rage: Temerity would, his fayned lookes disguise, So pardons friendly, grace I do despise. steed of Andromus In the morning following, leaue taken of Duches Egeria. Tarratus Lorde high Marshal in soueraigne iustice, calleth foorth Lord Trauenna, to avowe his prise of combate, hauing ten olde sage Fathers going in mourning gownes, and white wandes in their handes before him, as one that already shunned the inuitable tract of death, in Noble courage carrying awaye the Golden Garlande of renowne. for which the commons and the whole Dominions reioyceth. Trauenna in place) spake as followeth: Ah false traitour, spoiler of true honor, vnshamfast butcher of innocent blood, can nothing quench thy insaciate thirst of flattery, but the blood of Egeria and my selfe. I doubt not, but hast purchased a iuste reuenge for thy infamous naughtinesse: thou at this present yealpest after honorable Fame, the Gods as a filthy vnsauery carrion, wil direct thy corpes vnmeet the most vnworthyest vermine of the earth to pray vpon: thou feedest thy selfe with false honour, but perpetual shame to thy family, shal best rewarde thee. Doth not thy heart throb in these iniurious enterpryses? doth not thy owne conscience declare thy impietie? It had beene a most seemely blessednesse: yea, a sauorie motion, before anie on blowe had passed betweene vs, with sharpe penaunce reconciled thy selfe to the Gods, for thy temerity: the rather to haue inioyed the comfortable fruition after this lyfe. For there is such assuraunce at this present, sealed and inspired in my heart, that smartsome reuenge vpon thy blood, shal acquit this vilany. Necto amazed in hearing those, and a thousand such lyke thundring speeches, more ready to deliuer vp his Marshal staffe, then defend the interprise taken in hand: Lorde Trauenna hastely with valiant magnanimitie, buckles vpon his enemye, blessing him with sure blowes, as if he shoulde saye: now time approoueth a wynning or loosing honour, now either the spotte of dishonour shal bleare me, or the shyning light of renowne cleare me for euer: Within sixe blowes the combate ended. Necto hanging deade in his steele saddle, groueled and fomed with his necke broken. The people with wonderful admiration showted, Trumpets, shawmes, Flutes, Drumbes, plaied vp the sound of the victory. The Dukes commaundement giuen out to Lorde Tarratus , high Marshal, if the defendaunt tooke the foyle, his harnisse shoulde not be vnbuckled, nor dead coarse discouered, except before his presence: the high Marshal as wel to accomplishe the Dukes pleasure, as a full discharge of his office, caused the sayde dead body to be transported before the Duke, vppon whose Commaundement, certaine dominike Fryers, sworne to the same effect: Immediatlye without delaye, burned the Peasants filthie Corpes, promising and behyting greate promotions for their faithful seruice therein. Although Lorde Trauenna in plaine simplicitie, thought his ennemye deade and vanquished, yet this vnequal match throwne out, did more increase then diminishe his afflicted calamities. For Duke Lampanus indignation so highlye and sharpely styrred vp, bewrayd his complexion, as though hony were in a toades head, and poyson in a frogges tayle, more regarded the mewing of a young Kite, then the flying of an old Fawcon: notwithstanding, this couragious combate with the glorious victory therof, committed by vniuersal edict: the Lorde Trauenna by speedy prescription to the relinquishing, not onely the Dukedome of Hetruria , but also the suburbes, boundes, territories, al his Lordly possessions, landes, reuenewes, rents, fees, inheritaunces: As also from his deare olde mother, sorrowful Lady Trauenna , his Brothers, Sisters, kindred, friendes, and acquaintance, and how it did incomber the thoughtes of his Noble Lady Egeria : that although she was not destitute of many singuler good friendes, yet bereft of her best friend, Lorde Trauenna , the onely staffe of her lyfe: The losse of this refuge, a Dagger and sharpe swoorde to her heart. The Lorde Trauenna at his departing, came to the Duches lodging, who gaue him a hoope of Golde, round fastened to his necke the poste about the same was. No gyft didst euer craue, No better gyft I haue, Till death depart, Close me within thy hart. the Duches shoulde be executed within two dayes after Lord Trauenna was banished: Duke Lampanus expecting Egeriaes execution, message returned, her to be with childe, for which she is repriued. In many interrupted sightes, with panting stomacks, departed on from the other. The Dukes further commaundement, presently directed to Tarratus , Lord high Marshal, that within two dayes, Duches Egeria shoulde be executed. These heauie newes and tyrannical fury, displeased the mindes of the whole countrie, for the Dukes vicious filthy conuersation was manifest to euery man, besides with the popular sort of the Hetrurians , cast their eyes to the multitude of false flatterers, that continually haunted the Dukes court, euery man seruing his owne appetite, insaciable glutting in pride, ambition, and whoredome: reaching and rouing after stately honor, feathering and warming their nestes, whysteled merry songes in the Dukes eare, feeding the present world with delights. As in that many light desperate Ruffians, were harboured about the Dukes person: the priuate familiaritie of licentious lust, the contempt that raigned by vnbrydled will in heartes of inferiours. Euery man became lawles to liue as he lusted: yet many notable good conscionable Lordes, vertuous, wise, and learned Iudges of the Dukes priuie Counsel, inwardly mourned the state and time they liued in: the exquisite consideration hereof, reclyned the baser degree of the people to the Duches safegard: so that Egeria wanted no praiers, good wil, earnest suit for her deliueraunce. The more her sorrowes increased, the greater was she fauoured. The Duke hereby fel to extream hatred, thorow his vniuersal dominions, euery man readily helde vp his weapon, to pul the scepter of his Dukedome out of his handes. And whilst the Duke exspected Egeriaes execution, present message returned her to be with childe, al which being true, yet ielousie hauing so much distempered his vnruly sences, wandring thorow out the whole regions of his braines, coulde neither alter his present purpose, neither yet search a resting place to his body, neither exquisite or wholesome counsel, cure the greefe and disease of his minde. This mixture, a poulder of such operation, secreatly by little and little incroching, was hurled into sundry franticke fits. Although affection nothing wel qualified in Eldorna , neglecting the general contentation to his vniuersal Dukedom, esteemed not Egeria , for the benefit of her life to be reprieued. Yet Moretus that vertuous Iudge, as wel for the contentment of sundry freends and partners in this cause, as the fruite and ciuil tranquillity heareafter insuing to the Dukedome: made an oration, the effect following. Your power and obeisaunce, the portion (right worthy Duke) which all your subiects must stay vpon, the strong standard of their protection, aunswerable to goodwill, neuer stained as false Cowardes, either in ciuil or politique seruice. Why should a Dukes fancy, waiwardly wander: vanquished with troublesome trauels, raging in vaine loue, chafing with freating choler, harkning to endlesse slaunders, hauing no limitation in tongues, nor prescription of speeches, good subiects imploy not so much seruiceable persuite in honesty, as one false Flatterer counteruaileth by lurking attempts: a ruinous astonishment of dishonesty, to al partes of a dominion. Not gouerned by carelesse aduenture, but seuere authority: not with rauishing fantasies, but constancy: not with inuinceable vices, but honourable vertues. What causeth murmuration of subiects, but wauering inclination of a Prince? what causeth desolation of a realme, but violation of Princes? Surely, surely, no greater ornament, hapneth to your Noble Maiestye, then wholly to reuert to your pristinate estate, magnificence, Iustice, clemency: yea, make a conquest of those vices, which in the eies of the world are apparant Your people repute your honourable deare spouse Egeria , a good woman, but your Princely opinion, by flatterers sleights hardly conceiued, is flat iniurie: the more wholesome temperaunce, and rare vertues increase, the more olde manners are disfashioned and changed in you. Al which continued, shall greedily in ye end vanquish  & leaue you, a common booty: the people further grudge, worthy Egeria so nearely is examined, imprisoned, in face of iudgment seat: shamefully arraigned, hatefully handled, cruelly condened, without spark of fauour adiudged to die. And the Lord Trauenna , (notwithstanding his aduenture by combat) yet banished. All these straunge customes, as new and fresh surgies in your heart, rydiculous to your gouernment, offensiue to your people. Alas, alas, since Egeria is falsely accused, misreported and belied: yet were it a wholesome constitution, onely for hope of posterity, she were repriued. If you hack downe the tree, first saue the fruite: If you vnroote the stocke, preserue the syant: if you grasp vp the gallant flowers, conserue the seedes. You hereby regard your dissent, royal name and familie: Otherwise, ouerthrowe your Princely Throane, Seate and Scepter for euer. As I protest vttering my selfe, before the supernall Seate, the chaste body of Duches Egeria , is pure, vntouched, from al despight and villanie. So (oh Noble Duke) take this Duches into fauour, guerdan and adorne your Princelie Throane with her bewtiful countenaunce, recouer your good name, vncoutch the Rascall rabble of fained Flatterers, gaping after gaine, discouer the morning light, cut downe and Leauill the loftye Hylles, ouershadowing the pleasaunt Springes. Be not perswaded but the fruite which Egeriaes bodye hath formed, from your Maiesties Loines first yssued, the ofspring perfect, rightlie planted, by calculation of time: Considering Lord Trauenna was occupied by your waighty affairs, Ambassadour in Egypt , the time of Duches Egeriaes conception, long before, and many weekes after: I doubt not (noble Duke) this my Oration considered, your minde molified, present pittie appeareth. These comfortable medicins working effect, humanitie, courtesie, excellent and noble worthines shal illustrate your person, with pregnant pollicie adorne your high estate and linage, a rare blossome sprowting out, comforting and safegarding al the dominions of Hetruria , al which successiuely falleth out in fauouring noble and continent Lady Egeria . of childbyrth. The Duke fully resolued at good Moretus request, besides the supplication of diuers Noble men, to graunt the repriuement of Duches Egeria , vntil her deliuerance in childe byrth were accomplished: so that his desire in putting her to death, might not afterwardes be impedimented. The Nobles perceiuing blind conceit, and vnsatisfied minde vnreuocable to a better hope, stayed herein, permitted him headlong to be hurled vpon al aduentures, their causes remitted to the eternal prouidence. But Lorde Andromus imboldened Eldorna his Sister, to cal for secreat destruction against Egeria , mistrusting continual windes, woulde at length tosse and shake the Tower of their prosperities. The beauty of fayre Eldorna , seemed in the eies of Duke Lampanus , a little earthly Paradice, wreathing and wringing as they pleased his inclinations, whatsoeuer the Duke promised openly to his Nobles, woulde secreatly before Eldorna againe deny the same: whatsoeuer was obtayned contrary to her good liking, coulde more easely swallow vp Hellespont , or turne the Occean ouer the Alpes , then good successe to their exspectations. This costly magnificent Lady louer Eldorna , vndermyned high mountaynes, transpassed Bridges ouer mighty Seas: stood as a sure yron post in defence and safe-conduct of her brother Lord Andromus , by art of wordes winding the Duke to her ready bent bow, with vilnes of beautiful vizage, indoting his concupiscence against the whole dominion of Hetruria . Al which as a manifest truth on a time approouedly fel out: after many pittiful peticions, for inlargement and deliuery of Duches Egeria , of sundry her noble friendes, who taking thorow view of the Dukes plyaunt affections to euerie mans purpose, secreatly Eldorna betweene themselues taunted the Duke as followeth. [  Eldorna checking the Duke. ] To what solitary wildernesse is the vigour and rypenes of your pollicie roued, in that euery base vile subiect hauing aspired some promotion, rather of your goodnes and liberal grace, then their owne desarts, can hoyste your inclination as a horse inforced by the bit, or a ship by a stearne in the middest of the swelling Sea: put on a Princely minde, put off a base and flexible heart: eschew accustomable maners: let subiects penetrate your conditions not as they lust: but as you please, let them euermore seek, and what secreatly resteth in you, neuer find out: if against your person, whetting their venoumous teeth, let them grate rather vpon during harde yron, then soft melting wax. My counsel herein followed, practized and put in execution, shall transfreat your selfe more safer: their saucie liberty and preheminence cut off more shorter, setling your selfe in singuler soueraigntie, bring special welfare, condigne estimation and regard,   [  Harlots procure effusion of blood. ] to all those which attende your person. Furthermore if Egeria be the harpe that euery Rascal subiect vndelicatly playeth vpon, shread and cut a sunder those iarring strings. Her life is your death, and my dishonor. Egeria is deliuered of two children, a soone and a daughter, the sonne adorned with a golden thumb, the daughter beautified with a foot and legge of Golde. The Duke hearkening to the voyce of this night Rauen, daily croking for the sweete carkas of Duches Egeria , the Duke sought the contentment of Eldorna his strumpet,    [  VVhooremongers dotage. ] her deuice and counsel preuailed, the continual flames of populer murmuration quenched, the concours of nobles to his person diminished, no temperance could render rest to his miseries, nor resolue meanes for his distressed mind, nor remooue foolishe fantasies hamered in his braines, except the presence of this pleasaunt minion Eldorna ,    [  Promotions vnmeet for harlots. ] who imployed much communication with the Duke, as wel for dispatchaunce of Egeria , presently after her deliueraunce from child byrth, as also conuaying the estate of the Dukedome to Eldorna and her issue. These prickes & dartes of mortal shot thrown out, tormented the aliaunce, friends, counsellours, and Iudges, which inwardly tendred the good plight of Egeria , defatigated with intreataunce, defrustrate from al good expectations of preuailing, departed the Dukes court, resigned their offices and rich Fees, sold their patrimonies: their mindes aduersly driuen vppon forraine fields, strange vnlucky windes, blowing at home in Hetruria , so that the Dukedome and dominion of Hetruria , which before abounded in prosperous felicitie, with manifold ornaments of honor, now thrown down  & squiesed with great pouerty, wretchedns and misery: the Duke neglected the care of his people, the people on the other side vilipended the perso of ye Duke: their marchandize & trafick decayed, their husbandry forslowed: ground became barren without culture: the miserable famine which swarmed thorowout the whole country, consumed breed of cattle, the golde, siluer, and treasures was incroched among the wealthiest subiectes, who for their better safety betooke both fidelity and riches vnder forraine gouernments. Presently vpon this great hurly burly throghout the Dukes dominions, Duches Egeria within lord Tarratus high marshals house, was deliuered in child byrth of two twins, a son  & a daughter: the son was adorned with a golden thumb on his right hand, the daughter beautifully illustrate with a foot and leg of gold vp the knee, on the right side. The same night in which Duches Egeria was deliuered of these two goodly children, the Duke troubled in his thoughts: a most fearful  & terrible dreame vexing his heart: seemed to appeare vnto him a huge: mighty, tall Oke, with great bowes, bending & ouerspreading the vniuersal country of Hetruria : In ye top wherof grew Acorns of pure gold, on the right side sprang foorth a pleasaunt odiferous red Roze, clasping and comforting the said Oke: two fayre apples blossomed out of the verdure of the sayde sweete roze One of the apples in the vpper part, indued with a fayre round speck of gold, the other apple pure, perfect,  & clean gold on the right side: furthermore springeth out of ye Oke on the other side, a foul weedy stincking nettle, bespringled and mayed with vnsauory white blossoms, in the top thereof did grow a moste bitter sower Crab. The roots of the same nettle cangling and winding, not onely choaked and stiffled the Rose, and her fruite, but also eradicated the nettle, remooued the Oke from his vsual groweth, that for many yeares after, the Oke became imfructified and barren. In the nettle top seemed a most bitter sower crab to grow, wayed and bended the nettle flat downe to the ground. At last the crab consumed, withered, & quite dispoyled the sayd nettle. Being almost day, neere morning, in an other dream appeared a huge mighty Tower of brasse: neere this Tower out of the sower bitter crab, sprong foorth a mighty tal tree, the bowes therof springing & reaching the top thereof: two withered netles hanging & wauing on the same tower: thorow the iniury of the Crab & Crab tree brought to nothing. Out of the Apple with the round specke of gold start vp a mighty tall tree, which presently caught and quite deuoured the sower crab tree, neare the Castle Olerna . By this dreame manifested, the Oke againe began to florishe, whose greene bowes and braunches caught within the Apple tree roote, was hoysted to the brasen Tower top, with the swiftnes of the winde tossed hither and thither. In the same dreame also seemed, the Apple, whose right side was pure Golde, pleasauntly sprung foorth a dubble tree, out of one roote, the Oke vnnaturally requyred to anex and sap in the sayde duble tree, the Oke presently conuerted to a venomous Snake, and the left side of the sayde Apple tree, in the ende consumed the sayd snake, and the sayde left side also disagreeing, confounded and choaked vp the right side of the said Apple tree. But by the springing vp of a pleasant smelling rose, the left side was in the ende destroyed also: for this fragrant pleasaunt Rose tooke such deepe root, as neither winde nor weather, heate of sommer, nor cold of winter could impeach or annoy. masters to interpret the same: as the Image, shewing the fall and vprising of the Hetrurian Dominion. The Duke with these great vexations and troubles incombred in his minde, coulde no way solace his solitary sences, neither yet fayre Eldorna minister any iuyce or sap to his dead spirits: so that many waies consulting with his Nobles and Gentlemen, as also cheefe Charmers and Magike masters of his countrey, yea the Coniurers and dealers with vncleane Spirites, had the Dukes dreames in question: but in al these hurlie burlies none coulde be found out to reuiue Duke Lampanus , distracted into so many miseries: but onely an olde poore Countrey man, that of long time had vsed this art, sundry resorting vnto him, as wel ledde with popular report, as long experience and practize, otherwayes his haseling and foretelling of fortunes, as Constellations of Childrens byrth: rather esteemed to fall out of hap hazarde, then knowledge or cunning. This olde Country man, father Pallasus (otherwise called holy Thomas ) a weather wyzard, comming before the Duke, declared that if he neither might mooue his pacience, nor any otherwaies offend his person, would trace before his maiesty, a perfect impression, representing the forme, and vigoure of his Dreame. And spake further vnto him, that whatsoeuer misaduenture is foretolde  & threatned by this terrible dreame, either to him selfe or his Dukedome: yet by wise ordring and prudent gouernment, inferiour causes might change, & by sufficient remedy, a more setled and better disposition then specified take place. The Duke promised holy Thomas , father Pallasus pardo, in whatsoeuer he spake, as one woderfully stirred vp in the spirit of boldnes, vnabashed talked to the Duke as followeth. Your selfe (Right worthy and royall Duke) the goodly tale strong Oken tree, hauing ouer looked, vnderpropped and stifned the whol land of Hetruria against forraine foes: Hauing hitherto fructified with plentiful Acorns of Gold, which thorow your vertuous and noble example haue indued and beautified the whol common wealth. And the pleasaunt smelling Rose, his deare Duches Egeria , who surely knitting and fast cleauing to your fauour, neuer maketh alteration of prefixed purpose therein. The two Apples beautified with Golde, are these two Children, generated by your royal seed, formed and fashioned in Egeriaes wombe: The foule stinking nettle with white blossomes, springing out of the Oke side, is that beautiful strumpet Eldorna , who not onely choaketh and bereaueth chaste Egeria , and her lawful fruit, but also vndermineth your condigne famous person. And also the Crab which groweth in the top of the nettle, is the vnlawful bastard byrth, which in the ende shal betray and cruelly murther and hang his owne mother Eldorna . And an other friend as yet vnknowne, such a one as (1)    [  (1) Pasifer the traiterous flatterer loueth Elderna the dukes concubin, are both hanged in the top of the Tower. ] first receiued and respected into your honorable court and seruice: yet afterwardes growing in treacherous familiarity with Eldorna , better louing and esteeming him then your owne person, your banishment first procured, shal vpon a Tower of brasse, to the same ende erected, finished and set vp, reuenge al their naughty actions. In the middest of these hurly burlies, appered an apple with the golden speck in the top, which is the only fruit that issueth and proceedeth of this good Duches, in atchieuing great glory  & fame, (2)   [  (2) Pantipar the lawful heire, shal destroy Rastophel the bastard. ] shal both expel the vsurped gouernment of the bastard, and dispoyl the blood of the illigitimate miscreant: then immediately your selfe, being before cast out of your dominion by miserable exile, shal like a greene (3)   [  (3) Duke Lapanus returned from his banishment hanging Pantipar his owne sonne. Lampanus desiring to commit incest with his owne daughter is chaunged to a filthy snake. ] Oken tree rule and florish again within your own dominions. But it wil not long preuaile: for presently resigne your seigniory to your daughter, as dazled & doted with her rare beuty, desiring fleshly concupiscence with her body, shal be couerted to a venomous foul filthy snake. (4)   [  (4) Lord Nerich Duke Bendals son, marrying lady Selewsa with golden foote, shall slay both the Duke in the forme of a snake, and afterward cut off the golden foot & leg of lady Selewsa his wife. ] The finally, your daughters husband a forrain stranger shal vtterly subuert destroy & kil your selfe, being in the shape of a snake, then by a drench of inchauntment, cast your daughter into a deadly sleep, cut off her golden foot & leg, bereue her sweet life, take the Dukedome into his owne hand, vntil good Duches Egeria , that salutiferous Roze gorgiously springeth vp againe, out of whose chast root, spreadeth out an other natural roze, (5)    [  (5) Duches Egeria destroieth Lord Nerich, she & her posterity ruleth nine hundreth years, by marrying Lord Trauenna. ] whose seed & posteritie shal with vertuous guidance direct and gouern al the dominions of Hetruria nine hundreth yeares after. This old man holy Thomas , otherwise called Pallasus yt wether wyzard not staying opened the Dukes dreames at large, which was to the Dukes heart a fretting corsie, not in yt a mistery of the last cuersion of his posterity was discouered. But in that al Duches Egeriaes troubles and miseries, hauing an end: a new issue and disceat in good successe of time, shoulde againe take freshe roote in her and Lorde Trauenna . interpretation of the Dukes Dreame. Fayre Eldorna and Lord Andromus wel vnderstanding this old holy Thomas , [  No pitty in Harlots hands, sturre vp mischief, suck innocent bloude. ] (otherwise called Pallasus the wizard) naturally inclined to Egeria and her children, hallowed and hooped in the Dukes eares, presently to make dispatchaunce of him. Affyrming he was a sedicious presuming old dotarel, wilfully disposed, whose lewde speeches beeing further spread and knowne, an vnapeased insurrection might secreatly be styrred vp. The preuention of a mischief in season,    [  Voluptuosnes preuenteth all impedimentes. ] more better then haddy wists after, or thoughts out of season. The Duke harkening herevnto, thinking that if contentation of Eldornaes mind not satisfied, sodaine vnkindnesse woulde arise betweene them, as in that time might distemper many turbulent stormes, approching vniuersally thorow his dominions by such a busie babler: presently procured his high marshal without iudgement to hang him out of the way.    [  A Harlot greedy of reuenge ] Al which as the Duke inwardly conceiued a priuie preseruation of good name, a better stay and securitie to his voluptuous mind (which if Pallasus shoulde haue liued longer, a nusseling of harde and difficult disgestments) For that subiects would sharpen their faces more fiercer against him. Now the Duke although vtterly dispising good Egeria , yet not altogeather choaked in ill nature toward the Children, hastened a solemne celebration after the Hetrurian maner, in the triumph of Hercules . In which place, Children of royal and Noble byrth tooke their names. A voyce speaking thorow the Image, named the man child Pantipar : the woman childe Selewsa. Pantipar signifieth in the Hetrurian language, the sonne of violation. Selewsa doth make relation, to bee called the Daughter of daunger. The Noble men in this solemne dedication, yeelded serious peticions to the Official Priest, hauing the constitution of the Image in charge, desirous to vnderstand what was foreshewed by the man childes golden thumb: the answere, as followeth. [  Pantipar shal forcibly rauish Duches Egeria, his owne mother. ] Eldorna, shall not vnreuenged be, Pantipar, shall root vp her progeny: Pantipar, his mylde mother shal offend, The Gods on him, reuenge will extend. Within the golden thumb, was imprinted in Latin Letters.  Fati nvlla est vicissitvdo. In this honorable celebration, the Uirgin infant, brought foorth, who before named Selewsa , the daughter of daunger, by request of the Official Priest, made to know what insignment by the golden foote foreshewed, aunswere taken from the Image as followeth. [  The vertue of Egeriaes continencie, is shewed in the daughters destiny, but Lampanus lust with Selewsa, conuerted to a snake. ] The Golden foot foretels, who did a noble Dame forsake, In time to come for his desert, shall be a filthy Snake. The father dotes, the daughters flesh to feed, But who it is shall be a snake, for offering such a deed: Yet marriage bed with fayre Selewsa, take thy pleasant rest, If banisht now, within thy age, both paines and ioyes shall rest. Within the bottome of the golden foot,   [  The seed of wicked men rooted out. ] were expressed Latin letters.  Castitatem in sinv fovet. Selewsa into Egypt. The Dukes letters to the Marshal, for execution of Duches Egeria. [  Vertue soweth a new seed reaped in continent chastitie. ] All these destinies and fates, as speciall novelties brought home, not onely before the Duke, but imprinted in the hearts of euery subiect thorow out the whole dominion. But the Duke kindled in his sences, procured Pantipar to be conuayed into the land of Barbary . In which dominion the young Infant in company of his Hetrurian nurses, was honorably receiued, both because the Barbarian King was vnissued: as beeing a Dukes child of royal blood, wel coniecturing the infant naturally brought vp, woulde prooue very louing to the people, and careful of safe gouernment among them.    [  Fortune casteth a prosperous eye vpon some, yet with sodaine frouns ouer throweth their chayre of dignity. ] Furthermore, Lampanus the Duke altogeather bent in fury and crabbed nature, shooting with bloody and venomous arrowes, in dispoyle of lawful posteritie from his dominion and Dukedome, transported fayre Selewsa with her Hetrurian nurses into Egypt , where very honorable intertainement and comfort was giuen, in Duke Bendals house, who thorow age and time, gayned wonderful estimation: For as nature rewarded her with worthy beauty, so fortune forgot not to stuffe her with welthy prosperitie, who from her Childehood in Princely beauty prooued the onely Parragon of Egypt . But Lampanus not desisting in the banishment, first of Lord Trauenna , the young infant Pantipar , his legitimate procreation, and fayre Selewsa his Daughter: but with fuller determination of mischiefe, commaunded without delay by letters missiue, that Lorde Tarratus high marshal shoulde execute Egeria , and cut off her head: protesting by the same Letters, what safgard and tranquillitie might prosperously fal out to his dominions thereby. After receit of these newes, the night before her death appointed, Lorde marshal entring the Duches lodging, made relation of his charge so straightly giuen out by the Duke for her execution. My Lord marshal (saith Duches Egeria ) be not amazed, accomplishe your thorow duety herein: adiudge me not misgreeued either with these newes from the Duke, or with you the messenger: I am fully resolued my death more greeueth you then myselfe.    [  The vertuous can giue consolation to their miseries. ] As you haue beene ouer careful in my cause, so it is not a little yrksome to al your sences, in that my blood thorow your handes shoulde be imbrued: But this is the day which long I haue looked for: So now greatly reioycing, my miseries shal bee finished, and the time expyred. And yet a further consolation relieueth my afflicted minde, in that young Pantipar my Sonne, is transported into the handes of the Barberian King: And that my deare Daughter Selewsa , broughte vp in Duke Bendals house, a man of singuler vertue and honourable honestye. The conseruation of infants bee liberties and preheminences, proceeding from the supernal Gods, doe recouer a doubtfull estate out of the wide mouthes of greedy dogges, and deuouring vultures: Prouidence [  The gouernment of infants from the high prouidence. ] imbarketh them safely into what forraine Region so euer trasmitted the whing of protection, neuer departeth from them: their causes be solicited of straungers, helped of vnknowne men, the good vigilant eye of fortune euer more cast vpon them, assureth their estate. I thank you my Lorde marshall, for al courtesies and assured friendship, approouedly shewed in these my heauy aduetures: Good my Lord, to morrow in the morning, when death hasteneth vpon me, by the execution of your office, departing and shaking handes with this life, let it not be tedious or ouer smartsome vnto me, rid me quickly from these annoyaunces. The Lorde marshal and the vertuous Lady his wyfe, bathing their cheekes with greate floudes of teares, spake to Duches Egeria and sayde. conuayed (by Lord Apasus the Duches brother) by pollicie out of the Castle of Olerna, when she should goe to execution. Andromus with sixe thousand souldiers are deuoured with Rauens. [  True friendship is a copanion, and comfort in al extremities, forecasteth safgard, whom true loue knitteth and bindeth vnto them. ] If power were in vs, or that sufficient prouision coulde priuily conuay you by our assent, your death shoulde be deferred, vntil the appointment of the mighty power, whose leasure your enemies shoulde waite vpon: but we fearing, and forecasting the vnhappy successe, the ponderous burthen whereof, woulde lodge vpon our backs, should incur the Dukes tyrannical fury and wrath: no, no my deere honorable friends, sayth Duches Egeria : I do ioyfully prostrate my life to death: why shoulde I hope after life, since my Lord the Duke, wallowing in wil, and pestering in pleasures, desireth my dispatchaunce? If any such accident taking place, you my keepers shall taste the sower, and feele the smart thereof: If I escape the plaine passage, some vniust lot may throw you into a daungerous ditch: If my safegard thorow your good means be prouided, my enemyes wil hastely aduenture to fleshe them selues, for your contempt. Nay noble Duches (saith Lord marshal) we not afraide to aduise our selues in defence of your vertues, the preseruation of your infortunat condicion, shal in time to come, rid  & quite dispatch these troublesome varlets, from the state of this seigniory, as in the best maner safely deliuer you in good assuraunce of your selfe againe. Al which could nothing chaunge her vertuous intention, bent to scal the celestial immortalitye. Her long imprysonment, the false accusations layde against her, the slippery sleights of the Duke her husband, the infinite cares which she was well acquainted with. Al which gaue ful instruction, and testimony to her inward mind, as a careful seuere schoole master tendring the good perfection of his scholler.   [  Extremities iniustly happening, perswade and teach that which other wise coulde not be learned. ] Oh saith Egeria , this life is an execrable impietie, I doe abandon my whole reputation, honor, children, friends, misprising, regality, and worldly estimation, as fading shadowes. Oh saith she, my enemies haue charged me with adulterous poyson: the gods know me a blameles innocent, their iniust accusations gnaweth and fretteth the integritie of my soule. The high Marshal and his wife passing al the whole night in these and such like vertuous speeches, framing and addressing her whole bent minde to the euerlasting voyage, where she purposed to reste her fatigable coscience, roulling vpon the tyred wheel of infelicity. Foorthwith the vnthrifty flatterer lord Andromus , with a mighty band of warlike souldiers, exacted to execute the Dukes commandement, besetting the castle of Olerna round about: as also furnishing euery corner within the city and streets of Olerna with another garrison of armed men. But Lorde Apasus (Duches Egeriaes owne brother) accompanied with certaine other honourable gentlemen of neere aliance. Al which inuested in friers weeds,    [  Policies to a good ende not vnnecessary. ] craued licence of the comon souldiers, that pardon might freely be graunted, to common and talke with the Duches, touching the estate of her conscience, belonging to their function and calling, in that thorow their good counsel,   [  Vertuous meanes in deliuering innocents from the hands of tyrants. ] might at the hower of death be wel aduised, lest either vanquished with impenitencie, or thrown down in desperation, an other life should be tedious and ful of tormentes, perpetually gnawing and fretting her actions in this life. These good causes earnestly and thorowly mooued, had free recourse to Duches Egeria , chaunging and forming her into a Fryers weed, thorow the whole rout, as wel of the castle souldiers, as the towne garrison, without examination or suspicion, safely transported and conducted her: A wagon prepared in the ende of the towne, foorthwith by speedy carriage to the holy Castle, (a sanctuary dedicated to the honor of Saint Ciprian ) being foureschore miles distant from the towne of Olerna , as one deliuered from exceeding great greefe, liued in fasting and prayer. Shortly after the Duches departure, Lord Andromus commaunded lord Tarratus high marshal to bring foorth his prisoner, seemed as though he were greatly displeased and stirred with impassible choller, for her long tarriaunce, chasing and fuming,    [ The violent desires of a tyrant. ] as though he woulde teare her in peeces him selfe: saying, what do you dally with ye Duks commandement? it did grieue Egeria nothing to offend. Why doth it now grieue her to die? is this patient Egeria which so craftely hath crept into the fauor of the common subiects by her fayned holines? Uerily a marriner might wel row a good hansome Bark or ship, vpon the surging waues and swift streams, that so aboundantly flow from her eies.    [  The enuious scorne aduersitie. ] What? is she afraid to hoist vp sayle towards heauen hauing a merry wind? behold the Angels & whol celestial troup attend the castle gates, safely to guard her to ye gods them selues. The Lord marshals wife stepped foorth, and reuileth Lord Andromus . Thou incarnat deuilish beast, art not content to wreak thy villanous minde by wrongful accusation against this good duches, but ridiculously abuse her miseries: she frounsed in a thousand dispitful words, after ye simple sexe of woman kinde, transported with fiery choller,    [  True friendship detesteth iniury, can not dissemble nor counterfaite in their friends causes. ] and inforced with deadly fury: if it consisted in her power to haue reuenged & punished Andromus : no law could haue tamed her tongue, nor restrained the rage of ireful indiscretion she yeelded so much to melancholick desires: go seek Duches Egeria saith she: It is vnknowne to my Lord and husband, where or what place she hath attained. I verily suppose shee is gone to seeke such a varlet as thou art, within the bottomlesse pit of Hel, for I am sure she shal neuer finde thee in heauen. Wel saith Andromus , bring her foorth according to sentence of iudgement, or els the smart wil fal vppon your shoulders, as wel for violating the lawes of our Realme, as contemning the Dukes wil and pleasure. Upon these wordes certaine of his moste trustiest souldiers, russhed into the mayne Castle, with diligent viewe and vigilant eye, left no one corner vnsearched. At last perceiuing a manifest truth, that the Duches was stolen and conuaied, as well for auoydaunce of mischaunces hapning, which hurling heads presetly might bring: besids his greedy guts gnawing with an eager worme, vntill these newes were certified to the Duke. At the shryll sound of a trumpet euery souldier recouering his place, gaue attendaunce vpon Andromus person, not knowing the contrary but Duches Egeria was ledde to execution,    [  A naturall voyce in the comminalty ] except a general precept had passed thorow the whole host, to the same end, as wel foot men as horse men shold presently depart with Andromus . The common souldiers, whose spirites not a little reuiued thorow secreat brute giuen out, the Dukes pardon graunted for Egeria . But Lorde Andromus marching homewarde, sixe thousand souldiers attending his person, their expectation deceiued: For being vpon the wide desart, plaine Palamooth , eight myles from Olerna : a huge armie of night Rauens flying out of the East, hauing terrible clams dolefully croking, the whole Elements could not be decerned for the infinite multitude. The people and countrie astonished, verily did thinke the rulers of Hel, with al their Legions were loosed and set at libertie against their countrie,    [  Vengeaunce neuer departeth, without feareful execution, especially in villanous actions. ] in executing vengeaunce from the gods, for the miserable wronges of Duches Egeria . The armie of these Rauens continually floting in seuerall great flightes, by the space of one whole day, by coniecture sometimes two thousands, sometimes foure thousands, sometimes more, sometimes lesse, the multitude hereof couering not onely the plaine fields, but darkned al the East parts, deuoured Lord Andromus and his armies,    [  An honorable celebration of burial, vsed among the Heathen, now coulde not be had. ] eagerly feeding, and greedely tearing their flesh: company coulde neither rescue them for tuition of their liues, nor approch to bury them, being dead: their stincking flesh couered the earth, fed the vermin, and fowles of the ayre. This example of horrour, quite vanquished the Dukes sences: fearing the like destruction vppon him self, could find no ioyes, to his dolours, no patience to his furious rage, no colde to his heate: tost with extreame feauer fits, no sleepe coulde comfort, nor foode releeue,   [  VVhen cattel is taken from mans vse, by punishment not for their guiltinesse, but their want procuring scarsity, to whom their seruice is dew. ] nor good counsel aduise him. Especially for that filthy stench and vnsauery smels of deade Corses: not onely corrupting the cleare ayre, but infected the vniuersal Country, with contagious murrains to al manner of Cattel, besides incessaunt pestilences, bothe of men, women, and children. Furthermore, this sharpe powder had such inward operation in Eldorna , aswell because Duches Egeria wel protected, and safely escaping their slimy clowches: as the sodain distruction  & downfal of Lord Andromus , her trusty brother, whose carkas continueth a spectacle of notable infamie.    [  No greater grief then wicked posterity, not enioying honorable funeral with their predicessour. ] But her greatest greef, for that by no means, his body could be intumbed to honourable funerall. And she sharply casting her eyes vpon mighty iudgmentes approching the dominion: surpassed and ouer reached their wilde mercilesse manners,   [ Magick art wrought by Planetical charecks of great force. ] altogether daunted in their pernicious reaches, put on a greater humiliation of minde. Notwithstanding, her former follies, continued the Duke in like perplexity, with inwarde sobbes of heart, chased a deluge of bitter saltish tears from his eyes Yet taking some counsel vpon these dolorous misaduetures:   [  Spirits within the regionall monarchi, soft, cold, palpable & weak: but in proprial lineaments, apt in their operations, perfect & fayre in kinde, not simple, but instrumentall bodyes. ] A question did arise among the honourable Hetrurians , sworn vppon the Dukes counsell, whether the death of Lord Andromus was an execrable example, from the mighty power: or maledict spirites charmed to wreak a finall destruction vpon them. In these long consultations, euery mans opinion knitte vp in one vniformity, that Andromus death chaunced by lewde fantasticall coniuration, not by mysteriall gouerment, of the celestial insight. And yt the mighty prince Stolas in the form of a Night rauen;    [  A Legion, 6666. ] with his twenty and sixe legions drawne with inchaunters cyrcle, shewed out this notable admiration and vniuersall prodigy, vpon Lorde Andromus . The Duke with aduise of some fawning friendes, layde pleasures aside, as wel because pestilence deuoured the people, murraine consumed Cattel, subiectes growing loathsom to them selues, tillage decayed, al thinges out of frame and barranaged, by meanes of the Dukes incontinencie with Eldorna . And although Andromus a late terrour and true testimony, admonishing al tyrannicall flatterers to feede Princes braynes with false attempts: Yet the Dukes Court not vnfurnished with new startvps, reuiuing his dead dumpes with straunger insinuations, imbeseled his wittes to al maner of bloodsheading and rapinous extorcion.    [  A Carter counterfayting a Courtier, is like an Ape moing and disguysing euery mans gesture. ] The Dukes flexible follies without further searching, what comfort and counsel might best be taken and receiued, his miserable mind presently to be refreshed: those which either fed his humours or delighted his ears, most readily entertayned them: One Pasifer a base borne crauen, made proofe whether sweet iuyce were suckt out of a Dukes Court, or courtly maners gaine estimation, or deluding art of speech deserue familiaritye, neyther vnacquainted with the Dukes complexion,    [  The expression of a flatterers ornaments. ] nor vnskilful to handle his owne exployte, first choyclye conuaying him selfe, sparing no trauaile, neither by day nor night, to seeke, wine and obtaine the same. Pasifer nothing bashful to speake for him selfe, with countenance vnchangeable, behauiour impudent, hardened with impenetrable boldnes. Nothing preuayleth against a shamles flatterer, his Art sucketh sweetly and soketh al the vaynes vnawares.    [ A flatterers heart halow vndermineth. ] Surely if Noble estates could so consider, nothing happeneth more pernicious, then to be incensed and mislead with fraudulent allurements of a flatterer. Although at the first brunt not easely discouered in euery flexible nature, yet their abhominable factions, although neuer so priuie,   [  A flatterer vnknowne, vntil his actions bewrai his sharpe weapons, by which secretly woundeth ] yet at length appeare more brighter, then a light flaming Beacon, vppon the top of a high Mountayne. The late vengeaunce duely executed vpon Andromus , coulde not sufficiently aduise nor warne a negligent slougard, but presently after the cutting off a Snakes head, taketh hold on a Serpents tayle. Pasifer fayning himselfe expert in Phisicke, practiseth a medicine to salue the Dukes sore, and increase his ioye, stretcheth foorth his Artificial vaynes, like a baselicke,    [  Pasifer the flatterer readely entring the Dukes vaine. ] paynted with sweet Berries of the mountayne Brosco : And yet baned with bitter seeds of the deadly herbe Onixion , tolde the Duke it was a reprochful dishonor if he accounted not the conuaying of Egeria , a dispite to his Person, an inueigling of common subiects to passible daungers. If not remedied, wil whet their swoords to sharper edges, sodainly cut off his prosperous dayes. Wherefore sayth Pasifer ,    [  A flatterer wil readily proffer an euil seruice. ] in sending out a Garrison of new appoynted souldiers: I my selfe will aduenture as chiefe Captayne in that seruice, wreake your Princely displeasure vpon Tarratus (Lorde Marshal) for his desert, as wel because Tarratus Lorde Marshal, vntrustily demeanured him selfe, againste your condigne royaltie: and Lorde Andromus your moste trusty Counsellour and friend brought to villanous confusion among them.    [ Sweet flattery accepted. ] The Duke not altogeather voyd of taste, with hungry appetite, maketh exceptation of his francke offer. Pasifer in rigorous boldenesse, with pestilent pursuite, putteth Lorde Marshal, his Wife, Children, and familie to sharpe dint of Soorde, and hotte broyles of furious fier, saue onely one of his Children, a proper fayre wench, absent from her Father and Mother, brought vp with Lord Apasus , the Duches owne brother: the which childe foorthwith, conuayed to the holy Castle, who most naturally was brought vp in al honorable education by Duches Egeria . But Pasifer after this murthersome conflict,    [  Flatterers feather them selues with promotions and rewards ] returned safe to the Dukes presence: who not onely rewarded his valiant seruice with Golde and rich treasures, but indued him with great lands and reuenews. Besides al which, by letter of deputation, constituted him to guide and gouerne his whole dominions. The Duke thinking the death of Lord Andromus not sufficiently acquited, sendeth foorth a priuie scrutenye thorow out his dominions, whether any such coniurers,    [  The Duke hath a bloody mynd. ] sorcerers, and inchaunters could be espied, which wrought the final death and sodaine destruction of Lord Andromus . This butcherly Pasifer as chiefe gouernour, with sundry captaines and seueral armies,    [  Pasifer winneth his spurs by vitiperous meanes. ] hasteneth to assault the coniurers Cityes For in Hetruria as certaine Cityes aypointed onely to the habitation of charmers and coniurers, priuiledged only to them selues: no man might plant among them, but such as were professed in the knowledge and skil of that Art and faculty. [  This policy in Hetruria al treasons, murthers, felonyes, first inuestigated and discouered by art Nicromancy. Then after punished by penal law, so that the whol dominion had recourse to those cities. ] As Pasifer approched towardes these cities, dared not to hazard him selfe very neere, fayned to speake with the principal gouernours of the fraunchiseis, touching great affayres and waighty businesse from the Duke, in the gouernement of the common wealth, the which nothing fearing imminent daunger that the colde Frost woulde pearce the naperine leaues in hot sommer, or the hotte sommer melt the Saxenfrage stone in the stormy winter, reputing their rocke sure, and foundation vnremooueable, innocently presented them selues before Pasifer , who without any impeachment, or further matter layde to their charge, like a bloody Butcher in open shambles caused their throates to be cut, with present deuastation spoyled, consumed, and burned ten notable Cities, to sinders and ashes, which for the space of sixe hundreth yeares before were renowned by Art Nicromancie . Releiuing onely the Golden ornaments which appertayned to their actions:    [  The Art of Nicromancy rooted out from the dominion of Hetruria. ] as bookes, Swords, Crownes, Ringes, Scepters Synods, Pentagorons, Charects, Keyes, as a rich Boty and spoyle giuen to the common souldiers, that which was pure and perfect Golde detayned, but Commaundement royally giuen out, to transport the bookes onely, before the Duke to be burned. The Duke after al these Ague fits finished, promising securitie to him selfe, singuler contentation, and intier affection to his sweete deare Eldorna , Princely renowne, and royal aduauncement to his polliticke Counseller, and trustie friend Pasifer . Yet the loue of subiectes, a guiltlesse conscience, and good name, these groundworkes the establishing of al truethes wanted: Besides which the Duke vtterly deceiued in his owne imaginations, for that penal shame began to knocke euery hower at his gates, stayning him with infamie and dishonor. Eldorna his amorous Lady beeing great with Childe, the sacred iudgements prescribing these torments and inflictions, a fable for the populer sort of men, continually to gnaw vpon: Besides which the Dukes vile affection possessed with lewd luste, hunting after rancke carrion neuer glutted,    [  An adulterer not satisfied with the beauty of one. ] but mislead in the dayly desarts of vaine delectations, Eldorna on her behalfe with prouident discretion, forecasteth her slippery glyding stay: Her brother Lord Andromus taken away, the Dukes head tossed with inconstant inclinations, his treadinges loose and vnsure, on whom she principally depended, could not so safely be imbarked, as her expectation desired:    [  A harlot inconstant. ] wished shee had wel left, where she yll began. This tottering vpon a broken Brydge, by little and little cast her selfe into the loue and good liking of Pasifer , many artificial contemplations, feeding each other, as oportunity happily ministred occasion,    [  The sleights of a Harlot in the conuaying her lewd life. ] misspent no one hour in the day without yeelding some amorous fruites. Duke Lampanus vtterly vnacquaynted with these vntrusty trickes, rested rather vppon the vnskilfulnes of a yong bird, then the raunging out of an olde Buzzard: yet, Eldorna passed foerth the time but in yong vnripe fantasies with Pasifer , vntil shee were deliuered, the which time of safe deliuerance fully expired,    [  A priuate comfort to himself, but a publique shame to the world. ] was to the Duke both priuate solace, and publike shame. A man Childe brought foorth into the world, approued the only poyson by which the Duke was choaked: a Caterpiller thorough whom, the common wealth is gnawn. But alasse, who would esteeme and regard an vnaturall bastard,   [  Bastardas of inclination for the most part gyuen to villany, tyranny, and all other execrable exploits. ] borne in a sower crab stock, and vnnaturally reiect the good children of vertuous Egeria , grafted, bred, and nourished, in the sweete Apple iuyce? what good inclination woulde fasten his right hande to the top, and with his leaft hande pull vp the roofe? Whereas the Children of good Egeria , were brought before the Image of Hercules , in mourning  & sorrowfull teares, without any pomp, or glory, so this Bastard, the childe of a Harlot, royally receiued before the same Image of Hercules , with such sumptuous magnificence, as no King coulde surpasse in such a case, with tryumphes, solemne iustes, playes of Venus , the comedy of Lady Lauinia , a tragicall History of the banishment of Letrues in Greece , with pleasaunt minstrelsie, dauncing, vauting Feasting,    [  A spirit coniured within the Image pronounced the names of Noble mens children. ] banquetting, with al other iolitie, as though they had beene before quite mortified: and nowe a day of fresh reuification approched. The voice of the image at the peticion of the instituted priest, called the Bastard Childe, Rastophell : as much to saye, the Man of infamie. The Nobles regarded not to make further inquirie vppon the Bastardes fate and destinie, least either the Duke shoulde be ouercome with immoderate ioyes, or stroken downe with immeasurable sorrowes: committed successe of time to approoue and make tryall in the rest. The Duke taking no final consolation in breeding this filthy young venoumous vermine Rastophell , dazeled in dotage, imagining winter stormes ouerpast, and the pleasant aryual of a cleare Sommer at hand. And although to Lampanus vnawares, yet nipt and attached with a priuie disease in the Browes, by meanes of the new inioyned loue of Pasifer and Eldorna , the league of friendship and falshood of flattery, so lymiting the Dukes conceites, no mistrustfulnesse coulde arise, first sweetning his mouth with the braue beauty of fayre Eldorna . Secondly reioycing in the policie and practize of Pasifer . And in the third allurement,    [  The Duke taking holde vpon three broken staues. ] and hope in the budding foorth of the Bastardly blossome Rastophell . What a long relation might I make of the sport and dalyaunce begunne betweene Pasifer and Eldorna , hauing bended the Duke to their bowe, hanged their noses ouer the whole Realme, controling in what seemed best to them selues. And whereas in the vertuous dayes of the trustie Spouse Egeria , the Dukes head disceassed and befraughted with the rewme of Ielousie: So now his darling Eldorna , and cunning Counsellour Pasifer , gaue him a Glyster beneath for his aking Kerchiefe aboue. Hauing yeelded her bodie and loue to Pasifers pleasure, when the Duke was sleeping, they woulde be waking, when the Duke was in the Chamber, they were handling pretty ioies in the Clozet, when the Duke was in one place, they were in another, keeping companye together, discoursing vpon Louers lawes. In the middest of their pastimes, their espials brought news to the Dukes court,    [  The good & vertuous are preserued in al straights & dangers. ] reported that Duches Egeria continued her aboade within Saynt Cyprians sanctuary, the holy Castle. The Duches thorough secrete friends admonished, that a snare and engine layd out for to apprehend and entrap her. Her captiuity before, with the distruction of Lord Marshal and his wife, and furious tyranny, diuers otherwayes executed, were sufficient enstructions to regard her safety. Forthwith in the company of Lorde Apasus her brother, and diuers other Lords, Ladies, gentlemen, and their wiues, with the Lorde Marshalles daughter, attending and wayting her perso, with great care and endeuour tooke ship, hauing a merry winde, hoysted vp sayle towardes the Land of Barberia : Into which Countrye, her Sonne was before conueyed and arriued. The tediousnes of the iourny not so much troublesome, as that daungerous shypwrack dashing vpon a Craggy Rocke, hazarded their liues: but that Fortune in the middest of miseryes fauouring them. Certaine other straunge shipps passing by, rescued theire vnlucky perilles. Notwithstanding he freshly rigd againe,    [  Friends still stirred vp to defend vertuous innocency. ] yet enforced by tempestuous wind and weather, vpon a fruitful Ilande, called Palimon : within which place, a right Noble Knight inhabited gouerning the people. Lord Apasus spake to the Knight, in the name of the Duches and the rest as followeth. intertaynment: her notable cure vpon the Knight, her perfect skil in the knowledge of Phisicke. VVorthy Man, we straungers and Aliens from thy People and Iland, by meanes of many misaduentures aduersly fallen out, compelled hither to make our refuge in seeking friendship among you: here is the renowmed chast Duches Egeria , long vexed with captiuitie, arraigned and condemned to die. Escaping the subtle snares of enemies, betooke her selfe to banishment, and now hardly auoyding shipwrack, committeth her selfe to your mercy:    [  The graue moderation of a chast matron, decerned from the roling eyes of a harlot. ] She left not her natiue soyle for euil desert, lewd behauiour, misgouerning her life: for she is a continent and chast matron, bearing the glory of vertue in her countenaunce. A cruel vniust woe chaunced vnto her young dayes, to become the nuptiall spouse of a voluptuous vnchast Duke, more esteeming and hauing in price the false dissembling face of a Harlot, then good continent Egeria : yeelded more credite to the vniust asseueration of one Andromus a flatterer, then the pitiful teares of this honourable person, whose life from her infancy hath hitherto continued without blemishe. But as fortune hath to this your presence,    [  Mercy wayteth in the gates of the righteous. ] neuer departed aside from our safe conduct, so since whose deliueraunce the Rauens of the ayre, for example of terrible iustice, haue deuoured that vniust false villain. The Knight intertained them (Right honorable) for good liking and fauourable honor, vertuously appearing in their faces, gaue to vnderstand of their honesty. The Knight willingly with gorgious and sumptuous intertainement, according to the worthinesse of honorable strangers haue receiued them, refusing that offer, thanking his curtesie, esteeming them selues in aduersitie, as pilgrims thrown vpo strange rocks of hard fortune, glad of friendes and friendship,   [  Humilitye throweth downe the vertuous to be lowly in their owne sight. ] notwithstanding the Duches humiliation. Yet the Knight commaunded the best and wealthiest within the Iland to attend, prouiding al necessaries for their indigence and want, besids which, the most pleasauntest buildings were appointed within the Iland for their lodginges: who after long recreation, refreshing their wearisome miseries with good ease, crauing licence to depart. The Knight hauing a greeuous straunge disease raygning vpon him, called Lassabeu ,   [  Duches speaking in the greeke toung. ] in the nature of a blouddy flixe, many yeares before most strangly vexed him. Duches Egeria taking some view of the Knight sayth: good Syr, your disease euidently is known to me, partly already wel acquainted with the nature thereof: am no professed Phisition nor Chyrurgion, but if it stand with your pleasure to aduenture your selfe vpon my simple skil. Although a stranger, yet to my vttermost gift & experience wil, seek the recouery of your health. The Knight saith (good Duches) I thank you for your courteous offred friendship, if by your knowledge my health be recouered, I shal obtaine a greater benefite from your good grace, then euer could be ministred vnto me by any mortal creature yet liuing. I haue to my great cost and charge, intertayned the best and most learnedst Phisitions and Chirurgions from sundry famous places of the world, yea men of renowned credite haue trauailed vnto me: yet hitherto I neuer thorow their wisdome, cunning, learning, policy and practize, coulde be remedied or eased. Duches Egeria both in her captiuitie at Olerna ,   [  Duches Egeria educated in liberall Arts, besides which indued with sundry princely quallities. ] and during her Sanctuary continuaunce in the holy Castle, studiouslie applyed her selfe to attayne that skil, besides the honourable deuine natural gyfts, with which she was indued for her better grace, in that faculty, prooued notable and profound. Although shee were a worthye Duches of Royal bloude, yet the fulsomnesse of the disease, neither was yrkesome vnto her, neither the daintinesse which her degree might require, disdayne her to make refusal of any paines for the accomplishment of her patientes health, she applyed medicines both within and without of such vertue and effect, thorow which the Knight very shortly recouered not only health, but liued long after a very perfect and sound man. The Knight thorow this acquaintaunce, found out the incomparable vertue, wisedome, learning, skil and modest chastitie, which abounded in this noble Duches, procured her renowne to be published, in manye forrayine Nations, appoynting a sure Ship, trustye Mariners, with great store of prouision for her passage, rewardeth her with great treasures: Writeth to the king of Barbary , Letters touching her rare and excellent ornaments of nature. Yea what a renowned woman his country was like to enioye, wishing he might haue beene worthy of so blessed and good creature to haue dwelled amongste his people. This good Duches Egeria , her deare brother Lord Apasus , with the residue of her honourable company passed foorth their iourney towardes Barbaria : where, and into which country most ioyfully shee was intertayned of the King, Queene, Estates, as the best and chifest of that Nation, with al other sortes of people fauour for her courteous humilitye: her ornamentes for her skill, woorthinesse for her vertue: learning for her greate study, increased, flowed and abounded, reaching so far into the noble science of Phisicke, able to dispute, talke, and reason with the best and most learnedst in the worlde therein. This noble Duches Egeria , guyded so much by wisdomes lore, that many forraine Princes came to reuerence her, besides common people full of sundry straunge diseases homaged her person, for remedy and ease: some for one griefe, some for an other, as the falling sicknesse, the disease of Elander , called with vs the shingles, for Lunatickes, for remedies against the pestilence, for strangulion, for purgations to the stomach and spleane, for payne in the blader, for breaking the stone, to purge the vrine, to auoyde the vrine, for Collicke, for the blacke and yellow iaundize, for the body mispent by consumptions,    [  A Phisitian must be acquainted with al diseases, as wel belonging to chirurgery as phisick. ] for coughes in the deuastation of the lunges and liuer, for murres and megrams, for blooddy flixe, for painful stitches, for cramps, palses, aches in the backe, the sweating dropsy, for paines in the eyes, for gouts, for swellings, the canker, for any maner of decrepit lamenes: there was no disease as wel named as vnnamed, but Duches Egeria taking in hand, her excellent knowledge gaue health and soundnes. Oh how many mighty Princes and great Monarches of the worlde, content to stoupe for health of body to this worthy woman, how wonderful treasures, rich iewels were dayly layde before her, sent from al part of the worlde, in respect of her magnificence, ronowmed fame, admyrable credite, vniuersally spread. The gaine of this glory did more depresse and martyr her enemies, then if she had made a conquest vpon them with fourty thousand men of war, the honor which shee attayned vnto in Barbery , a forrain Nation, as good occasions offered, the world most glad of her, condigne fauor, presented her person: recompencing her extremities ouerpast, in al maner of Princely ioyes, ouer prising the most gladsome dayes that euer she liued in her owne natiue country. The Duches good successe abroad, not a little freated ye cankred stomachs of her enemies, as Duke Lampanus her husband, Eldorna & Pasifer at home, repenting that better forecast had not setled in their heads, in the preuention of such mischiefes, by this prosperous euent like to insue. Eldorna inioying Pasifers loue  & plesure in faithful seruice vncontroled, beginneth now to fedome & tramel the deepest waters, in stead of the mighty Trouts, catch the poore foolish herring. This the Duke deceiued, strange foggy mystes smoking from the lofty rockes aboue, no lesse then maruailous to the low valleis beneath. The Duke as a instrument of folly, blinded with vaine wil and foolishe affection, vsed to what purpose this Miniano pleased, firste framed by Pasifers fraudulent documentes, ceassed not more and more, traueling their wits, incessauntly spurring their sences, as wel for the maintenaunce of their iniust vsurpation, as trembling in quotidian Feauer fits, least their lewd leachery shoulde aspire to the Dukes eares, not a little tormented in their spirites,    [  Harlots are enuious, fearing euery one that loketh vpon them wil bewray their lecherous liuing. ] aduised them selues by priuie consultation togeather, how the glasse might be cracked in shiuers, least their infectious vrins should be cast against the bright sunne beams, as wel to procure their owne safety, as insolently deiecting the the prerogatiue estate, by subtle science of wit, inueigled the Duke to deliuer vp the title of his gouernement and dominion to Rastophell his bastard sonne. Al which brought to vnhappy passe, Eldorna and her louer Pasifer without gainesay, more safely for recreation might tosse the Tennis balles, washing their countenaunce so fayre in the Dukes presence, without suspicion, as though no blemishe were in beauty, nor lewdnesse in loue. The Duke many times sitting like a dizard, deserted    [  when a harlot supposeth al sure, then greatest plagues for their deserts at hand ] and left to him selfe, putting a broken staffe in his hande to holde by. Receiuing onely sixe thousande Florence by the yeare towardes his maynteinaunce: And Pasifer appointed Lorde gouernour of Rastophel for his education, trayned him vp in Nicromancy, prooued so expert therein, excelled all the Magicke masters and Nicromancers of that age and time. The Duke for refreshing his broken wits, early in a Morning did ride forth into the green forests called Radundon , leauing his company and tract of Hownds, glauncing his cowrser somewhat aside, by chaunce mette with a poore countrie peasaunt, called Truthtelall . Good morrowe fellowe, saith the Duke whither art thou trauelling? Good Sir, I am passing foorth towardes Olerna vppon necessary businesse. Tell me, doest thou knowe the Duke of this lande, no by my truth, I knowe him not, neither care if I neuer doe, except his manners were better, and wittes more surer. What saith the Duke, doe his maners indomage or hurte thee: no saith the clowne, he hurtes both him selfe, and his whole Countrie and people. The Duke inwardly chafed, hardly coulde gouerne nature, or tie vppe affection to heare the poore innocent slaue reckon vp his abhominable life. Ah saith the Duke. What reportes doe the Countrie giue out of Lady Eldorna : saith the simple foole, some say she is an arrant filthye whoore, hath quite vndone this Noble fruitefull Dukedome, which for many hundred yeres hath bene richly guided, now ouerthrowen by Eldorna , whose iniurious counsell, firste procured vertuous Egeria , and her children to bannishment, nowe translating the Scepter and dominion to Rastophell her bastard sonne; besides whiche the Duke is vsed as a fiddle to play vpon, for Pasifer day  & night, praunceth the Dukes white ambling Mare, which so choisely is reserued to his own saddle. It is no small griefe to subiectes heartes, that the Dukes wilfull stopping his eares againste good aduise But the Duke forceth Truthtelall ,   [ Truthtelall begins his talke before Eldorna. ] that simple wretch to daunce attendaunce at the Court. although feigning unmeasurable laughter, and much pleasaunt mirth. Yet Truethtelall stroke a sharpe deadly dagger to his hart: I my selfe am the Duke, charging and commaunding thee vppon payne of present death, to aduowe, and vtter at large the same wordes to Eldorna , whiche hast already discouered before mee: I will be thy sefegarde from all harmes, and well rewarde thy paynes therein. Truethtelall seemed to play his parte before the Duke, in the presence of Eldorna , counterfetting the gesture of an ydiot, pleasantly conceited him selfe to expell phantasticall buzzes from the Dukes braines. My Lord saith Truthtelall , you haue a faire ponde, preseruing the daintiest Fishe for your owne taste, when you playinge in your bedde a flattering thiefe, glanering you by day, tramelleth your freshe waters by night. Your white Swannes, swimming in your most pleasaunt riuers preserued by you, but pluckt by others: your delicate plumbetree, dayntily kept, for your owne tooth, a priuie practiser vnawares throweth a mayne cougel into the best bowes thereof: but suche is your liberall and franke hearte,   [ Truthtelall mockes the Duke. ] if within your garden a sweate poyse be gathered, sufficient smelles besides refreshing your sences, vnmissed, no griefe. If you spit hony, and drinck poyson, vnseene of the eie, not rued of the heart, the Duke opening his blind sences, began to enter into the cleare knowledge of Eldorna and Pasifars violent villany, fel into witles fury, watched the gates, the city being a fire, would subdue Eldornaes inclination, when he himselfe before was slaine, this drench ministred by Truethtelall ,    [  Cayninos, otherwise called Truthtelall. ] powdring his stomache began to cursse and sweare: wishing him selfe dead, aboue al men most cursed, giuing credite to false Whores and flattering knaues. Wel saith Eldorna , if my sight and company haue glutted  & pampered your affections, I praye you make speedy deuoidance of me, I will not impaire your honor, I was neuer accoumpted a whore, before I met with a violent leacher. I am young, yet not voide of this experience: if subiect to wit, yet wil without wit getting a better choise, hath free libertie, vpon better assurance, dischargeth her selfe. If you so gladly desire separation from my societie, I must brooke & disgest your hard nature in the same as I may. These furious stormes ouerpassed Pasifer this present night intised Truthtelal to a secrete corner of the Dukes Pallace thrust a sharp sword through his heart, buried his pesaunts carkas within a stinking dunghil. Al which pearcing the dukes eares no lesse lothesome, then greefesome, helpe preuailed not, remedy being away, as a man heat in the head, diseased in his browes with the cornicles of Corinth hastely running, beating, prancing and vaunting, at length after bayard had wel gawled his mouth with the bridle, stayed, deliuered out for himselfe as followeth. If wholesome counsell, of wise and learned men, coulde haue remoued my inflexible minde, I had not now bene ouerturned. If my defence had taken her guidance, by the gentle reede bending with euery winde, hither and thyther, standeth safe, had not now like the prowde stately Oke, ouer high in mine owne conceite, beene cast vp by the roots: the same ignominious scorne, happeneth to me, as the simple goate, meeting with the crafty ingenious Foxe drinking togeather in ye deepe diches, the Fox by faire wordes, was lifted vp by the goates Hornes to the highe bankes. The simple goate leaning ouermuch to the Foxes faire wordes, leaft to himselfe, knewe no way to escape, wished, before the danger taken in hand, deliberation had better considered what followed, mockery, fraude and destruction. So surely if gouerment in the beginning hauing, foreseene the end, had not nowe beene subiect to wicked false and peruers wayes of your disguised dissimulations Haue I hatred in place of Friendship, hath familiarity brought contempt, hath beneuolence nursed vp ingratitude. Behold the poore vertuous Ant, in her kind almost drowned, hauing but one little sprig to craule vpon in defence of life, throwne downe into the water by the simple dow, could not sleep, vntil requital were made, bestinged the Fowlers foote making a noyse, admonishing the improuident Byrdes to escape the subtle secreat nets. I haue neglected al mens aduise to preferre and aduance your reputations, hauing banished Wife, Children, bereaft sundry good men of their liues, forsaken friendes and subiectes, resigned my seigniory into your handes, strypped my selfe naked, your wil and pleasure in all pointes, yet brute beastes and foules of the ayre in all thankfulnesse and humanity, excel and reach beyond your sauage natures. This the Duke beheate him selfe: A pound of greace, dearer then a nounce of sweat: a Pitcher of some lesser prized, then a firken of teares. Eldorna & Pasifer keeping present silence, in great snuffe departed the Dukes Pallace, to an other house whiche they inioyed in the right of Rastophell the Bastard, beeing there setled. Pasifer writeth backe to the Duke as followeth. Your euil deserts and franticke fashions haue so wounded the inwarde cogitations of your most truest and deare friendes: altogeather ashamed from time to time their indiscretion should hazarde credite, life and goods for such a one, who rather was to be shortened and cut off, then succoured, as wel for your gracelesse ingratitude, as tyrannical foolishe demeanours, but specially the misgouernment of this Dukedome. Since you forget to reclyne the right rule of of honest lyfe, vnreasonable desire abandoning mutual loue, must of speciall care to the common wealth, remedy inconueniences thorow your negligent slouthfulnesse, rather increase then diminishe. Especially since Fortune hath disposed me a Honourable Maiestrate, in the right of vertuous Rastophell , towardly in politicke administration, wil defect in any part of righteous duetie committed:   [  Euil things praysed for gaynes. ] most readily bent to abridge your licentious minde and carelesse liuing, from such enormities as may wholly euert his royall dominion, if not other wayes forecast. For as you haue dispossessed your selfe from all absolute power of ruling the Realme: So we must reclaime your busie vanities, either to liue as a priuate person, or els by banishment renounce these our dominions: muste earnestly cast our eyes in appeasing the outrage of domestical enemyes, represse the practises of forraine foes, espie the policies of Egeria and her Counsailloures,   [  Egeria a corsie to their stomaches. ] al which concerneth the establishment of that famous young Marshal Prince Rastophell , where you vainely sticking in loue of Eldorna , blow the light feathers of Phrigia against the boysterous Northren windes of gypt , whom without moderation you ouer long haue abused, shee thorow your vncircumspect interprice, a poynting marke for the world to wonder at, her recouery of your abuses, in consideration of better experience, fully lessoned in repentaunce, determineth honest nuptial matching with my person, retyreth from infamy, reiecteth a bruised crusht coudgel,   [  The shameles pretende repentaunce to couer their vilenes. ] leaning more confidently vpon the sure staffe of vertuous life. Therefore to be short, take as a choyce to your selfe, what afterclappes by stubberne resisting maye fall out: on the contrary, by quiet departing into a Forraine Region, to your life, name and goods, a defence: or if priuate lyfe may better like within this your natiue Country, not intermedling or reaching within the royal estate, we readily are to fauor protect and defend you. If perswasions not vncouching your yron stomach, setled in wilful obstinacie, improuidently, producing vaine hope to your selfe, muste be content to treade the path of misery and beggery. A Duke ought not, to beare so base a mynde, in obeying such Pesauntly qualities. Therefore let warninges, wisely forecast what in denial of reasonable requestes, may bring: I doubt not then, but you wil accept that good ordinary way, which shal bring best securitie.   [  The Duke called to memory his former life, of which we are all forgetful, without some sharpe spur of remembrance. ] The Duke after perusing these saucy and malapert Letters, wel backe beaten with his owne waster, stayed, and breathed vpon Pasifers former flatteryes, intertayned these dry blowes as reuenges for his hard cruelty, a great lesse, no booty, in exchaunge of Louers: Often times sighed, remembring in what ouersight hee was lead and alured, iniuriously defaming and banishing his deare wyfe Egeria : Cruelly murdering Lorde Marshal, his Wife, Children and family: the ten Cities of the Nicromancers: him selfe vtterly dispoyled, ouermuch leaning to the tryfling pleasures of a Harlot, pestred with the trecherie and false alurementes of that villayne Pasifer . Whereas heretofore true consideration, coulde not arrest an vnstayed conceit, from vnnatural supplantation of his owne Children, banishing them to hard aduentures of rouing Fortune. So hauing also resigned the keyes of his Dukedome to a Bastardly miscreaunt, the Sonne of a most stenched Strumpet. Al these motions as medicins working a speedy conuersion, coulde not so much helpe his memory, and brused braynes, as in that he was a iesting stocke to the worlde, degenerated from Royall bloode: his Nobles, Counsellours, valiaunt Captaynes, worthie Men of armes, prudent Iudges, and sage Senatoures, left him to his owne miserye: His vile, base, and poore Subiectes, cryed out for due iudgementes vpon him, found no consolation to rest vppon in this so harde and difficult a cause. Oh saith Lampanus to him selfe,    [  Lympanus speaketh to himselfe. ] If I staying within the Territories of these dominions, euerye man wil scorne my wretched plight, neither with reasonable requestes, may I craue mercy, or succour of any subiect, for that hauing layde vniuersal Plagues vpon my whole countrie: Besides my mislead life, offensiue, odious and contemptible to the face of men. How may I expect safety, a Duke of Royal blood, hauing liued in countenaunce, of a whole seigniory, now disgraced, bereft, measured with sixe thousand Florence, payed by the discretion of flattering traitours. The Duke vppon these inwarde pearcing prickes, without company, departed his dominion, and natiue Countrey, finishing the pilgrims penaunce, which Fortune had appointed, and his owne folly deserued. Firste trauailing many straunge countries, at length, dashed vpon the Land of Mesopotamia , made common sacke and spoyle of him selfe, destitute of mony, solde Ringes, chaines, bracelets, broches, and al other ornaments of golde, wasted and lauished al that euer he had: was in a forraine Nation compelled thorow penury and wretched Famine,    [  The Duke beggeth and no man will open his pity because of his proud vestures. ] to craue the beneuolent compassion, of wel disposed people. Euery one beholding his gallant coat vpon his backe, his gaye hat vpon his head, his imbrothered hose vpon his legges, verily esteemed him, some stout extrauagant, more delighting in wandring wildnes, then good seruice, or els sent abroad, as a spie to viewe the commodities of their countrie and Land, some feareful, some carelesse, some dispiteful towardes him, so that in such gazing vestures, vnmeet for beggers, no man wold extend friendship or reliefe towards his comfort. When night drew on, leaft destitute of houserowme, intertainment, or lodging, fearnig such a lusty felowe would in the night, eyther kill, spoyl, robbe or hazarde them, by some other dangerous displeasure. The poore Duke, left to knock his heeles against the stones, in colde freesing nights glad to take vp a softe bedde in the harde broade fieldes. A prety while this well pinched with colde, and hunger, inwardly remembred his iust plague, so happened, his owne inwarde thoughtes testifying not so much as his owne former life deserued, pawsed with him selfe, what good way best might be taken in so extreame wretched case, either with shame to yeelde what he was, or else to ease his extremities as he might, with hope in time to come, take holde of some better chaunce. The lesser ashamed of his foule reproche, beeing in an vnknowen place farre from acquaintaunce, his calamities hereby became hardened, and impudent, earely in a morning after little ease, and colde lodging all night, attempting some practise to chase hunger, and preserue life, in hope of better recouery, bechance meeting with an olde poore wretched Begger, hauing a ruinous lousie patcht cloke vppon his backe, desired the Begger to exchaunge their vestures. The Duke and Begger, both contented with this couenaunt, stripped themselues naked to the skinne, Duke Lampanus putting on the beggers poore patched ornamentes the straite harnesse begining to pynche his shoulders shrubbed, and rubbed him selfe like the wagging of a Sheepes tayle for the magotes. On the contrary, the poore Begger addressed himselfe in the Dukes costely agparell. Duke Lampanus sayeth to the Begger: Father, what prety damosell is this, that accompanieth you. The Begger tolde him She is my daughter, her name is Sibil . I praye you saith the Duke. Sithens you haue my faire apparell, whiche may be to you both credite, and preferment. Let mee craue friendeshippe two manner of wayes at your handes: The one is, let me haue fayre Sible your daughter to waite vppon mee, it may happen, I intende to make here my wyfe, the other let mee craue your bouget, and scrippe, the Begger content to graunt the Dukes reasonable requestes. Lampanus taking his ease vppon the grasse, opened the Beggers bagge, founde good store of browne Breade, harde cheese, and Bacon, Releeuing, and mittigating his terrible hunger, passed foorth to a cleare spring neare adioyning, dronke a very insatiable pull, as though some Horse, or Mule, after dry prouender, would flounder and quarrel with euery water pytte before his eyes. Duke Lampanus well refreshing his hungry mawe and greedy gutes, almost clounged together for lacke of foode and sustenaunce, shaked his newe friende Begger by the hande, with bouget about his necke, fayre Sibel that young trull at his heeles, passed out their iourney asking and begging in euery place they came, his olde patcht Beggers cloke Respected: wanted neither meate, drinke nor money. Alwayes when night approched, littered and fothered together with fayre Sibel in a barne, tooke such pleasure in begging by day, and pastime with his young trull at night,   [  Faire Sibel the Dukes walking mate with childe. ] his extreame downefall, from a Duke to a wretched Begger was neyther odious, nor hatefull vnto him still, misleading his wretched life. At legth this lusty walking mate fair Sibel cried out of her vnhapi chance became gret belied. The Duke bethought himself, such a brach stil folowing might easely in time breed seuen or eight whelps, at his heeles: vnskilfull to vnburthen him selfe from this waight, attempting many wayes, at length in a fayre hot sommer day, meeting with a barefoot fryer talking in Latin, disputing one with an other of Humidum concoctum tenui si callido, admiscetur, venerem an excitat, cum semen non absumet . The Duke closing and clapsing, perswaded with the Fryer yt fair Sibil was possessed with an euil spirit, could not anye way be released, without a Fryers Benecen . The Duke whyspering fayre Sibil in the ear, said: sweet loue, you and I, haue long liued in lewd lechery, it is high time to be shryuen, from the seuen deadly sinnes. I haue intreated this deuout good ghostly father Frier Harry , to take some pains in yoder thicket wt you. The Fryer very wel contented with these newes,    [  The Duke departeth from his walking mate. ] tooke Sibill by the hand departed aside: good Syr Harry sayth the Duke, vse fayre Sibill manerly, shryue her thorowly, talke to her pleasauntly, she is a choyce thing, shamfast and feareful Duke Lampanus , leauing this filthy drudge vnder Fryer Harries hands at randoms, to shift for her selfe, in the broad world, hastely passed ouer into Cipers , stil continuing a misdemeaned course of life, begging and wandring, from place to place, was according to straight lawes of that Country apprehended, taken for a vagrant runnagat, brought before the maiestrate, imprysonned, whypped, and rigorously punished. After these sharpe conflicts, and great warnings, a vertuous Gentleman of that Countrie, resorting by chaunce the common pryson, relieuing the wretched estate, of miserable Captiues, beheld Duke Lampanus , bound, and fettred, with yron, and chaines, demaunded what country man he was, tolde him, a Hetrurian borne: The Gentleman asked the cause of his imprysonment, who aunswearing neither for treaso, murther, nor theft: only because being a straunger, inforced thorow ye sharp dart of pouerty to craue ye countries beneuolence  & reliefe. The gentlema perceiuing Duke Lampanus wel qualified in learning,, tender yeares in al Princelie education, whose skil appeared very ripe, and ready both in Latin, Greeke, and the Caldean tongue, which in royal estate was altogether neglected, now standeth him in sure stead. The Gentleman contented to obtain inlargement, & freely set him at liberty, if he within his house would become a schoolmaster, for the bringing vp of his Children. Lampanus ioyful of this offer, hoping of some better dayes to come in ease, of his ruful plight past, yeelded the Gentlemans request. After long seruice in the trade of a schoolemaster, very painfully imployed trauaile & profited his schollers. By reason penury had pinched him, experience teaching a better fashio of liuing was wel gouerned, of good report, in fame, fauour, and wel lyking of his Master, Mistresse, loued of the whole family. By continuaunce, these good occasions offered, made open confession to his Master, that he was the royal Duke of Hetruria . The Gentleman for his good deserts, foorth with, as much as ability might serue, aduaunced him in al lawful meanes, according to peticion, safely conuayed him in comely apparrel, iewels, mony, and prouision to his daughter Selewsa with Golden foote, brought vp in Duke Bendals house in Egypt , vpon arriual, as vnacquainted approched the Dukes court: signified his businesse was to speake with the Dukes owne person. Duke Bendall incontinently vpon the message and news, that a certaine straunger, by speech a Hetrurian , desirous to frequent his honourable presence with some secreat talke. Foorthwith as one ful of friendly intertainement, coueted nothing more, then speedely to repayer furnishing his desires. misfortunes, especially persues in complaint the villanies of his owne nation Hetruria, as followeth. enemies, but not his owne naughty actions. ] haue hurled me to your presence, not of any euil pretence, or false deuise, attayning these your countries, but as one by subtle fetches of insolent subiectes, ouermuch leaned vnto them, reposing my special trust & affiaunce for the stay of my affayres in their handes, traiterously haue beguiled me. I am (Oh noble Duke Bendal) Lampanus the true gouernour of Hetruria , banished from my countries and dominions, bereaft and spoyled of al that I did enioy.   [  The hard nature which first banished her, is now desirous to see her. ] And sithens my deare daughter and childe with Golden foote, Selewsa , at your charge and wel liking brought vp: Nature and affection haue drawne and ledde me hither to see her. Duke Bendal with right good grace much reioyced, courteously receiuing and reuerencing him, proffered his friendship, power, and assistaunce, as wel to maintaine his present estate, as finally restore him home to his dominions. Selewsa with Golden foote, presented her selfe before Duke Lampanus her father, who comending her beauty and deuine graces of nature, condemning his owne hard, harmeful heart, so much obeying wanton wil, in banishing, and vnrooting her from Hetruria her countrey. Saith Lampanus , what did I meane so plyantly consent, to lasciuious lust, and false flattery. But this an consolation saluing all the rest of my miseries, this present hope rewardeth all my payneful panges ouer past. My Daughter Selewsa is liuing. When my malicious minde committed my fayre Selewsa to banishment: I wishe my graue, had swallowed me. I am with my owne fantasie displeased, my mislead life loathed me there in. This one thing secreatly resteth within my hidden thoughtes: if euer I recouer againe my right and inheritaunce in Hetruria : Oh fayre Daughter Selewsa , refuse not to be crowned the Royal Duches of that Realme. Lampanus honourably mayntained according to Noble estate, onely at the cost and charges of Duke Bendall , the rather for fantasing fayre Selewsa , esteemed her a seemely meete wife for his Son and heyre young Lorde Nearich , nursed vp togeather, might pursue the better oportunitie, to aspire the seigniory of Hetruria , gayning a royall estate, far ouer reaching his owne inheritaunce a simple Dukedome. Duke Bendall reuiued in gladsome hope, of clyming the highest step of these famous dignities, made a special resolution to spare no coste, nor stacker at the heauy burthen of charge for the accomplishment of so lusty expectation. Also Duke Lampanus made a determinate purpose, with more mature deliberation, and riper iudgement, to reclaime his dominions. But now in the domesticall busines of Hetruria. Pasifer , and Eldorna , practised their wits with equal circumuention, not onely for euer to bar Lampanus fro his Dukedome with al impossibility of euer returning home againe, vsed diligent watch, examined the bottome of euery attempt.   [ To inioy present commodity are content against their coscience to sweare. ] At last debated vppon the Coronation of young Rastophel , resigned the crown and Scepter into his handes, which before time they had reserued to his vse. For declaration of true obedience, many of the best subiects, did sweare disloyaltie to Duke Lampanus , duety and subiection to Rastophell the Bastard, who hauing this false vsurpation close in his cloutches, his vnkind behauiour, altered the mindes of the welthiest and best subiectes, with infinite treasures, as wel for their owne contentment and secure tuition to their liues, departed their natiue countrey. The realme left vnpeopled, without tillage, destitute of Bread, bereaft of mony, treasures, traficke of marchandize, from other Realmes, and dominions, for their necessary vse decayed, al things was out of frame and good order. Rastophell the Bastard very young, proud, leacherous, furious, altogeather from his infancie, applying and stretching his wits in the science and skill of Nicromancy, approoued excellent and perfect there in, wholly gouerned his dominions by the practize thereof. Partly by the subiects deuoiding the Realme, and deuastation of the dominion:   [  No hereditaments due to Bastards, if by vsurpation they attaine, prospereth not. ] as for that Pasifer sometimes woulde checke and controle Rastophell for his riotous wretchlesse lyfe. An outrage, bitter misliking, and discention grewe and waxed very ripe betweene Rastophell, Pasifer , and Eldorna his Mother. One Spido a notable cunning youth, brought vp with Rastophell , wholly of his counsel, as wel to serue the present time, knowing he was no lawful Prince, but a vsurper, also vewing the wretched calamity, and ruine, the dominion was brought vnto, stirred sinders more hotter among them, flattered Rastophel , feeding his humours, aduised him to reiect Pasifer , and Eldorna his Mother, make deniall of their checkes, contempne their controlementes, beare swaye of his owne absolute aucthoritye.   [  Spido a notable flatterer. ] Spido dayly whispering Rastophell in the ear, beganne to rouse vp his Peacockes feathers, forgetting to looke downe on his yellowe feete, extreamely swealled, furiously raged, againste Pacifer , and his Mother Eldorna , his beste friendes and chiefe aduauncers. Spido nothing failing in all manner of subtil seruices, and abhominable enterprises of a faigned disguised flatterer.   [  Vnskilfull to vse prosperity, disdaine sodenly dasheth the downe. ] Attempted Eldorna , and Pacifer on the other side, vnder colourable friendely faith, pretending great good will towardes young Rastophel in respect of mutuall education: wishing and exhorting them sharply to reproue the vnbridled life of Rastophel, Spido spuing out suche bitter bane, became by processe of time in mortall hatred one towardes an other. Rastophel wrinckling his browes, began to whette a sharpe edge vpon his sword, repenting so strong and mighty staffe committed into a mad mans hande, fearing the mighty mynaces and wilfull speeches, sharpely giuen out, should be beaten with the same weapon, whiche they by wrongfull violence had disceitfully wrenched from an other man. This Spido vnder cloke of true loue still feeding their stubborne natures and vnciuill maners, planted most waighty Canons, [  Although Rastophel a vsurper, yet in that place a lawful ruler, Pasifers enterprise, disorder and rebellion came to euil successe. ] battered the strongest walles of the Dukedome, tormented with eger complaints, their seuerall mindes impressed villainous detestation, seazed vpon the with inexpugnable violence, possessed all the partes of their bodies, putrified the very heart roote one towards an other: Pasifer & Eldorna voide of all hope and proofe of courteous reclaming Rastophel , refused the frequentation of his court, raysed an army of souldiers, attempting as well the ransacke of his pallace, as apprehension of his person Rastophel through Spidoes cunning casts, admonished of this deuise and practise, impropried and matched into his company and seruice, the moste couragious and valeant Captaines, and best experienced souldiers, him selfe chiefe gouernour, planted in ambush vppon the voyage. Pasifer hastening towardes him: in preuention whereof, gaue such a whotte cannisado, two thousand of Pasifers expertest souldiers came to spoile and slaughter, him selfe taken prisoner, Rastophel staied not herein, tooke the best aduantage of good successe, made also a sharp inroode vpon Eldorna his mother, claspt her vp with her friende Pasifer , in harde merciles captiuity:   [  The flatterer Spido counsailed to cut them off, hauing no end of his mischief, considering this diuision could not be the ouerthrowe of one, but a destruction of the other. ] Consulting with Spido what moste expedient was in suche a case to be finished. Spido of wyly wit, and subtil capacity whispered priuely in his eares, aduised to throwe them by terrible iustice to bitter smartsome execution. Other subiectes of best countenaunce amased and terrified hereat, should increase honor to your person, renoune & tuition to your Dukedome, and a ready daunting, and repressing of sawcie enterprises. Spido saith, doubt ye not, of iust matter sufficietly to charge them withal: as chiefly, your mothers filthy adulterous life. with that base varlet Pasifer , the traiterous spoyle of vniust vsurpation, lauished, wasted and consumed thorough their naughtinesse, to present insurrection  & wilfull rebellion, as actual banishment of your deare father of famous memory Lampanus , being now in your capcase,   [  Spido plyes his wits for their dispatchance. ] good fortune neglected, prosperity, assingning you, a childe yong, vnexpert, yet counterpoise an eternall felicity to you and your posterity, by their dispatchance out of the way. Whereas if pluming their backs a fresh, their master feathers ouer flying the highest and strongest fortres of your dominions badonage, & subuersion shalbe your refuge & best defence for ye same, my tender care ouer this your preseruatio in ye night, tosseth my mind with fearful dreams. In ye day time vexeth my thoghts, fearing some sode destructio aprocheth your noble person, with watchful circuspection, requisitly is to be considred, that regard may euermore maintein your honor, defed your roialty, no which thing can successiuely be atchieued,   [  Spido persues Rastophel to the vttermost. ] if liberty & liues be granted to the no dout, if humble submissios can change your countenace wil refuse no actions to win, no want of friendes. Aduancing their cryes, hie profers to persuade, nor alluring practises to assail you. If affections recline, or nature alter, or peeuish pity begin to gnaw or bite, as vnhappy messegers abiect the, pursue your owne determination, trust to your selfe, let no licorish sweete tast deuoide your wholsome appetite:   [  Publike profite in common wealths preferd before priuate inscription. ] Rastophel wholy fastening his minde more vpon prodigality, ambition, vain glory, priuate inscription, the publike profite: was ignorant vpon what soile he had leared himselfe, howe easily his feete might slide standing alone, little remembring the popular emulation towards his gouernement. In renouncing & cutting short Pasifer & Eldorna his best friends, desperately throweth himselfe into vnremouable perdition, his sure proppes taken away what harde bickerings he should beate vpon, imprudently ouerslipping his wits, vsurpation in the dominion, could not be vnreuenged. Spido more and more leading him on his behalfe in beastly lust,   [ Improuidence ouerthroweth carelesse men. ] raunging after outward gases, scalding inward affections. On the other side distracted as a witlesse man without further searching his heedelesse head: Erected furnished and sumptuously builded a strong brasen tower very splendent, and admirable to behold, of wonderfull largenesse deapthnes and height a gibbet fastned to the top therof. the finest artificers in brasse throughout his dominions were retained to the speedy performance of this work,   [  Yong heads easily lead, and of them selues not without admyrable deuises. ] his purpose taking place, commaunded Pasifer , his mother Eldorna dispitefully to be brought forth as scornes of the world, to iest vppon, casting his eies to the top of the towre, said, you thinke time sleepeth, or that slouthfulnesse walloweth in wantonnesse with me: no no, although to my excesse charge, yet haue I settled a surer stay, to this my realm & countrie, then euer my predecessours before: I haue established a brasen tower to hang traiterous knaues and whores, I will not be adiudged partiall in my lawes and constitutions, all subiectes shall drinke alike of one cuppe, and one licour, Rastophel returneth, Pasifer and Eldorna to their safe custody, vntill at leasure his ghostly deuotion, so veritable aduowed, might be fulfilled. Spido not vnoccupied confected many sweete syropes, and pleasaunt poisoned potions for a inward scowring of outwarde corruptions, [  Our English prouerbe, false harlots falling out, true men come by their goods. ] spared no time, foreslowed no casualties to pricke vp the price of his owne aduauncement, not a litle reioycing, that discention pinched, gaulde, and lugd eache other by the eares: The consideration of these diuisions pearced the wisest subiectes in Hetruria , a singular shipwrack could not but be, a publique profit, if in a little moment forbearing: at length greatly gaining, these affaires in question, ye realme not without most miserable plagues vniuersally layd vppon them, subiectes daily flying away, famine vexing them behind, mortal plagues subuerted whole families to dust, wretched weeping, and woful wailing, harbored in euery coste, and corner of the countrie. Spido made chiefe ruler of the rost, languished in sighes, & perplexed with sorrowes, not in respect of vnhappy plight, the Dukedome was brought vnto, but fearing so long as Pasifer and Eldorna liued, his false vernishe would be espied, continual aggrauating their impiety, vntil their spirits and liues were depriued a sunder, and Rastophel left vncountenanced. For that these causes should not long hang in doubt, as also to minister iust occasions of fidelity, which he reposed in his friende Spido. Rastophel forth with, and spedily, powred downe the tempestuous showres of cruel murther, the buddes of tyrannicall counsell long husked, began now to blossome out: procuring Eldorna earely in the morning to be brought forth. Hauing before intelligence by her keepers: the end of her dayes were at hand, put on vestures of white silke, vehemently wept, lamented her sodaine fal. Comming before Rastophel her bastard sonne very humbly prostrated her selfe, crauing pity, mercy and forgiuenesse.   [  The ornaments of nature in harlots with out vertue vnregarded. ] Although her body, an vnchaste sinke, vomiting out the ruine of this comonwealth: yet left some sweete springes of naturall inclination, bubbling, and rising vp, besprinckled some fauour, & louing countenaunce to turne back from this bloudy enterprise, taken in hand, her coloures like the faire vermilion, her cheekes brazeled, as the newe bloomed rose: All the partes of her body curiously compact, and framed of Venus her selfe. Oh sonne Rastophel (saith Eldorna ) Remember, I am thy mother, thy selfe fashioned of my wombe and body, thy nature springing from the tree of my life, thy honour, estimation, and royal estate, through my care and industry attained, now repulsest me with open shame, stoppest my breath, shortenest my daies: Whereas thou oughtest in remorse of obedience and duty, vpholde my honour, safegarde my life, and prolong my yeares. Lampanus dreames in times ouerpassed, nowe take place, is this the Crabbe tree, vnmeasurable spreading, ouershadoweth all estates and conditions of this our Countrie:   [  This is the crabbe bending downe the nettle, of whose kernel sprang a mighty crab tree ouerreaching all the dominions of Hertruria, Lampanus dreamed hereof. ] mine own offences, I confesse haue deserued destruction: but shall mine owne childe, with shame and slaughter be the reuenger hereof? The banishment of Duches Egeria & Trauenna , the confounding, spoyling, and bereauing Tarratus Lord Marshall, his wife, children and family, the subuersion of ten Cities, a final finishing of many other plagues: especially, my dispiteful infidelity towardes Duke Lampanus , the aduauncing of an ingratefull coluber, an impertinent member, after complaint preuaileth not, where iust desert before was indomaged. Rastophel not regarding wordes: rather intimated, and egerly stirred vp, in greater fury: by commandement was cast vppon a table, her handes and legges with strength of men,   [  Eldorna confessing her owne bloudy life. ] stretched out, straightly bound, and holden down, Rastophel with sharpe knife, cutte Eldorna his mothers throte, slitte her belly, imbrued his handes in her bloude, and bowels,   [  Nero not more vnnaturall. ] tearing and mangling her sweete delicate fleshe, searched the place, which first conceaued him, by a butcherly instrument cutte off the white lillie necke from her shoulders, accustomable adorned with a glittering chayne of pure golde, the bloud streaming and trickeling down,   [  Butcherly instrument. ] as from an Oxe, or Sheepe in slaughter: with the corny salt of Arabie stuffed, sewed, and cloased vppe her belly, fastening her shoulders with chaynes of Iron, in the toppe of the brasen tower hanged her vpon a gibbet. Here deare friend Pasifer , sawced in the same pickle, his mouth with the whot burning pepper stuffed, hanged vppon the same gybbet aliue, a view of iust vengeance, for al ingratefull, flattering, adulterous traytours to behold. This bloudy action finished, Rastophel spake to the people reprochefull woordes against Pasifer and Eldorna his mother, calling her whoore, the deuowring shee Beare of Hetruria , and Pasifer his deare friend, and first founder, the dishonour of his Father Lampanus , the bloudsucker of his dominions, as of long time saith Rastophel , with sucking innocent bloude, haue ingorged their mawes. So nowe let them mutually march forewardes to the high heauens, before the Goddes spue and spitte out the garbages, which with open murther and miserable slaughter they haue long fead on. By art of coniuration foorthwith protruded a wicked Spirite, called Focalor , a worthy Duke, with thirtie legions to keepe the aforesaide brasen Tower. Least if any kindred, or speciall friendes vouchsafeing to take downe these martyred carkases with secrete funerall solempnise them. But some attempting to put in practise, the which before was coniectured, foorthwith torne in peeces by these maligne furious spirites. Nowe the vitall sences of Spido hauing a newe hearte of ioyes, refreshing all the seuerall sences: well quaffing on this bloudy cuppe, his thirst neyther staunched, nor his flattering false fetchches without further shiftes, stayed. Roueth on still reaching Rastophel ouer the shoulders, with a crooked measure, like a caterpiller poulling, pilling the geuernement, and common wealth, leaft no ingen of dissimulation vnsearched, if profite any waye might thereby arise. This Rastophel although ouercome, and swallowed vppe in Spidoes disceites, and cauilling counsailes: yet not carelesse, or without consideration for fortifying, the hauens, and principal portes, belonging to his seigniors & dominions, the most warlike soldiers through much trouble and vexation in the Royal estate leaft Rastophel as one vnwoorthy of principality to himselfe: besides that the Realme vnpeopled, naked, bereaft from necessary commodities, yet for defence against forraine and sinister attempts in many and sundry opinions, rested vppon this one point: that whereas hauing in the science of nycromancy singuler skill, and practise, the whole monarchy of maling spirites at his becke and commaundement, committed the precinctes, portes and confines of Hetruria in all partes to be planted vnder the regiment of these spirites against forrain enemies whatsoeuer. And as touching, ciuil inuasion, wholy ordered by sharpe dinte of sword. I think it nothing vnnecessary in this history, to set downe the chief Emperial rule of these spirits, with al their hoste and armies, force and might, in this great action. What partes, seuerally euery King with their Legions gouerned. The Easte partes of Hetruria , king Baal with threescore legions, his Princes, Dukes, Earles, rulers, and potentates, betooke himselfe into which iurisdiction. King Purson , otherwise called Cursan , with twenty and two legions, his Princes, Dukes, Earles, rulers, & potentates their seueral legions attending the West partes of the kingdome of Barbaria . King Byleth otherwaies called Cerberus , hauing ninteene legions, his Princes, Dukes, Earles, rulers, & potentates, their seueral legions defending the South partes, bounding vpon the kingdome of gypt . King Synody otherwise called Asmoday , hauing 70. legions with Princes, Dukes, Earles, rulers & Potentates their several Legions muniting the North partes towardes the Helkhians. Rastophel pitching in league with these companions esteemed himself of no smal valure, coparable to incounter with any one King then liuing, without good gouernment, or guidance, insolently, vanting with scornful countenaunce abiected al people, his worthy friend Spido excepted. Yet fortune to his nose mocked and scorned him: in the ende, approoued his manners without vertue, gouernement without wit, practize without policie. So that this ioly fellow and big man, a silly wodcock, freshly painted out in Eagled feathers, easely caught in the fowlers snare, coulde not long indure, hunting after fame and security, altogeather deceiued in his owne imaginations. For that fame with swift winges flew into forraine regions. Spido a messenger of mischiefe, continually bewrayed domestical and priuate intentions. On the other side, securitie vtterly misliked to serue so tyrannical and troublesome vsurper, vnrespectiuely left to him selfe, perswaded forraine Princes to make no treaty of peace: trusting so much to his new garryson at home, vtterly deceiued and preuented in his affaires abroad. Duches Egeria beeing by wrongful banishment in Barbaria , vnderstood the estate of Hetruria by her country men, flying thither for supportation, succoured thorow her gracious goodnes, increased in honour and riches, naturally wishing welfare and protection vnto them. Also Pantiper her sonne with golden thumbe, dearely esteemed of the Barbarian king, hauing no issue to vnite and knit the inheritable succession, was the hope of his country, the rather for that from his infancy naturally brought vp, wel feathered and swiftly whinged on both sids. Yet his deare Mother, good Duches Egeria misliked Pantipers indiscreet conditions, rainging in vaine brauery, trifling with franticke youth, made choyce his aduenture shoulde be for his owne right in Hetruria , then at randoms hazarde him in many imminent ieopardies in the middest of a sauage people, after the death of the Barbarian king. This vertuous Duches Egeria espying in Pantiper, Lampanus natural inclinations, weakly perswaded of his wel doing, esteemed he should conquer by his departing, both gaine and glory to his family for euer, his continuance might euert the renowne of his mother to shame, be frustrate in the end fro al good expectations. And surely, Pantiper had much incurd displeasure, offended graue modesty, discountenaunced the honorable maiesty of this good Duches. Chauncing on a time, Egeria with this her sonn, for the ouerpassing of diuers troublesome cogitations, vexing her senses, walked togeather in the priuye Garden of the Barbarian king, without wrinckle or blemish of any misthought, chearefully smyled, merely iested with Pantipar , according to the honest course of motherly nature. But Pantiper on the contrary so conquered, and as it were, quite drowned in his mothers beauty, ouercom with her good ornaments of nature, exchaunged chast continency to open rebuke, the tip of hope, to ignomious dispayer, as one iniurious to the maiesty of honourable matronage, first desired, then wrastled, yea struggled to obtaine carnal copulation with his good mother Egeria : when neither mischieuous alurementes,   [  Incestuous copulation violently comitted, can not escape terrible reuengement. ] pestilent perswasions, nor sharpe threatninges coulde bend to extort, without violent opression, hurling hither and thither, threw her flat vpon the ground, rouling a sharpe knife in her golden lockes, fastened her head to the ground, deflowred & grasped vp the wholsome herbs of vertue, growing in the choyce garden of gladsome renown. Against this sauage saucy interprize, ouer spread the darke shadowing cloudes thereof, with the bright shyning sunne beames of vnblemished life: besprent her face with drery drops of dolourous teares, long time and many dayes sorrowed this detestable deed of Pantiper her sonne. Crying out betweene them selues secreatly: saying, Oh sonne, I wish my wombe, had beene fruitlesse and barraine,   [  Egeriaes mourning speech to Pantiper. ] when so crooked a sprig first sprang out, the seed perished, when roote sapped to so vnnatural a stalke, these dayes of tribulation, in which our patience and vntouched vertues are approoued, now stayned thorow thy corruption like a filthie cloath. The Gods know my constaunt chastitie transmitted me into this forraine soyle. I ioyned with thy Father Duke Lampanus , in honourable espousal estate, layed adulterous actions with Lorde Trauenna most uniustly to my charge, cruelly with out remorse, persued the ende of my life. But as my body vnknowne to all men besides Lampanus himselfe: so dishonesty neuer shal confiscat my honour, nor deminish my vow. The Rauens of the ayre deuoured flattering Andromus my wrongful accuser. So rioutous lust bereaft & quite stript, thy father from his Patrimony and rightfull inheritaunce. The Harlot Eldorna a plotforme of all our miseries, appaled, disfauoured the cheerefull countenaunces of the Hetrurian subiectes, now brought to destruction with Pasifer her filthie Louer: the Tragicall execution of her defiled wretched life, finished by the handes of her Bastarde sonne Rastophell , as fearefull shewes for the wonder of the worlde, her selfe nursing him vp in al villaynous vsurpation, scourged with her owne rodde, her throate cut with her owne knife: But my innocencie hath witnessed from the firste day of my affliction, vntill this present, the concord of my conscience. There was neuer man although his beautye, comelinesse, and strength farre surpassed Lampanus coulde submit me: No false sound coulde delight my eares, chase to retier my chaste course vowed to Lampanus , neuer shall any nette snare me whilst we are both liuing. Oh sonne, I weepe this thy wickednesse, neither place nor time wil I take to reuenge: neither giue the world to vnderstand this vngratious deede in thee, a sonne of so inordinate desire: vnruly loue lurking in heart with his owne Mother: or that a mother guiding her selfe so carelesse, yeeld oportunitie to so reprochful a sonne. In the middest of these anguishes and miserable plight: vowed the same day, in which this deed was done, and committed, as a penetenciary sinner to solemne and reuerent fast, as dutifully obserued to the ende of her life. Moreouer Egeria like a good mother, perceiuing a dangerous disposition in Pantiper her sonne, mistrusted the worst, sought fauorable good wil of the Barbarian king for his returne into Hetruria , in attayning and possessing him selfe into the rightful inheritaunce of his own dominions, & also for the dispossessing and extirpation of that miscreaunt Bastarde Rastophell , as wel for approofe of some honourable and victorious exploite, as a stay and prop by his returning home to his poore exiled country men: But chiefly shee feared surffeting youth and vntoward extrauagation, made choyce rather of his present departing into his owne natiue cuntrey, then continue there a forraine soyle, with shame, dishonor, and repulse in time to come. Egeria euery day visited the kinges court in fauourable peticion, for the aduauncement of Pantiper into his owne country, for assistaunce of warlicke souldiers. The Barbarian king aunswearing, loath I am that Pantiper should relinquish my kingdome and dominions, being the staffe of my olde age, after my death the hope and exspectation of my subiects, who beeing left without issue, maye come to vniuersal spoyle: Although Pantiper not borne naturally among them, yet issuing of royal bloud, the sonne of a maiestical Prince, rather wil recline to his obedience. No, no (sayth Duches Egeria) Pantiper a straunger, no good cause offered, why forraine subiectes, thorowe him shoulde either bee burthened, or mooued to disdaine, esteeming hereafter your intent rather an iniury then friendship. With humble expostulation if permission may be graunted for his departure, frequenting his owne Prouinces with fame, no lesse then to your person honourable renowne, hauing brought him vp to such abilitie, prowesse, and warlicke perfection, is to confesse homage and fealty to yur kingdome whilste he liueth. The Barbarian king possest with a mild spirite, prest, and ready in al points to serue Egeriaes expectation, presently mustred a great multitude, as wel of Babarians , as exiled Hetrurians on their behalfe, very venterously offered their seruice, towardes the accomplishment of this exploite. Egeria hauing gathered great Masses of Gold and siluer, thorow her learned skil and practize in Phisicke and chyzurgery, stuffed her Sonne Pantiper with such aboundaunce, nothing wanted, either to his aduenture or contentment. Euery chiefe pettie Captaine and common souldiers, hauing before any interprize taken in hand, their seueral paies, and ships fraighted with al maner of furniture, as well victuals, as warlicke weapons. In the middest of this great prouision, certaine secreat letters conuayed out of Hetruria from Spido the flatterer, Rastophels chiefe counsellour: the effect thereof as followeth. Although ability hitherto serued not, in defence of your estimation,   [ Spidoes letters of treason. ] or yet oportunitie could make declaration of vnfained good wil & duty (noble Duches Egeria ) so my true loue & assured seruice for worldly gaines neuer shal be vnstayed, especially this enterprize of Lord Pantiper pretended, percing our domestical eares, iustly approoueth, so that forraine friendship may regard good liking, & proffered seruice aspire safe conduct in ye midst of your counsels, setting my self as a ladder, by which he expeditely may clime his rightful inheritance, wil both content & place my self to his aduacement, satisfie ye iust tribute of my life in ye same, as for cruel & pitiful death shal assurable discourse my purpose, so no prefermet on ye cotrary shal more greatly vantage, as in defacing, euerting & dispoyling this false vsurper Rastophel ye bastard. My own conscience checketh, torment of mind euery hower of the day calleth on me, vntil occasion may offer fauorable grace in the sight of fortunable successe, in wearying, tracing, & destroying this greedy deuouring wolf, brought vp among ye poore sheep of Hetruria . Expect therfore certainly what instructions in his secreat affayres may be giuen, wil imploy my self agreable to your seruice, crauing no greater benefits in remuneration therof, then my own contentatio in this world to serue you. After Egeria, Pantiper & their counsel diligently perused these spiced speeches, smelling a painted parasite, dissembled their thoughts: experienced, ye sugred words euery warm sun wold easly melt: purposed to vse him with out trusting: countenancing him without fantasing, preuenting his power, vnabled: by wisdoms forecast, to indomage their intent. Furthermore in explemet of these warlick busines, appeasing the mighty raging garrison of maling spirits, attending ye borders of Hetruria wanted prouision of skilful Nicromancers. But preparation made out fro many other cuntries of the best & expertest charmers, magike masters & coniurers, at Egeriaes only cost & charges, a hudred smal ships foorthwith furnished for their dispersion. Besides al which, nature adorning, Pantiper with a golden thumb, ye inspiration wherof cosisted ye vertue of deuine grace, in derogation & expulsion of vnclean spirits, rasing & filing the said golden thumb finely from the flesh, by the seperation of a ioynt. To the most artificial coniurer, consecrated the vse & power therof: premeditatio aduising ye surest stay to lean vpon, was reputed both expedient, as also a safe shelter to the fighting souldiers & the coniurers ships to take ye fore front, interchasing al aduerse preposturations, hoised vp sail, a gale of mery wind safly deluered the, into the coastes of Hetruria . These coniurers vnbarked & set on shoare by insigned power of ye golden thumb, cited ye whol monarchy of these abiured spirits to their apearance, with such eger violent might, hurling on heaps, the elemental influences extracted out of due frame. The roring seas by intollerable strength, yelling & foming forth their mourning cries, the nauigation subuerted & drownd. The ship with the golden thumb onely safe protected. Pantiper with inuincible courage presently aduaced himself vpo the Hetrurian coastes. Rastophel amazed at the shew & sight thereof, with timerous troubled mind considered his precipitatio at had, especially his monarchal power before conquered, now bereaft fro al ioyful hope: yet hauing assembled a thin army of hunger starued Hetruria souldiers, nothing auailable for his defence, yet respected defiance against his enemies, comitted the said army to Spido the onely strength & chief gouernor of the Hetrurian dominions, who returned himselfe, his captaines & souldiers to Pantipers seruice, exacting forthwith an oth of homage & fealty vpon them. This don Rastophel as a naked man, apprehended within ye holy castle, in a deep den secretly conuaied him self. Pantiper without any further disturbace, quietly entred the kingdom, first giueth in straight charge & commandement the golden thumb to be caried abroad, sactifying, seasoning, hallowing and making wholsome as well the brazen Tower, as the coastes of the Hetrurian dominions from al maling spirites by the power therof. Pantipers commaundement in this case fulfilled, procured Rastophels mouth to be stuffed and closed vp with the corny Salt of Arabia , hanged him a liue in chaines of yron, by Pasifer and Eldorna , vpon the top of the brasen Tower. Pantiper tooke possession of his dominion, placed the banished Hetrurians , to very honourable dignities, aduaunced the Barbarian souldiers. But Spido playeth his pageant. Notwithstanding Rastophels wide exclamations againste him, for false coloured treasons at the hower of his death handleth Pantipers inclinations, feadeth his vaine, feriteth his fauour; is magnified chiefe of the realm, next Pantipers owne person, perswadeth Pantiper to guide his subiects by wholsom ordinaunces, and reclaime the borders and confins of his regiment, by marshal prows, Pantiper ratifying Spido the most sapiet subiect he had, reioycing not so much at the doubtfull recouery of his patrimony, by late victory: as in that hauing matched with so discreet a friend. Altogeather forgetting Spidoes traiterous ingratitude towardes his first patron & founder Rastophel , could at his own wil exchange glistering gold to drossy refuse, sprong vp of no precious or royal nature, but of Pesantly blood & currish kind, euermore digging into the vnsauery dungels like the vnderminning dran. Oh, gentle blood will neuer pamper his ful saciate pray, & foorth with reuert to ye puddle of carels wil and canckred disposion, naturally neglecting worthy estate and calling: for which cause mighty monarches of the world, handling deeds of armes, and trauel of common wealths, yoked the selues, not with lothsom louts, but franck minded captaines, not crauens kind, but venturous knights: not flatterers, but true friendes, not dissembling vpstarts, but auncient dissents, such whose family and lineal, petegrew, many hundred years before flourished. If Pantiper had set before his eyes these approoued policies, neither the spirits of youth, could haue seduced him, nor the fresh shewes of falshood dazeled his eyes. And except Spido had inuested a silly sheepes fleese on his backe, his Woluish condicions had not long bene vndiscouered. Pantiper conceating him selfe, the dominions of Hetruria , without further chalenge fast tied to his enterprise, so beleeuing Spidoes dexterity with shadowed hope, ouerthrewe himselfe. In this interbreathing time, Hetruria became well impeopled, the Realme multiplied in golde and siluer, all good thinges, through Egeriaes natural prouision abounded, noble families, with price of honourable possessions adorned. Lordes, Knightes, Esquiers, gentlemen were in semblable degree endowed, the yeomanry, husbandry, and artificers well placed for traffique from forreigne regions, great vent, tillage, and breede of cattel increased, learning, and liberall artes mainteined, marshall prowesse exercised. All thinges in most decent course rightly placed, if trustlesse Spido , on whose shoulders the greatest foundation of the common wealth depended: were cut off, being a loathsome relishe in the mouthes of all true subiectes: yet neither priuate nor publike subiects, except in danger of death, might forewarne him in continual drinking this deadly poison, would surfet Pantiper and his dominions to confusion. Moreouer these affaires not so priuately handled at home, without, without special knowledge and vnderstanding to Duke Lampanus abroade, who with sharp determination desired his returne home againe: aswell because Hetruria would naturally comfort his old age, as especially reaching after the preferment of Lorde Nearich Duke Bendals sonne, ioining in nuptial estate to faire Selewsa with golden foote. Although accounted the reuewing of his right, a difficulte danger, yet Duke Bendal , by wisedomes discretion deliberatly considered, what best might be aduentured in this busines. first by famous promulgation published throughout the land of Hetruria . That Lampanus by such good and conuenient order (as best might minister successe to his enterprise) was to reclaim the inheritable right of his dominions, now withdrawn by disceitful intrusion & vniust vsurpation of his owne sonne Pantiper , both to be displeasant, if pliant wil, fauourably, might entertain reasonable requestes, vaine sound of renowned glory may in proceeding by tiranicall conquest against them aduance his courage, if presumptuous prouocations produceth not subiectes mindes, headlong to fall in popular mischiefe. Lampanus intention herein bruted thoroughout al Hetruria to ye same effect. But Pantiper harnised with security, carelesse of these thunderbolts: recounted his stool vnremouable: Scorned, & mocked his fathers challenge, as dotish deuises exasperate subiects, to treacherous disobedience: and surely the vanity of subiectes is to be noted in this one point, in many common wealths. Desirous of changes, vncontent with their calling, or aspiring after the commodities of anothers. The poore disdaining the condition of the rich, the wealthy oppressing the estate of the needy, murmuration against the felicity of magistrates, contening straitnes of laws, throwing open the gap of liberty, the same manner folowed the Hetrurians , the world runneth at randons among them, euery man distracted with priuate opinions, outraging with pestilent presumptions turmoiling their wits in disloyal practises, some fauouring domestical solitarines, some bathing them selues in the bloud of ciuill sedition, some estraunging them selues in nouelties, hoist downe in a moment the surest step of their highest degree, some others a thousande times in one day, least to their own disposition, without guide, tosse the rolling wheele of fickle fortune. The felicity of Hetruria quite abandoned from mutuall loue, selfe will declined, their inward cogitations from the right rule of reason, if loial truth had rested in the Hetrurians hearts. Pantipers estate had ben vnshaken, no gate for Lampanus entrance could haue bene opened, good cause approuing the same: for that like a carelesse crauen, aforetime neglected the good and wholesome gouernment, leauing the dominion to the mouthes of rauening wolues, Pasifer, Eldorna , & Rastophel : his right esteemed of lesse value, his person worthy dishonor: besides, all which reiecting princely estimation to so poore a plight, tossed with stormes of aduerse infelicity, moste vnseemely for a Duke, bearing a base minde, caste his eies aside from the high misticall might of a renowned potentate, to the vile lothsome life of a miserable begger of long continuance, beholding base & inferiour causes. Duke Bendal whose experience, aswell for publique causes of the comon wealth, as graue prudence in warlike furniture not lacked, spent a whole age in glorious renoume thereof, new moulded, and artificially polissed, Lampanus in al enterprises to become more established. In open businesse circumspect, in secrete insight close, watchful and deliberatiue. Discretion set at liberty, vsed to his friendes plaine and succinct speech to his enemies, a solempne sowre countenaunce, vnable to approche his secrete thoughtes by a thousand driftes: as out of a hollowe deapth, vsing the occasion of speeche a farre of. And as one before, lead out of the sincke of slauery, fearing to fal againe in like daunger charily marketh his foote steptes: limiteth euery action: Lampanus mouth before gauled euer after feareth the hooke. With the serpentes teeth in times past wounded: once cured, casteth his eyes heedefully alwais vpon the scarre: As a silly birde, inforced through raging stormes to vndershrowde the greene branches, amased, vnable to dishelter her selfe. Surely, surely, Lampanus lessoned that misery was the end of lechery: that flattery couereth friendly falsehoode: negligent affiance vndermineth princely pallaces: All the sweete flowing floudes of nature, with free accesse, recoursed the top of wisedomes inclination. And the rather Duke Bendal the cheareful starre rightly guiding the wandring ship, consulted the best opportunity for recouery of the Hetrurians dominion, of themselues able to finish something, but without the king of gypts might, power, & furniture to perfect, and accomplish nothing: so that with daily competition, viewed the king of gypts person for ayde of souldiers in this their pretence: who as wel waying Duke Lampanus long afflictions, as suppressing of domestical treasons, an insolent example of false subiectes to all vniuersal princes appertaining. Yeelded the second part of all able men in seruice of this exploit, so also no treasurs for souldiers pay, no warlike weapons, or armour, no shippes, no fraight wanted. Six thousand charrets, eight thousand camels, forty thousad valiant fighting souldiers, besides diuers princes and noble Captaines, fauouring this busines. The gyptian king, by Duke Bendals inducement on their behalfe, supplied in all thinges their necessity. This busie busling in gypt , pearced Spidoes itching eares in Hetruria , abashed, mistrusting his estate wold be stirred, double dealinges, and two faces espied, bethought rather with safety to caste anker, then dashed and ouerturned sodenly in peeces, vpon some craggy rocke: paused with aduisement whether treacheries towardes Pantiper , might better protect and defend him by relinquishing the Hetrurian soile: then aduenture his pristinate estate, in losse both of life, landes, honors, and discontinuance. Al his guylefull conueiances before time, hereby bewrayed. Spido casting in his head, during Lampanus life, Pantiper disobediently detayned the dominion. As one right expert, and subtill perceaued, the young vnguided discretion of Pantiper : the old beaten proofe of Lampanus (although brasening his face in the fauour of Pantiper ) yet his inwarde imagination lingered in the gyptian attempts: what conueniently was herein to be commenced, laboured the vttermost of his wittes: Pantiper smitten with flattery, trusted, and well liked Spido in al informations, committed to him aboue all earthly creatures the honour of his dominion, neglected all perilles imminent insuing. And otherwayes Pantiper might haue backed & quight deliuered himselfe fro all daunger, assertayned his rule, and aucthority, with more surer counsellours: not allured nor mislead by disfigured countenance of a dissembler. Surely the young yeares of Pantiper ouermuche occupied in pestilent pleasures, his wittes rauished, and manners dispoiled thorough the naughtinesse of this stinging venemous snake Spido , with foule and greedy appetite weltring in treacherous oppression rent in peeces the seames, and skirtes of Hetruria : writeth priuy letters to Duke Lampanus in gypt , as followeth. Nothing may intice (most soueraigne and puisant Duke) or depriue my natural loyalty assigned to your good liking, neither in perfourming your commaundement, omitte any seruice imputable to the duety of a subiect, or expedient in the maiesty of a Prince, beeing in my cradle, when you first left your heritable right of these our dominions, so altogether vnacquainted with your stature, visage and conditions: but your princely disposition, by common report considered without further respite, do prefixe all my secrete counsailes and constant faith in perpetual loue towardes you, for proofe of my attention in my priuate regarde, and due desert of your person. Doe assemble all the powers of nature: what ordinance may chiefest preuaile in consolidation of all your inflicted wounds, yea in searching the deepest freates inwardly festering, will apply some vertuous odure for your outward recouery, I find nothing more healthful & sound, then returning to your Hetrurian possessions againe: I loue Pantiper , if he reuerence Lampanus . I wish his good successe, if he do homage in the office of a Sonne to his Father, in these disfauoured deformities suspected culpable of the extraction of due destruction from the Gods, is to wreake iust vengeaunce vppon him: as it sufficeth mee thorough my best aduisement to drawe you: so beeing a publique prince, auaileth by your expert counsaile to finish the same iniurious to your self, should be appointed to wilfull banishment, and priuate solitarines: I will first measure what is profitable for Pantiper , councelling him to submission, shewing what execrable vengeaunce is portended to them which drawe the sworde of tyrannye againste their owne Father, admonishing him to conuersion, least wilfull conceite swiftly blowe vp pestilent perdition vpon him, if my instructions in these reasonable requestes scorned and disdained, he shall be left as one subuersed to his owne desire, and appetite: I may not both defend and warne him, am without malicious misdeeming of the world, therevpon to fauour and reuerence your worthy protection. Fare you well. These letters transported as sweete flowres & pleasant fruites with promised requitall, refreshed Lampanus smelling, chaunged all dispaire to perfect assurance of conuaying him selfe already in repossession the Hetrurian dominion, especially for that Spido on whose backe the common wealth hanged, so frankely profered himselfe, this newe aliaunce arrested all Pantipers determinations, now marked the straunge sytuation of the cause, & mutability of the man, but Lampanus fed this fire with continual flame, indeuouring to minister opportunity to his owne purpose, to recouer his dignities purchased best opportunity, vailed Spidoes spitefull trechery, vnder the bush of sugred wordes leuied his measure to increase and nourish his humours, and serue his exspectation, least his affections should alter, or by sinister interchange surprised, did moderate and dispence his priuie traiterous onset, with letters as followeth. I neuer dispaired the Gods so discontented in overturning my careful reconciliation to my countrie, hitherto leaning vppon my shoulders, prouidently haue strengthened & gouerned al my attepts, so alwayes haue I excogitated what chiefest in my waightiest affaires was to be cared for, aswell their due veneration, as my owne vertuous guidance, if in times past wandring as a banished man in many forreine soiles, thorough diuerse prouinces, without appointed place, of any certaine aboade: yet at this present, sustained suported, & furnished in al things appertaining to the conducting of a noble prince from his banishment: hoping the full perfection of my felicity: through your wisedome in my behalfe is considered of your free offer I do accept, and loyall enterprise wil not in any respect put backe, closing your amity, and blasing your chiualry in the highest degree among the beste of my friendes. Untill my soule be deuorced from my body, will neuer throwe downe so excellent a subiect, putting off all feminine affection heretofore vsed, laying aside those vaine delightes, haunting princes houses: now hereafter new harnishing my selfe in this worthy exploit with manly stomache, and stoute courage to worke wonderfull effectes, will accomplish my vttermost. Haue not I iust cause to render immortal glory before the mighty Gods, that in the middest of my misery, mishap and mortal wo haue assigned so worthy & prudent a friend, as noble Spido to assemble his counsels, in the face of the giptian princes, yea & that the safegard of our personal maiesties finish the course of these attemptes and hazardes taken in hand: euery day heretofore haue washed my face with teares for the tragical ruine of my countrie, although in such perplexity vnable to performe that good which I intended in my hearte towardes the same. Oh the light Sunne beames of my honour, first pearced, rent in peeces, & darkened by falshoode and disdainefull dispite of Eldorna that filthy harlot, then misled with collusion and cunning craft, by attributing ouermuche fidelity to Pasifer , dismayed al my Spirits, brused the whol region of my senses, the dominion and poore subiectes, indaungered, crushed, and broken with sorrowes, sharply plunged in careful calamities: now my owne sonne Pantiper entring at the posterne doore, contrary to the dutiful obedience of a sonne, vsurpeth my crowne and dignitie, holdeth vp the swoorde of Marshal defence against me: The Gods haue in safe custody preserued both my life and honour, in their infallible insight, haue ordayned you (most valiant Spido ) to suborne and finish my heauy depression, aduaunce to remedy, and correct, a traiterous trespasse of a malignaunt accursed Sonne. This I ende, assuring my pitiful fal, shal amount and scale the top of my desire, treade downe, disgrace, and quench, the schorching flames of noysome enemies, assembled in publike mischiefe, the rather by your proffered aduenture, to the same, dayly exspecting your worthy person with speedy expedition to our presence, wishing you as my selfe: I bid you far, worthely to regard your continual felicitie. Lampanus regarded the merit of such Personages in them selues, prodigal and clyming, prone and ready, to trafficke Princely dignities, for vile rewarde and slimy dung, from disloyaltie. Was absolued and from vniuersal expiation acquited, setled his iudgement in the gayne of such a flatterer: intertayned and placed him in the rancke of false friends, vsing him as the shadow and image of a deade man, without trusting the valour of waighty affayres in his hands. Now in the meane season Pantiper vnderstood Spidoes pestiferous treasons, who throwing into forgetfulnesse vertuous and grateful obedience, the first ornaments, and glittering qualities of honest subiection. Pantiper presently prouided a pouder, to cure this maladie, fearing daungerous losse of honor with careful consideration, beganne to aduise him selfe contriued an extraordinary seruice of souldiours to be sent foorth, for Spidoes apprehension. Which newes by Spido firste vnderstoode, without breath or pawsing, hastely amounted Duke Bendals Court in Egypt , where in disclosing the Hetrurian attemptes, was recompenced and rewarded with sumptuous intertainement. Pantiper now feeling the foundation of his Dominion shake, by absence of his best staye Spido , who before time appeared firme and inuiolable, now villanous and disceitfull. Confessed his false coloures and disceitfull inchauntment, blearing his eyes: whose infidelity now felt and searched to the bottome, coulde not be lightened to the same: by warning of any good friend. A worlde it is, to beholde his estate and reputation discountenaunced, of all good hope depryued, without solace, leaft to vncertainetie, languishing in sighes and sorrowes, resting in miseries, wrapt in diuers deuises, at length reuiued his dead sences, beganne to nessel him selfe vnder his Mother Egeriaes whinge, wryteth to her of this sodaine darkenesse, happened within the Hetrurian Dominion, by the fugitiue starting a side of Spido his chiefe Counsellour: not onely hauing stayned the true office of a subiect, but imbelished the safegard of his regiment, disclosed the priuitties of his counsel. of Spido, as followeth. I recon nothing more hurtful in this life beyonde measure, then the centre of a modest pucels cogitations, with flattering protestation to bee ouerthrowne: neither can mortal men be discharged from the prison of blind opinion, once vanquished with the freshe affection and beautifull alurement of a flatterer, matching him selfe with such miserie, at no time or season can be Lorde and master of his owne secreates. I haue seene and knowne, and now at length found the force of a flatterer, constrayneth great impossibilities to pernicious alterations and sodaine exchaunges, vnlooked for, the sigh with demure countenauunce, but couert naughtinesse is horded secreatly in their heartes: their treasons flie swiftly, spreade sedicion at large, and quickly is taken hold of: the false colours of Spido hath bleard mine eyes, hath sucked the Hetrurian hony, and now spitteth out the Egyptian poyson: hath drawne out a venoumed swoorde to hacke a sunder my rule and gouernment, was wont to visit me with his counsails, now baneth me with deadly destruction. Oh (my dear mother Egeria ) as you did conduct me hither by safe ship vpon the calme Seas, the weather beeing both fayre and bright, so leaue me not now in a weake Fishers bote, wauering and tottering, hither and thither with boysterous windes of Egypt , to be ouerturned. I am as one roulled and wrapped by sundry extremities; sold into the hands of enemyes: either to yeeld with repulse and shame, or els as one vnskilful of warlike feats, haue the gristle of my young vnexperienced age flat bruised and broken in peeces. Wherefore sweete mother, ayde me with your strong hand, that these dangers procured for me may be escaped: plucke me out of their handes, that for my iniquitie towardes you, with iust correction I be not stroken. Oh deare mother, rule me with your reason, with your honourable consideration counsel me. These daungers ouer passed, I wil hereafter learne to aduise al my actions with such discretion, as neuer after to be incombred with the treasons of a flatterer, whose villanies I wil disdaine, as the stincking corrupt filthy scabs of a harlot: Deare mother, speedely aunswere my distressed desire. The veneration of the Gods blesse and sanctifie you, with honourable and long life. Fare you wel. Duches Egeria beholding Pantipers letters, the bitternesse whereof mooued her to tendernesse and teares. But she perfectly instructed in wisdomes precepts, that to striue against her husband, although he were a wicked man, not ignoraunt how difficult a thing it is, to pluck out the thorne which he first thrust in. Yet nature inforcing Egeria to poure out some sage sentences before Pantper , against the vnaccustomed assaults, & rigorous rages of Fortune: partly already perswaded, he was an immolation of reuenge to the bloudy handes of fearefull Mars : But the mistery of her minde reserued therein, to the benefit or euil hope of successe. It is well remembred (my honourable sonne) that flatterers toyling and vnderminding many dominions, especially Hetruria : are timber worms which lurk in the secreat cels of princes consciences, counterfait the complexions of all Creatures, nourishing their empty euacutions with Noble bloud, garbaging their venemous vaines with priuities of honourable houses: why did you not behold and turne ouer the olde Chronicles of Hetruria : the fal of Princes: the vnruly rable of flattering startups, which once furnished with pryde of prosperity and wealth, insolently lay blockes in open passage of noble estimation, ordayned and stirred vp as instruments of impietie to wreake the iustice of the mighty Gods. If kingly felicitie enuied not that which aduersitie iustly fealeth and grieuously groneth in: The happinesse of the one, preuenteth the miseries of the other. The Lacedemonian kings, although preserued in wals of yron, in towers and Castles of brasse (yet false flatterers paynting their faces with filthy colours of traiterous insinuation) couetously hunting after promotions, practize to venoume the secreat closets of Kings chambers, alter and subuert princely glory to miserable infamy. Necessary is it therefore, Princes respecting their owne counsels, muse and deing their own priuities, cast their eyes vppon the conditions of al men, yet scarcely trust, aduenture, and admit any priuate person to publicke causes, except the Prince and vniuersal counsail, ioyntly consult within the bowels thereof. The Gretian princes continually were coacted in Charets and close Litters of Gold, garded with great armies and hostes of puisaunt souldiers, yet thorow permission of false flatterers, to dayly assemblies deuerted to sodaine confusion. The condition of Romaine Emperours, their exploites, honourable deedes of armes, surprizing and ouerreaching by fame and glory, their vniuersal age in which they liued, yet in middest of their Councels, Senates, conuocations, and tribunall Pleas, dispoyled of their liues, yea the worthinesse which many yeares before was thorow noblenesse atchieued, in one Breuiarye brought to nothing. I say (my deare and honourable sonne) take veiew of our Hetrurian gouernement, in semblable maner what chaunceth, especially in the aduauncement of flatterers. But (Oh my sonne Pantiper ) regard the fore fathers of Barbarian Princes, retayned in counsel to the seruice of publike causes in the common wealth, sonnes of most auncient families, borne to honourable reuenewes of natural gyftes, wise, vertuous and ciuil guidaunce. If of base byrth any were into princes fauoure preheminenced, firste tryed before they were trusted, deserued, then honoured, wel approued, then credited. The Princes of Siracusa , feared flatterers from their Courts by penal punishment, they were accounted the houshold of Hell, accepted the messengers of some maling spirite, the trifles of infidelity, the rotten stayes of maiestical gouernment, where any such harboured, disdaine followed them, not onely of forraine Princes, but euen of priuate subiectes. My honourable sonne: I saye, if either learning, wisedome, fore cast, or experience had in any or euery poynt warned you, neither had you persued your owne will, nor left to the race of your retyre. If absolute power and regarde had beene bended to your priuate affections, sweet flattery had not caught you, nor subtle collusion disceaued you, or matching your selfe with inseperable, playne, simple, and vertuous antiquitie, no such violence had ouer taken you. Lampanus my husband your father, equall to vs both, may not be vndermined of me, nor yet resisted of you. I may wel counsel, but not defend you: since my aduentures be perpetual, and pleasures of Hetruria short. I can not minister any helpe or comfortes to your sorrowful afflictions, especially againste my owne husband your Father. As I doe admonishe you to submission, humblenesse and reuerence to his person: so I charge you repell the bitter onsets of stubberne will. For although he hath heaped manyfolde miseries vppon my backe, yet with all honour to his person doe I discharge my selfe. Fare you honourable and deare sonne in singuler vertue. Your sorrowfull mother Egeria. daunte the cause of her husbande Lampanus. Dewches Egeria , although to resiste Lampanus iniurious attemptes, (hauing great occassion) yet wisedome, obedience, and humilitie, gaue to vnderstande what glory and magnificence fortune reserued to her pacience, although motherly nature contentiously warred in the aduauncement and defence of Pantiper her Sonne: yea discretion mitigated the meanes which might either preiudize or scandelize the honour of Lampanus her husband. Whereas Egeria layde downe and rested her defence indifferently betweene them both: so Lorde Apasus her brother, Pantipers Uncle, matching in mariage with the Cypers Queene. This honourable preferment hapned and attayned by his Sister Egeriaes credite, vnderstanding his Nephew Pantipers distressed calamities, as wel by Lampanus violente inuasion prepared, as Spidoes false treacheries in denouncing his subiection, raysed a great armie of souldiers, to the number of thirty thousand able warriours, as infinite treasures and other furnitures bestowed to that businesse: the which Cyprian souldiers hastely conuayed to Pantipers seruice in Hetruria . On the other side Lorde Trauenna , notwithstanding his extreame proscription, yet graced with Fortunes felicitye, thorowe discreete forecaste and manly behauiour, grewe in fantasie and wel liking of the Getian Queene, who amiably respecting honourable nobilitie from which he discended, and Ciuil condicions, rightly framed in his natural lineamentes: receiued him into her maiestical fauour, chaunged his wandring solitarie life, into fashionable regard and estimation, betrothed her loue, seigniorie, rule, and gouernement during her life to Lorde Trauenna . After the death of Bariana queene of Getes , Lord Trauenna whose comely & courtly behaviour with incomparable courtesy exceeding: by the vniuersal voyce of the Getians , elected King and Ruler in her stead: So worthely among these people reputed, deigned more worthy, then if naturally he had beene brought vp among them. Lord Trauenna not of compulsion, but curtesie requested two thousand, able men to be prest in his friende Pantipers behalfe into Hetruria , the which multitude leuied, and accepted into seruice, with money, victuals, harnesse, weapons, exemplified, with all other warrelike furnitures for supplying this enterprise taken in hand, the souldiers of the Getians by Pantipers entertainmet, mightely magnified, and preferred into Hetruria , Lord Apasus souldidiers from Cypres , and Lord Trauennaes souldiers fro Geta for strengthening, and supportation of Pantiper and his dominion, ioining, and cloasing together in Hetruria. Pantiper nowe waied in ballance either winning or loosing all his interest, no more in his own fantasie put affiance: or depended vpon the fauning breath of any one man. By assemble of al his wisest and worthiest Hetrurian subiectes, prouided a generall aduisement, what best was to be cared, and considered of in this waighty work, newly consulted of ye chief Hetrurians to consider their own tuicions & safe gard, by no better meanes coulde be mainteined, then their true & iust obedience to Pantiper : for if seperation happeneth betweene the prince and subiect, especially at that instant an open passage for the forraine enemy to enter in, had bene leauied: first esteeming it a conuenient meete thing, that all cities castles, towers, fortes, counterforts, rampartes, bullifortes, countinmures, vammerpains, flanckes, and brayfortes, with their portes and principal hauens, furnished, and beset with their own domesticall souldiers, their forrein souldiers transmitted from Cypres and Geta , whose valiauncy and seruiceable fidelity in open field to be tried and approued: yet vnder the Hetrurian captaine to be conducted, for better safegard aswell in the estate of their own liues: as their more surer and expert seruice in this interprise: Pantiper to stirre vp the Hetrurian souldiers stomaks, speaketh in open face vpon a theatre this oration following. Although this our dominion (noble Hetrurians , and worthy subiects) hath for many yeeres ben heretofore thrown out a common spoile for sundry base flatterers, and impudent startups, to treade vnder: deepely digging and vndermining the royall estate and dignity to vs appertaining, so we by their collusions, and vnknowen disceites slaightly conuaied, are into infinite daungers infortunately conducted: the freshe memory of the Hetrurians miseries, thorough Eldornaes filthy life, Pasifers cruel extorsion, Rastophels false vsurpation easily from your eyes powreth out a fountaine of teares: these hurtes, and stumbling blockes, through my mother Egeraes tender care to her countrie, at length taken away, nowe my selfe as young, and without experience settled among you, am in hazarde to be bereaued, not onely of life, rule, and gouernement. But your felicity (my subiectes) peruerted, what may vnto your share befall, but rifled, ransacked, and dispoiled of all your possessions and wealth, your young men put to violent sword, your wiues rauished, your daughters deflowred, your common wealth subuerted, the dominion shaken, all thinges out of course. Reason were it, the Sonne to giue place to his Father, that preseruation with all might, to be assured to the Dukedome: but banishment in my infancy, difficultie attaining this place, suppression of flatterring, traiterous restitution of good lawes, forming in his right place euery thing, now disordered, misgouerned and hazarded againe: may not I then well repent that euer to comfort your distresse I aduentured my selfe, or releasing your miseries, matched with you: yea, that euer I sware gouernement to you, or that vowing fealty and alleagaunce to me: if you now reuert subiection, renounce your prince, denye his honour, desperately infringing our coniuncted amity. Surely if trueth be in your heartes, stirre vp your stomackes, manifest to the vttermoste your valeant mindes, stretche forth the power & might of men, if they seeking to win our ioyes, let them first put on deadly sorrowes, if wearing a crowne, let them first combat a victorye, and whereas for my owne security, I might haue returned to my mother Lady Egeria , inhabiting the Barbarian soile: if stedfastly you stande, will springle my heart bloud vppon the Hetrurian fieldes, before I wil cowardly start aside from my countrie men and people, loose one iote, or little porcion of my seigniorie: be not amased my subiectes, friendes and countrie men, either let vs liue to maintaine our estates together at libertie, or else with fame and renowne loose our liues. This much sufficeth I truste to giue testimonye of vnfaigned affection towards you. The Hetrurians muche reioysed, with gladsome heartes, offered them selues in Pantipers seruice a sacrifice, made choice to fight rather in defence of their Countrie, then dispoiled of their liues, or vnder Lampanus tyrannicall slauerie captiuated: whereas the Hetrurians in their seuerall opinions disioyned: so nowe with inseperable heartes faste knitte one towards another, purposed to bicker and trie by the teeth, the last euent of these vnkindly turbulent stormes, their stomacks more stouter, in yt they before time were pinched with Lampanus careles, crauenlike extraugatio, his slacke negligence in gouernement, lecherous life and many other abuses, with daily vociferation against him, the people whetted and sharpened their tongues: now at length Duke Bendall , and Lampanus of gyptian souldiers, lead forth a mighty army, intermingled with aide of forreine princes, confines and neighbours to Duke Bendall , vpon the borders of Hetruria landing, marched forwards to a conuenient place vpon the top of the mountaine Auindall , moste fitly for this exploit situated, the Hetrurian souldiers much disuauntaged thereby, pitching the bottome of the saide Hill. This Mountaine harbored manye sauage and cruel beastes, steepe, craggy, full of daungerous caues, and rockes, the difficult straitnesse hereof, impedimented the one from the other a long space, but through nimblenes of stoute watches, great slaughters in the meane while happened on both sides. Duke Bendal perceiuing their intent to preuaile nothing, as one desperate from good hope, brake up siege, winding the West part to a vsuall passage, which although at that instant intercluded, yet conquered by sodaine slaight to them selues: the pollicy of Duke Bendal was such, as a man prudent forecasting, hard, and waightie affaires, with easie aduise: Duke Bendal in the night season forced two thousand camels with hollowe rattles of yron to their neckes fastened, sounding out a doubtfull noyse, shutting vp all other passages, the barriet souldiers, without rescue troden to death, this rancke confusedly out of order running forwardes, passed foorth vpon the Hetrurian tents without returne: Duke Bendal ordeined a hoste of foure thousand souldiers to pursue this inroode with wilde fire and whot brimstone in their handes, the gyptians maine armie passed there by into the lowe valleies beneath, entered vpon the Hetrurian souldiers as naked men, dispoiled the whole multude of their liues, yet Pantiper absent from the general armie at the same time: bethought this extremity lately happened (except stopped) an infectious scurfe like to ouerspread the whole dominion, erected foure lanipels, ingens of mighty intollerable force, throwing out pibble stones of twenty or thirty pound waight, by such slaight and cruell batteries, as that the gyptian souldiers were compelled to retire. Duke Bendal , and Lampanus in this fresh deuise, amazed, doubtfull, in attaining their exploits what to be hazarded, pawsed vppon sundry circumuentions by secrete scoute, at length procured a number of great fierce fiers of pitch, tarre, flaxe, brimstone, rosell, to be extructed round about the said Lanipels, yet a farre distance from the daunger and slaight thereof, driue the Elephantes as a foresaid. Dispersed the watch, killed the souldiours, to their owne vse obtained the Lanipels. This enterprise successiuelye againe obtained in Lampanus behalfe, tooke good effect: Pantiper vewing euerye thing out of course, growing worse and worse, purposed to finish these fatigable warres with cruel dint of sworde, mustered a newe armye of forty thousande souldiours, to serue this publique ministration: extracted from the holds, and fortresses of Hetruria , in defiance of the same imbassaged hearaldes to Lampanus , and Duke Bendal : they much reioycing to vnderstand these newes, made speedy preparation to array their souldiers to the same, but Lampanus , and Duke Bendal interuewing the lewde disposition of Spido , caused him to be stript naked, his phisiognomy disguised, and skin painted in sundry straunge colours, a red crosse vpon his backe, his head besette with a cape of cockes feathers of Asia , his tongue thruste with wyer prickes on euery side, lockt within a brasse saddle vpon a mules backe, with a broken staffe in his hand, placed in the forefrunt of the battel, and a blewe streamer in the other hand, certaine verses written vpon the same cloth, as followeth. I am Spido that spitefull spie, my false desceites are knowen: Reuenge my carion corpes as my desertes deserue, Foule same retire backe, from thee I can not swarue. The Sunne, the Moone, the stately Stars, condemne my traiterous life, The Hetrurians shame by me is wrought, I stirde the gyptians strife. VVith al disdaine disguisde I am, my painted face beholde: And like a foole with feathers deckt, into your hands am solde, You Gods that dwell in golden skies, some better rest me send, Now my dissembling daies, with dint of sworde must end. When Pantiper as chiefe president of the Hetrurian army, valeantly lead foorth the hoste in manly courage: forthwith by meanes, a secrete voice giuen out of Spidoes entertainment, and sharpe handling among the gyptians . The Hetrurians cruell rankered heartes, in the ioyning of these armies, presently hacked Spido in peeces, leaft no one ioint vnhewen from an other. Although Pantiper , and twenty other noble Hetrurians in one like suite of harnesse furnished them selues: yet Lampanus , and Duke Bendal , fiercely approching the maine standard, entercountred Pantiper and the rest: couragiously behaued themselues, to fearefull and terrible death, pursued them: the gyptians , giuing such a whote fiery cannizado, with cruell extremity in bloudy slaughter, pearced the remnant of the Hetrurians behinde: after two houres fight, the victory to the gyptians belongeth. Lampanus , laying aside all fatherly good nature, caused his sonne Pantipers head from his shoulders to be strucken off, and pearched the same vpon a pale top. The battell ceassing, newes by publique promulgation spread through out Hetruria of Pantipers death, yeelded vp their cities, and principall holdes: the forreine souldiers inforced to shifte for them selues, escaped away in the night. Although Lampanus in vtter hatred of the people, yet once againe gloriously entered his kingdome, and became their gouernour: the Hetrurians seasoned their stomackes to digest the same, as temperature could best frame, and serue therevnto. After Lampanus had settled his rouling stone, Duke Bendal his leaue taken, departed into gypt backe againe. Lampanus repossessing his pristinate estate, laide sharp punishments, and hard lawes vppon the Hetrurians backes, the which brought cankered contempt, and indignation to his person, the people very unruly, with vnbrideled will intraced their former malice against his person: Lampanus for his vnnaturall outragies towardes the Hetrurians , bereft from the loue and subiection of the people, his miserable plight again indangered, daily destruction to be looked for: yet vpon better aduise, and that for his better security, resigned the estate of the seigniory, to faire Lady Selewsa , with golden foote his daughter, and Lord Nearich her husband, betooke himself to priuate pleasures and rest, Lord Nearich , and faire Selewsa , with renowned honour among the people gouerned, but for that Lord Nearich a stranger, and faire Selewsa although a Hetrurian borne, yet with the manners of the people vnacquainted, therefore: retayned one Pleasmanus to bee especially of their counsell: and as Hetruria thorough flattering disemblers had before beene long punished, so Lorde Pleasmanus handeled him selfe in cunning slayghtes, beyond them all. For whereas notable dissembling fayners, for aduauncement and vnlawful promotions, finely handled them selues: so Lord Pleasmanus delighted in the fauours and friendship of the common sort, courteous, ful of fauour and grace, winding more and more, secreatly into the mountaine of their priuities. Pleasmanus drew the multitude to such admirable delectation, moystened their mouthes with sweet sirops, priuily perswading the people, yt Lord Nearich a stranger, fayre Selewsa a banished Hetrurian , vnmeet, vnnatural Princes, shoulde appoint direct rules to naturall and louing people. Lorde Pleasmanus smiled vpon the common sort, wincked vpon al transgressions, fauoured traitours, theiues, harlots, al lewed, dissolute, vile, and abiect persons. Lord Pleasmanus handsomly conuayed his inward craftes, obtayned amity both of Prince and people, notwithstanding al which pestered cogitations, deeply festered in his stomach. Lord Pleasmanus vttered foorth before the people, saying. Oh if I were your gouernour, and the administration of iustice vnder my handes, what luste and liberty shoulde ouer shadow al your actions, without priuate controlment or publicke institution, promising freedome, estimation, wealth, security, lulling and drowning them, with out waking in a deadly daungerous sleepe. Lampanus before time wel hammered with the false practizes of flatterers, trembled in the memory of former miseries so sharpely tasted, lead Pleasmanus by fayre wordes into the top of a high Tower, whereas ouerlooking the same. Lampanus with other confederats to that effect appointed, cast him ouer, dashing his bones against the harde ground, and brake his necke. This Pleasmanus by subtilty conuayed him selfe into the fauoure of the common sort, wretchedly with shame and dishonour ended his life. Now Lampanus assuring the estate of his Dukedome from al tempestes vnshaken, gaue him selfe greatly to voluptuous desire, olde filthy lust incombring the high counsels of his vnderstanding, desired incestuous concupiscence with fayre Selewsa his daughter, who speaking to him after this maner. Deare father, remember the honor of your house, my aleagance and duty to my husbande Nearich , the violating of vertuous nuptial estate: al which shal bring a iudgment and scourge from the Gods, to punish our wicked deeds, & in this world euermore a disdaine and open contempt to be gazed at. Notwithstanding all which perswasions, Lampanus drowned in forgetfulnesse of former miseries, inforced vehemently the rauishment and deflouring of Ladye Selewsaes honourable chastitie, the which obtayned, as shamefully committed, was conuerted presently to a venemous filthy snake. Lampanus most odious to behold in the similitude of a snake, al which to fayre Selewsa greuous vexation, heart sorrow and teares. Selewsa altogeather remembring the duety of a daughter to her Father, framed of pure wrought Gold a fayre casket to preserue Lampanus in, during the continuaunce of these plagues happened, fead him with the milke of a she Unicorne. But on a time Lorde Nearich contemning the fulsome ougle aspect hereof, as also the stenching smelles molesting their magnificence sences: with his sharpe swoord readely drawne, mangled and killed Lampanus in the likenes of a snake, who after he was dead, his flesh growing very fulsom like the coloured purple Berry, with most vnsauery corruption did smel, cast thorow the Dukes palace the ineuitable smel thereof poysoned round about. Lord Nearich and Selewsa loath to reueale this heauy iudgement happened, secreately intombed and buried Lampanus carkas within the Garden of Hercules Image. The common people verely supposing Lampanus to his pristinate extrauagation, had be taken him selfe. But now Lorde Nearich hardly vppon his owne absolute authoritie, bearing swaye among the people, except mercilesse tyrannie, not able to rule the seigniory, for that the Hetrurians impenitrable natures, would not sustaine the burthens of a forraine Prince, as well dispersed sundry infamous slaunders, As pearsing honourable renowned credite, as traiterously also conspired the final destruction of his life. All which easely might be eschewed: had not Lord Nearich mislyked and disagreed with the sweete pleasaunt maryage estate of Selewsa his wife. After her vertues beganne, loathsome and vnsauery to his good liking, the Dominion coulde not long continue vnhazarded: For whereas Lorde Nearich a forraine Prince, lately in the pleasaunt temperate ayre of Egypt breathing, now in the hotte burning coales of Hetruria broyling: partly lead foorth with ambitious and Princely desire, as also his stomacke feruently blazed with straunge luste of the Hetrurian Ladies, disdained the comely beautie and honourable personage of Selewsa : Golde seemed drosse, pure Wine reputed stincking water: the sweete flowers before smelling, esteemed stincking weeds, his wholsome sences corrupted: nothing appearing in Selewsa vnto his eyes delightsome. So hatesome, that by many deuises and fetches practized, the meanes by which Lady Selewsa might be dispatched, at laste the rediest & directest order, was consulted of with one Phalagon a Phisitian, although well qualified and singulerlie experienced, excellently learned, and deepely seene in that Noble and reuerent science: yet couetous gayne and desire to estimation, as a lewed instrument to anye vile purpose puffed him vp. The vtility of the Hetrurian common wealth, in healing and curing the wonderfull diseases of the people, not so much preuailing by his skill, as his worthye gyftes to a vile and abiect purpose, misused, mislead in natures giftes with present disturbaunce of the people, his owne ouerthrow, and fatall finishing the sweet tender lyfe of Ladie Selewsa , interposed a potian to cast her into a deadly sleepe, the drench as followeth intermingled. Cinnaberis 12. Cariophilus albus 5. Sanguis Leporinae matricis. Aqua ex ranarum cruribus sublimato vapore collecta. Fel coruinum, cario balsami. Mamilla virginis dextra, ciconiae masculinae lactes, cauda hirundinis ad epilepsiam: per solem quinque septimarum spatio in vitrea cucurbita incalescant. This potian ministred by Phalagon the Phisitian, and by fayre Selewsa receiued, presently in a deadly vnwakefull sleepe was drowned, her sences mortified, assured them selues, no extraminent reuification coulde bee in her bodie. Phalagon , as well for his owne gaines, as by the alurement of Lorde Nearich in the promised promotions, which he gaped after: Cut of the Golden legge of Selewsa , from the fleshe, vnioynted the naturall essence, her sweet verdure loosing strength and operation, yeelded vp her delicate life, without hope of recouerie. The death of Ladie Selewsa vncertainely reported, surmising some one way, some an other, euery man lead and mislead by singuler report. But yet to salue this contagious soare, an honourable and liberall funerall, published thorow out the Hetrurian Dominion, was to insinuate the fauoures of the vulgar sorte of people, not onely to cloake their hidden murthers, as in that he might safely clyme the high staye of the Dukedome. without any impedimented stop or stay therevnto. After the honorable funeral of Lady Selewsa finished, her delicate sweete body, in the graueled earth intombed: the Hetrurian priestes aswel by speech dayly geuen out, as also in that she was intituled, by the voice of the comon sort, to be called Lady Selewsa with golden foote: the chiefe Prelats, and religious Cleargie of Hetruria , to the number of forty the officiall priests of Hercules image principall: in a night secretely attempted to digge the body of Lady Selewsa , onely for her golden foot, the which exploit put in practise: These priestes of Hetruria couetously inclined, wholy giuen and bent to this vaine and vile enterprise, in the middle houre of the night at Selewsaes tombe, meeting al together, delued, and vntombed Selewsaes sanctified body: perceiuing their intent frustrate, missing the gaine of that which they desired, departed, leauing the coarse naked and bare vpon the ground: for surely as the body of Selewsa priuely was intombed by Lord Nerich , and Phalagon at the first: so by whom, the vnioynting of her golden legge, by murther, fraude, and stealth happened as yet from the Hetrurians concealed. These newes of digging vp the dead coarse of Lady Selewsa transported to the hearing of Lord Nerich , who feared his inordinate murthering her dainty sweet life in publike question to the worlde, would appeare and be stirred. Phalagon , the phisitians counsel in these causes, searched, raked, diligently to the bottome fedomed, howe Lord Nearich might best regarde his owne person: defende his credite, possesse the Dukedome in the honour of the people, in cleanly conueying these fraudulent attempts by scruteny and inquisition found the conspiracy, and treason from the Hetrurian Prelacte, issued as fountains of execrable mischiefe to the same: some of them found out, taken and apprehended, confessed the remnaunt behind: this worthy diligent search by Phalagons aduise, in the fauour of present time, ripped to the bottome, the chiefest of these Hetrurian Prelates put to death. The sayd Prelates at the same instaunt, inwardly mourned their ill fauoured disguised maners, in the religion which they professed before the Gods: their liues blemished in factious inuocations, couetousnesse, extorcion, pride, lechery, and ambition. These Priestes (the rather put to bitter execution) for that the people of the common sort, cryed against their nefarious abhomination, were in the face of the worlde (as night Owles) for the smal Birdes in the open day light to wonder at. Lord Nearich to throw him selfe into the fauour of the people, ambiciously aduauncing his owne cause, as to appease the inconstant canonizing murmuration, in what so euer should happen, made a definitiue determination vtterly to displease the religious Priestes, in the fauor and amitie of the common and laye people: all which preuailed not to the furtherance of his cause, for nature alwayes loatheth and misliketh straunge and vnnatural gouernmentes: by Philagons meanes, to tame and chastise the maners of the sauage people, as otherwaies vnable: except by cruelty, tyranny, misgouernment, vsurpation, extorcion, taxes, heauy tributes, al other sinister meanes helped not, but rather more fiercer increased the maners of the people. The noble famous Duches Egeria , in the middest of these agonious skyrmishes, her forraine glory and renowne before finished, especially vpon that instant, and time imminent preferred Lord Tarratus daughter to the Barbarian king in mariage estate: who not long before had deliuered to Sepulcher, his deare Wife and Queene, her vertuous spirit to the mighty supernall Gods assaylant. This young Lady, which now he had matched with, at the motion and preferment of the worthy Egeria , was lord Tarratus high marshals daughter, whose father spent the best blood of his heart, and yeelded his life, with his family, in Duches Egeriaes cause and quarrel, in conscionable recompence whereof, magnified and aduaunced his onely child and Daughter beeing now aliue, vnder her tuition, educated, and in honorable maners instructed. Now lastly, Egeria in accomplishment of al Hetrurian tragical calamities as wel to her selfe, as her natural Hetrurian soyl, which inwardly in heart most tenderly she loued and long sighed after: returned with great admiration, praise, and renowne from her banishment, placed in a couch of pure Golde, a Diadem crowne vpon her head, (into Hetruria her owne Countrie) entring with recourse of the whole Hetrurians , what estate & condition so euer entertayning her, saying aloud. Oh happy is the houre, and blessed is the day, that our renowned Duches Egeria is returned from her banishment: the Gods sanctifie her, long to raign & rule ouer vs. Lord Nearich , & Phalagon the phisition, casting with themselues to resist, preuailed not, the minds of the people ioyntly knit, and inclined to Egeria : so that the same Lord Nearich and Phalagon the phisition, in Egeraes sight humbled them selues: notwithstanding she remembring the death of Pantiper , and murthering of Selewsa her children, as also what incouenience, and disturbance, by prolonging their liues might happen to the seigniorye: in straight execution commaunded her will effectually to be discharged, forthwith speedily, by the chiefe Magistrates, appointed reuisors to the same, were beheaded. The greate prosperitye and wealth
