 haue so much dared vpon presumption of your accustomed fauor, to infixe your honoured name in the forefronte of this my traueile: I can propoze no one in exaple vnto your L. more worthie then your selfe, who not vnacquainted with the speciall partes and aeternized memorie of them all, haue long since endeuoured your self to become a noble patterne of them all, the exemplifieng of whose praise, cannot by anie speeches of mine, be herein more greatlye put forwardes, then the same long since hath bene published by the renowme of your own proper vertues. My humble request vnto your L. is, that your gentle acceptance hereof may be an encouragement to my after endeuours, for whose sake I knowe the same shalbe of many regarded, and the insufficiency thereof the better protected. In which, besides the continuall manifestation of your owne worthinesse, your L. shall binde me to honor you in al duetie and humblenes, praying the eternall creator and guid of all your stately enterprises, to haue the same with your L. in his fauorable protection. Your L. most deuoted and loyally affected. Angel Daie. importuned by the earnest requestes of diuers my especiall friendes, (more presuming on that they conceiued to be in me than of the veritie it selfe, that thereunto might induce me.) I tooke vppon mee in satisfaction of their great importunitie, roughlie to laie out a platforme or Methode, for the inditing and framing of all maner of Epistles and Letters, insomuch as for the confirmation of the necessitie of the worke,  & the matter of their demaund, they had then shewed me manie likelihoods and reasons, howe much the same might profite, and how well of diuers sortes of people the trauaile might be accepted. The worke beeing then superficiallie begun, without additio either of any regard or industrie to the performance therof (my self hauing greater desire to learne of others, then to become a speciall eye-marke to be noted of all others) as times and seasons altered, so the fancie and conceit therof in me quicklie changed, and the continuance of other exercises for the present more auailable, made me to forget, what therein I had before time promised, whereby the deuise lay dead, and as matter of noe account was euer sithence turned in obliuion. Neuerthelesse about one moneth afore Michaelmas last, the vacation hauing been long, & little to doe, I ransacking diuers bundels of olde papers, among the rest found out this formost & forworne beginning, and the Printer as then being by, and perusing what it was, told me also his opinio of the matter, & that he deemed the trauaile thereof to be more then thanks-worthie, & therewithall assured me would approue verie necessarie, whereupon his desire & perswasion was (as one greatlie affecting the benefite of his coutrie) that I would proceed on so good a ground, and so roundlie went the progression of our arguments forwarde, that it was at length concluded & I faithfullie promised, to finish some part thereof to bee published in this instant terme. But considering afterwards of the labour, and well perusing what before time I hadde therein done, the order therof so far misliked me, as that I altogether resolued to alter the forme thereby cotinued, & by such resolution enforced my self to begin anew, by occasion of which, the latter grew greater then before, and I was compelled by my faithfull worde and promise now to finish vp that in hast, which before I coulde not frame my selfe to compasse, vpon long continued leysure. Manie no doubt shal you find the imperfections herein, which aswel my self by ouer-great hast (not hauing so well as I might and would, if leisure had serued me) perfectly perused the same haue happily omitted by lack of foresight, in setting the Printer a work, wherby I was (I protest) forced as fast as I could to scrible out the coppy, and to deliuer it to presse, least therby he should be compelled to stay and hinder his worke: as also by like default of ouer speedie dispatch in the Printer, therby misplacing diuers figures quoted in the magent, where they are either mistaken, or sometimes not vsed in those places at all. In occurrence whereof I desire the learned Reader, as he shall find to correct, and the other vsers therof to beare withal, promising that in the next setting foorth, the same with better regard shall bee considered, and God sparing life with more perfection deliuered, the residue of the faults being not manie are in the page after this placed down and corrected. And nowe touching the order of this booke folowing, I must aduertise him that is desirous to take profite thereby, that he first do circumspectlie consider with himself, the seuerall rules in the particuler chapters, preceeding the orders of these Epistles , in such sort as afterwardes they are distinguished, and therin see, what to the better ordering and principall direction, of whatsoeuer he shall take in hand to write, is therfore for his better instruction enioined. Next also by diligent animaduersion therof, hee shall the better vnderstande the seuerall natures and properties, that in the partes of euerie Epistle , are ordinarily to bee required, besides the vse of them in their seuerall places, and what force they bear, being so sorted out, according to their speciall purposes and directions. Next for the better inducement & leading the learner into a plaine & perfect platforme of this Methode following, and to the intent hee may as neere as may be, or as his capacitie at leastwise may any wayes reach vnto, know skilfullie  & not by rote, how or in what sort he shal happen to do either well or ill, I haue first (in a preamble or intermixed discourse, either proceeding or interchangeably passing, before or with the kindes of the sudry exaples of euery Epistle ) declared the properties  & vse of those with what vehemencie or lesse application they are to be inferred or quallified, so that hee who seemeth to haue lesse knowledge at al (be it that he haue perseuerace to coceiue or to distinguish the parts he seeth there laid out before his eies) may with great facilitie, and without anie shewe of difficulcie at all, attaine to whatsoeuer, herein prescribed, or by the circumstance therof intended to be in any sort deliuered. To the greater ornament whereof, I haue applyed such Figvres, Schemes , and Tropes in the margent of euerie Epistle , euen with the places where they are vsed. And at the finishing vp of this worke, haue determined in the ende therof (which in the next terme shal as a second part hereunto by gods grace be published) to set them altogether, and there to explane to the Learners view and for his readier vse, their particular natures and qualities, that they who (being vnlearned, and hauing a pretie conceit of inuention of them selues) haue heeretofore vnknowing done well, may see howe with skill and discretion hereafter to pursue the same, and the ignorant also hereof, whose reach hath not byn so ample as others, may be thereby informed what vnto well doing is most consonant  & agreeing. Now for the readier finding of those Epistles as each of their kindes are suted forth in sundrie Examples : Peruse but the head of euerie page, and vnder the title of the booke, you shall finde what in the same Page is cotained, viz. Wher the Epistles be, you shal haue them noted in their kindes, as Epistles Hortatorie, Dehortatorie, Svvasorie or fall out to bee handeled. This booke shewing these partes before remembred, I haue termed by the name of ignorant what great perfection is to bee required in suche a one, by whose title the same is christened, neither supposing the matter heerein contained to appeare so sufficient, as perfectly therby to enable what in the same function is to be required, but because the orderlie writing of Letters, being a principal part belonging to a capacitie, whereout the scholler or anie other that is vnfurnished of the knowledge thereof, may gather ayde and furtheraunce, the better by suche means thereafter (if his industry serve therunto) to become a Secretorie. And for somuch as this, beeing but the first part thereof, is also the first worke in shew that euer I deliuered, I determined as vntimelie fruite by occasion of the hastie gatheryng of the same, to put it foorth in common tast, the rather to be satisfied what liking it carrieth. The relesse wherof beyng of the discrete and skilful sort allowed, to furnish a place in any one corner of their banquet: The other part heereafter shall I trust with better liking return, in the after publishing, & to the followers thereof, ryght pleasing and profitable. Heerein (ouer and besides the Chapters giuyng instruction as aforesaide to the seuerall partes particularly handeled, that is to say, Demonstrative & Letters , and at the end of the same, the descriptios of the Figures, schemes and  TROPES , as before I haue noted, and lastlie thereunto annexed a Discours of the partes and office of a SECRETORIE, all which Godwilling I meane by all conuenient leysure to performe. Presenting in the meane time what herein set downe to the generall and friendlie regard of all men, beseeching that in courtesie they repute of my trauels, as formost of all other things I therein respected a publike benefite. In affoording whereof, they shall doe no more then belongeth to Gentilitie, & encourage me by whatsoeuer other meanes, to gratifie their courtesie. Fare ye well this fift of Nouember. 1586. Of an Epistle, the commoditie and vse thereof. Touchinge an Epistle,  which vsually we terme a letter, no other definition needeth therof, then that which vse and common experience hath induced vnto vs. A Letter therefore is that wherein is expreslye conueied in writing, the intent and meaning 1 of one man, immediately to passe and be directed to an other, and for the certaine respects thereof, is termed the messenger and familiar speeche of the absent: for that all occurrences whatsoeuer, are thereby as faythfully aduertized, pursued, and debated, as firmely might fall out in any personall presence or otherwise to be remembred. The ancient 2 vse wherof is such, as from the beginning (since characters were first found) hath had his continuaunce and euer since as a faythfull and secrete Ambassadour hath remayned, of him from whome the foremost title hath had as whereof ensueth a platforme to euery motion, beeing in truth so manifolde, as are the imaginations of each mans fantasie, seeing that the declaration of euery Letter is no more, then what the minde in all occasions willeth to haue perfourmed, and according to such instigations, wherwith at that instant men are fedde, when they write, taketh his formall substaunce, whether it be to require, councell, exhort, commaund, informe, commende, entreat, confirme, or whatsoeuer other intent determination or purpose therein had, as cause and matter may fall out to be in anye sort required. To grow into the particularities of euerye benefite receaued by the common vse hereof, and the commoditye thereby ensuing, what might be sayde more, then that which by due course euery man hath almost in practize. If you aske of the learned, the vniuersall contentment receaued thereby, expressed in sundry their authorities will testifie, who the rather to aduaunce the efficacie hereof, haue by diuers methodes and orders prescribed in wryting, set downe the perfect instruction, vse and meane, wherby men the rather may be induced to the skilfull perfection that in a matter of such excellency is to be required. For besides 4 plentifully extant, some also of the choysest and beste learned of late yeares, haue endeuoured by writing to publishe in the Latine tongue, their sundry methodes touching the same, among whom Erasmus , euermore famous for his studies, and Macropedius at large. Lodouicus Viues , and Hegindorphimus , learnedlye, yet brieflye, each of them well approuing the goodnes, in that by seuerall rules they haue distinguished the diuersities, ground and skilful directions thereof. To dwell in tedious discourses were but friuolous, although others might in like maner be alleadged in examples as copious. But now, if you will demaund of the vnlearned, they then to whom the want thereof breedeth so diuers imperfections, as with many wishes they could desire to be amended, knowing how greeuous it is to participate their moste secreat causes to an other, and to laye vp their chiefest trust in the affiaunce of an others credite, can bewray vnto you. And although pregnant wit ensuinge by nature, was the foremost cause that firste bred the inuention of letters. And that euery man naturallye can speake and set downe his own meaning, yet Art preuailing in the cause, and by cunning skill marshalling euery thing in his due order, proportion and place, how much more the same is then beautified, adorned, and as it were into new shape transmuted, by such kind of knowledge, the difference that dayly appeareth may yeeld proofe sufficient. What is chiefly to be respected in framing of an Epistle. commendable maner of writing  & orderly framing the same, hath in some sort been already remebred: it shal not be amisse in continuing the intended order hereof, that in this chapter we do now more fully indeuour to aunswere the purpose, therein supposed. For the better manifestation of which, & to the intent the ignorant and studious herein, may by degrees be led to the attaining of that which vnto the matter therof may be approued most conuenient: I have first thought good to draw vnto your consideration, certaine speciall points in this action  5 of all other principally to be regarded. It shall then beseme that for such porformance the better to enable him whose forwardnes requireth the same these three notes in aptnes of wordes & sentences respecting that they be near and choisly piked, orderly laid downe & cunningly handled, next breuity of speach according in matter & dilation to be framed vpon whatsoeuer occurrent: lastly comelines in deliuerance, concerning the person and cause, wherupon is intended 7 the direction to be framed. These three, as they are seldome in our common vse of writinge, amonge the ignorant at any time pursued, so vnto him that desireth by skilfull obseruation and practize, to become therin more wary and circumspect, are greatlye auaileable to be vsed. And that we may the more conueniently distinguishe each part of these properties in sort as they are to bee followed, we will first in the course of this Chapiter examine and laye out the seuerall distinctions, wherein this kinde of aptnes is principally to be considered. As nothing therfore in the common vse and conuersation of men deserueth more praise, then that which is 8 well ordered, and according to the time place and presence vsually appointed and discreetly furnished: so in this matter of writing Epistles, nothing is more disordered, fonde, or vaine, then for anye one of a thinge well done, to take forth a president, and thinke to make vnto him selfe thereof a common platforme for euery other accident, who with out consideration of the grauity or lightnes of the cause he taketh in hand (much like vnto a foolish Shoemaker, that making his shoes after one fashion, quantitye and proportion: 9 supposeth the same forth with of abilitte fitte to serue euery mans foot) includeth in like sort a common methode vnto euery matter. Such imitators who rather by rote then reason make hauocke of wit with purchase of small discretion, by such vnnecessary capitulations, beeing often times farre different from their owne intended purposes, 10 whereat the Readers may laugh, and euery one may sport, then certainely to manifest their argument with such correspondent speaches as thervnto may be deemed incident. To auoyd this so great and hard an imperfection, it shall speciallye behoue him that endeuoureth well to write, aduisedly 11 with him selfe firste to consider, the foremost motion inducing argument to the cause whereof he is intended to debate, and beeing well studied and read in the purest and best kind of writers, (wherof great plenty do now remaine in our English tongue) seeke to frame his inuention accordaunt to the example herein for that purpose (or to the like effect) before him deliuered, not in the selfe same speaches, but in the selfe same order (the intendment whereof was not otherwise layd downe, but onelye to such ende, and for the like obseruation) which order beeing distinguished in the seuerall partes of euery Epistle, shall conduct the follower, to what ende, and vpon what occasion, each matter therin was in that sort particularly framed. Next let him deliberate with him selfe, how much or 12 how greatlye importeth the matter he taketh in hande, to whom he writeth the same, and what in the handling therof it shall principally concerne, that according to the validitie or forceles conceit of the same, the matter of his Epistle by aptnes of wordes may be measured and composed. Hereon lyeth the chiefest waight  & burthen of each mans discretion, wherevnto oportunitye also seemeth a thing so necessary to be adioyned, as laboring the one perfectly, and attending the other circumspectly, I see no reason, but he that can frame him selfe to the varietie of these, may with greater facilitie reache vnto the reste, the better to enhable him selfe hereafter if aduauncement draw him to it to become a Secretorie. mans intendments, it shalbe as apt vnto euery one, as anye aptnes of wordes in anye of them to bee deliuered, to take notice of time and place, needfull to giue opportunity to whatsoeuer in suche occasions by him continuallye to bee handled, the necessarye consideration whereof, because the same also somewhat hereunto importeth, I will in place conuenient, where more at large the same may be required, endeuour to enlarge it, pursuing in the meane tyme as in this Chapter intended, the purposes therin to bee considered. Now the matter and importance of your letter thus deliberately 14 aduised, the best forme and manner of deliuery, shal then, next to the same be considered. Wherin it appeareth that kinde of writing to haue bene deemed alwayes most excellent that in sentences is most exquisite, in words of best choyce, and the same most effectaul, which to the argument, place, time, and person, is most meet and appertinent, which entreating of hye matters is weighty, in meaner causes neate and pliable, in the lowest plesaunt and more familiar, in iesting that procureth cause of delight, in praising commendable, in stirring vehement and bold, in aduising gentle and frendly, in perswasion sententious, and using grauitie, in narration playne and resolute, in requiring shamefast, in commending officious, in prosperous causes glad, in troubles serious and more sad. And finally, that attemparating vnto euery circumstance their sundry motions, in such fashion and order as vnto the matter therof is most consonant, can most fitly and redely deliuer the same vpon whatsoeuer occasion to be ordered. And herein is especially to be considered, that of what validitie or inualiditie soeuer, the matter to be discoursed 15 or written of may appeare, and to whomesoeuer of hye meane or low accompt the same shall passe or be directed, that the aptnes of speach be therein so deemed, as ye choysest and best maner of speaking may to euery of these occasions be admitted. For a weightie cause, and common direction, may not all in one kinde of termes be deliuered, neyther is it fit that in a letter framed to one of good calling, a man should there in deale with him in speeches: as when be directeth his seruaunt to seethe a peece of salt fish, or dresse a messe of potage, but such shal be the stile as is 16 the account of the partie to whome it must goe, and the weight of the cause that is to be handled, that is loftie when it is required, neate, pliable, or more meane, if so it ought to be respected, onely prouiding that whatsoeuer or to whome soeuer we write, we alwayes giue our selues as neere as may be, to the moste likely and best kinde of deliueraunce, auoyding all nicenesse and farre set fines to be vsed therein, the matter hereof being but such, as if a man should by orderly speache, eyther weightily, grauely, pleasantly, or familiarly, discourse or commune of his affaires respectiuely, touching the person & cause, and in no poynt otherwise. This onely difference in letters as in all other speaches, that eche man studie for his indeuour to write commendably, as in speeche he gaineth moste praise that speaketh most excellently. Of Breuitie. vnto breuitie of speach. This kind  17 of breuitie is not as some vndiscreetly haue imagined, that which consisteth in fewnesse of lines, and shortnesse of roome in shewe of a side of paper, but breuitie of matter, wherein scope sufficient remayning for the necessarie demonstration and deliuerie of any needfull occasion, men are barred from friuolous circumstances, and especially enioyned therin it abborre all maner of tediousnes. For which cause some and those a good sort, haue bene, whose opinions haue affirmed that continuance of matter ought not to be vsed in a letter, for that the nature of an Epistle is thereby barred, and it rather taketh vpon it the habite of an oration, then an epistle. To this kinde of continuance are subiect epistles, petitorie, and hortatorie, suche also as in commendation or vituperation of a thynge or person are consequentlie framed, the occasions whereof doe manye times inuite 18 greater suggestions, and farre larger circumstaunces, for approbation or diminution then any other, according as cause and matter is in each of them requieed. The tolleration of which notwithstading in either of these (besides also that it is both very meete, and greatly necessarie in such an Epistle) both examples of many learned vsers thereof, and warrant of common custome haue geuen argument sufficient, insomuch as for ye better manifestation either of the goodnesse or badnes incident to anye of those causes, it seemeth of greatest furtheraunce, and thereunto most conuenient. And albeit the length of suche kinde of letters may sometimes peraduenture amount to so grosse substaunce, as maie rather appeare to be a discourse then an Epistle, yet in perusing the effects therof it may fall out that little or nought at all may happely be found, that shalbe beyond or besides the matter: whereon such district 19 examination hauing passed, and nothing therein deemed vnnecessarie to the argument, me thinkes euen in that plentie of deliueraunce also, the breuitie herein required should nothing at all be omitted. For who knoweth not that is but meanly learned, that when to be briefe is commended in writing, it is thereby alwaies intended, that a man, with (only necessarie) speeches may be pardoned to deliuer his meaning: neyther is it without the limits of breuitie when aptly and at full the same shalbe in this sorte reported. And for the better declaration vnto the ignorant, how farre the conceite hereof may be induced onely in writing of letters, I will first limitt what may be accompted necessarie therein, and afterwarde endeuour to laye downe how contrary thereunto, men as well in the vse as neglecting thereof, haue heretofore erred. downe for the playne and open deliuerie of euery occasion, to thintent the minde of the writer, and what hee pursueth may aptly, and in good and ready sorte be playnly conceaued. The repugnancie hereof is, when eyther with insufficient tearmes, or too muche curtolling our argumentes in conceite to auoyde tediousnesse, or otherwyse with often iterating, neuer thinking to haue spoken sufficiently of a matter, eyther to induce remembraunce, or put forward our meaning, wee abbreauiate or amplifie our Epistles: and when some others also of a conceit more curious then necessary, striuing to excell in variety of sentences, and copy of wordes coyned all of one suite, think therefore in paining them-selues to write more then needes, to be counted more eloquent. These imperfections as eche of them in trueth are farre different from that (necessary) heerein required, so are they indeed to be blamed, and each of them (where the defect remayneth) with study to be amended. Hee therefore that desireth to be an imitator of these directions, let hym first be warned especially, that as the rockes of Scylla , hee doe abandon all kynde of strange and vnused termes, (straunge I meane for theyr insufficiencie in not accordyng to the matter) tying himselfe in suche sorte to breuitie, as that the argument of hys Epistle, lye not so obscure, that it rather seemeth a riddle, needing some Oedipus to interpret it, then a formall declaration of his meaning, vehemently giuing 21 himselfe to auoyde all superfluitie of wordes, friuolous and vayne repetitions, wherein one and the selfe same thing is iterated, still spoken of and continuallie inforced, Let him alwayes suppose that in deliuering of anye matter, the best obseruation is, in playnest sorte that may be, to laye downe th'effectes, inferring afterwardes, lessening or proouing, what vnto the weight of the argument may bee thought moste correspondent, not regardyng so much to haue choyse of wordes as perfection of sentences, and those not vnnecessary, or amplified superfluously ouer and besides the needefull setting forth of the matter. 22 The errour of this (ouermuche) hathe beene so common to manie men, as those who haue not beene supposed vnlearned, haue manie tymes by a ryfe and plentifull conceite of inuention, eftsoones incurred the same: but not in one kinde with the others. The fault whereof in them hathe manie wayes beene the lesse imputed, because by skill, and learned discretion they have bene able not vnorderly to put downe the same: In which action of theyrs, diuers the moste excellent haue bene of opinion, that in choyse of two extremities, the more rather then the les, might therin with greater praise be admitted. To constrayne a Gyantes foote within a childes shooe, were both ridiculous for the possibilitie, and insufficient for the wearyng: for that of necessitie the moste part must bee disfurnyshed, the shade of the whole foote beeyng altogether yet vntouched: much more tollerable were it of the twayne, to cast the Gyauntes garment vppon an infantes shoulders, the shewe whereof albeit boysterous, and the carriage tedious, yet the attire beeing of the finer stuffe, there may be drawne thereof many good partes, to the fashioning of a more seemely garment, and remain afterwardes as pleasing to the beholders; as comely for the wearers. heard of that in moste woonderfull and serious manner haue affected this obscure or rather aenigmaticoll kind of breuitie, wherein not so much as the least part of the matter shall bee almost discouered. I doe remember a preetie iest, that I haue often heard repeated of pleasaunt and learned Skelton , whiche beeing not altogether impertinent to thys purpose, it shall not be amisse for the readers recreation, briefly to haue discouered, and thus it was. There is besides Saint Albones a place called Margate whiche sometymes was a Priorie 24 of Nonnes, and ioyned not farre from the Abbey there. To this religious Priorie belonged a Myll, the water-course whereof, came from the Abbeye, and vpon some displeasure, or annoyaunce done to the Abbey groundes, grewe to be stopped. The Ladie Prioresse of the Nonnerie, seeing her selfe thus highlye iniured, and bearyng no stomacke to argue the matter wyth the Abbotte, hasteneth by licence to the Courte, meanyng to acquaint the king with her cause, and from him to seek redresse: Where encountering with Skelton , she communicateth to hym her councel, and requireth in briefe maner to haue the king thereof aduertised, by hys skilfull deuise in writing, whereupon Skelton wrote, and the Lady misliked. It was too much, and the kyng importuned with serious affayres, would neuer peruse it, why sayde Skelton , shall I not deliuer to the kyng the state of your cause, what els aunswered the Ladye: But I will haue it moste briefe, in three woordes if it were possible. The conceited scholler perceiuing her humor wrote immediately as foloweth. Humbly complayneth to your high estate The Lady Prioresse of Margate : For that the Abbot of S. Albones did stoppe, With two stones and a stake her water gappe. Helpe Lord for God sake. The Lady hauing good opportunitie, reft the writing, and viewing the quantitie and not the substaunce onely, pleased wyth the breuitie, shee presented it to the king: who for the noueltie of the shewe, read it with pleasure, and redreste it with likyng. The conceite was pretie, and so muche the more apte, because so aptlie it fitted the purpose, whiche by no meanes coulde so well be informed in so shorte roome, but by so pleasaunt a conueyance, the inspection whereof (hee well knewe) might be an occasion (as it was indeede) to obtayn respite for the sutor to informe the rest. But this inuention is not common, and therefore seldome happeneth to purpose. 25 But now for our superfluous intrudors without either wit or discretion, who carying blunt conceits of their own, do neuer thinke to haue spoken inough of a thing, without fiue or sixe times at the least, they returne it and repeat it againe and againe in a letter: and that theyr meaninges are neuer to be comprehended but in ouer large deliueraunce, making sometimes three or foure letters in one, not knowing in the end which way they came in or where to goe out. It were a sport to see what odde kinde of stuffe, these hammer headed creatures could produce, whose inuentions being more pliable to their common exercises, then adopted to writing of epistles, I willingly doe let passe, wishing onely that the most cowardly wittes of all sortes, in theyr young yeares trayned vppe in any part of learning, when they come to that ripenesse to vse theyr capicities, doe rather inure themselues to the best forme and maner of writing, eyther by instruction deliuered, or by order prescribed, then to followe the common custome, whereunto by confirmed ignoraunce they may bee with more facilitie induced, holding for firme, by enhabling themselues to the skilfull handling of this practise, to be especially euermore enioyned, that leauing too much prolixitie, they do endeuour to become briefe, and eschewing too muche breuitie, they write not obscurely, or rather so curtoll theyr deliueraunce as no sence remayneth, whereunto who so bindeth himself, shall by reasonable exercise in short time, attayne to such ready performance as in the partes of this methode hath bene so specially required. Of comeliness to be obserued as well touching the person as the cause. Two especial notes haue alreadie beene debated, respectiuely to be considered in the framing of an epistle, aptnesse of words, and breuitie of speeche? nowe then to the third obseruation, which heere I haue concluded vnder this worde 26 decoru , named in english comely, or that which fitteth or best besemeth how, or which way soeuer. This kind of comelinesse or beseeming (as well as in any other behauiour) beeing herein of like principall and most choice regard, extendeth to the consideration of the person to whome, and of the cause whereof we meane at any time to write. In accompt of the person, is to be respected, first the estate and reputation of the partie, as whether hee be our better, our equal, 27 or inferiour, next the lightnesse or grauitie, as whether he be old, young, learned, vnskilfull, pleasaunt, sage, stately, gentle, sequestred from affayres, busied: or of what disposition, shewe, or profession foeuer he be, that acccording thereunto, the methode of his Epistle may immediately be ordered. An these estates of betternes, equalitie, or inferiour calling, the excellencie or debasement of eche of them, shalbe measured to remayne, according to the credit, countenaunce, estate, or dignitie of him, from whom the letter is framed, and by so much the more shall surmount or be lessened in iust account, by how much the neerer or farther of, eche man is in calling to him, vnto whome hee taketh vpon him to write, wherein a man may assoone ouershoote himselfe by beeing too muche officious, as bewray his ill nurture, in not becomming sufficientlie obsequious. 28 In lightnesse or grauitie of a man, we shall chiefly haue regard to his auothoritie or profession, for neyther all thinges to all men are conuenient, nor one thing to euery man may easily be adapted. In one kinde wee frame our letters to olde men, in an other sorte to young, one way to sad and graue persons, an other to light or young fellowes, one platforme to Courtiers, an other to Philosophers. To honourable personages with duetye reserued, according to theyr calling, to our betters euermore with submission, to our equalles friendly, to straungers courteously, to our acquaintance familiarly, to our inferiours beningly and sauourably, to our friends louingly, to our enemies sharpely, and nippingly, and finally to all kinde of persons according to their estate gouernment, profession, or qualitie. we shall then haue next regarde to our cause, the conueiaunce whereof shall rest in the proper substaunce of all our argument to be written of: needefull shall it be therfore, that the cause be euermore measured according to the parties apparance, his credite or worthinesse, that the validitie thereof be aunswerable vnto the one & the others goodnesse or greatnese, that the intendinent be sound, lawfull, and to no euill purposes, that it contein not matter of scurrilitte, filthie and base kinde of villanie, that the very decorum required in all kinde of writers, be herein obserued most principallie. And finally, auoyding all vnseemely and bad kind of deliueraunces exepugnant to ciuilitie, that nothing therein be found that may be deemed ill sitting, or otherwise that beseemeth a direction so worthie. all thinges with such exquisite performance, as whereunto neuer afterward ensueth any iust reprehension, willeth ( as Horace in his booke de arte poetica 30 excellentlie deliuereth) that vnto euery thing bee geuen his true nature, collour and proportion, aswel with pen as pencill, abhorring as monstrous, and enemie vnto skill, what otherwise vnaduisedly shall be portrayed or described, by reason whereof, whatsoeuer carryeth wyth it selfe a iust decorum , is sayde to be neate, apte, and comelie, the contrarie whereof as altogeather impugned is sayde to be vnmeete or vnseemely. And in somuch as this decorum is a worde among sundrye that are vnlearned, more often repeated then manye tymes well vnderstoode: I will somewhat declare what order the same beareth, in thys kinde of proportion. It is therefore in an Epistle a singuler decorum when of common and meane cause wee yeeld common and playne speeches: An indocorum , agayne when vppon a grosse conceite: a trifting toye, a matter of no valewe. Wee seeke to frame high and loftie sentences. meane regard, and a great Indecorum 31 it shalbe to a person of greater account, not to giue sufficient, and due regard. A matter of grauity deliuered with weight, a matter of sorrow reported with griefe, a matter of pastime discoursed with pleasure, a matter of follie intermingled with laughter, doe eche shewe the decorum therein contained, and what agreement falleth out in euery seuerall discription, where contrariwise, to a person sorrowful to write of lestes, to talk learnedly vnto a clown, to salute an olde man with childishe fantasies, in causes of common wealth to aduaunce trifles, what thing more absurde or greater matter of indecorum , canne be founde placed in any writing. I doe remember where 32 cunning workeman excellently depainted, and thus it was: A man by his finger on hys mouth remaining mute, yet very grauely clad, not otherwise deciphered but by hys apparell and countenaunce, the inscription thus shewed. Cum tacet, haud quicquam differt sapientibus amens, Stultitiae est index linquaque voxque suae. When men stand mute what difference remaynes, Twixt mad, and those whom wisedome rules at beck: The toong it is, that yeeldes or els restraines, The perfect shew of wit, or follies checke. And no maruell for that follie her selfe layd forth in wisedomes garmentes, who will doubt that heareth not her vtteraunce, but that her speache will sound so great purpose, and like to the habite importe matter of great grauitie. For this cause seeing before speache hadde, which is the true note, and testimonie eyther of wisedome or follie, all men in theyr seuerall callinges are holden indifferent, yet doe wee see that when suche men are discerned by theyr speeche, forthwith there falleth a separation, and the reuerence that all menne for the moste part yeelde to discretion, maketh sufficient apparaunce, what regarde skilfull vtteraunce beareth from such hatefull follie. And sith common experience (according to their effects and conditions) giueth almost vnto euerye person, what to saye and speake, whereby they are not greatlye discerned, vntill in matters more waightie they are employed: yet how much more in vse of writing, the difference thereof shall sooner be made, in yeelding foorth a certaine triall of euerye mans discretion, according to the seuerall occurrents whereof he shall be occasioned to endite, I leaue to euery mans practize to founde, and to the vunderstanding of the grauest to conceaue. Now then, for somuch as hereby appeareth, that onlye tryall yeeldeth difference of eache mans abilitie, and 33 what by nature he is most pliable vnto, whether wisdome or follye: and that by how much the nearer each one for his indeuour, seeketh to attaine the perfection by suche means required, wherby ye finenes of each wit is the more thoroughly sifted, by so much the more he is to be regarded, accompted of, and especially commended. It shall behooue each one in framing his Letters (seeing Letters also are but a formall kinde of mutuall talke, both speach and writing, seruing onely to declare a mans meaning) to indeuor according to the waight or lightnes of the cause to contriue his actions, that they be such as wherein this decorum both in person and matter may be imbraced, and the repugnauncie thereof to be vtterly auoyded: the ready meane of which, he shall the sooner attaine vnto, by diligent regarde had, and due obseruation of those three especiall notes heretofore already remembred. And now to the residue in the discourse following, touching the method of these Epistles, to be in order pursued. 34 Seeing an Epistle hath cheeflye his definition hereof, in that it is termed the familiar and mutuall talke of one absent friend to an other: it seemeth the Character thereof, should according therevnto be simple, plaine, and of the lowest and meanest stile, vtterly deuoyde of any shadowe of hie and loftye speeches: yet neuertheles for somuch as in the argument of a great many of them (whose seuerall distinctions heereafter shall appere) is required a more high and lofty deliueraunce, partaking many wayes with that kinde accustomed in Orations, and is therefore accordinglye to be necessarily furnished with the points thereunto incident: we will for the present, sort all kind of Epistles onely into these two maner of differences, the one part whereof shall bee sayde to be generall, and the other speciall. Under this stile of generall shall bee comprehended 35 all such, as eyther for fashions sake, custome, duty, courtesie, or other familiaritie doe ordinarilye passe from one part to another, rather of a pleasaunt conceit, or some other more district or seuere motion then of any extraordinarye cause, forme, or substaunce in eyther of them contained. Such are those as whom either long acquaintance or auntient familiarity, haue caused interchaungeably to haue performed: or fatherly reuerence, and seruile duetye 36 haue bound, by graue authoritye ouer children kindred or seruants, accustomably to be continued. These, for the common and ordinary matter in euery of them vsed, beeing vtterly exempte from anye waight or grauity at all, are rightly termed by the name of familiar letters. They now that be speciall are such, the matter of whome (as I sayd before) do admit both higher stile and more orderlye deliueraunce, according to the waight of the argument, in anye of them to be handled: and for this cause are termed 37 special, as bearinge in them a resolute pourpose and intendment seriously to discoures, aunswere, implye or auoyde, any certaine matter or causes, importing the present affaires whereupon the direction is framed. Of them also are certaine diuisions, learnedly by skilfull authours that heretofore haue bene distinguished, the titles whereof I do omitte, in an other place then this more oportune to be hereafter remembred. These as they are from the others many waies estranged in their seuerall arguments: so vnto the conuaiaunce and expressing of their causes, appertayneth both other order, and diuers partes in them (then in the residue) more fully to be considered. In whose composition, that there may be a perfect platforme gathethered of a more certayne proceeding, wee will as others haue thought meete, distinguishe their seuerall partes as they fall out to bee borrowed in an Oration. wherein is or may be required any continuaunce of matter, it is very necessarye that whosoeuer shoulde take vpon him to aunswere the effects limited and agreeing to the same, be therfore ready furnished and prepared accordingly, it shall not be amisse herein to bring vnto the readers consideration, what may be deemed vnto the accomplishement thereof, eyther of greatest furtheraunce or of most necessity, by knowledge whereof, he may be the sooner setled in that hereafter maye be vnto him prescribed to be followed. In suche kinde therefore of Epistles, exactlye and with good perfection to bee handeled, the learner shall vnderstande, that there are three thinges, by meanes whereof for the needfull expressing and orderly, deliuerye of anye matter whatsoeuer he muste of necessitye bee furnished. Inuention firste, wherein 39 plentifully is searched and considered, what kinde of matter, how much variety of sentences, what sorts of figures, how many similitudes, what approbations, diminutions, insinuations and circumstaunces are presently needfull, 40 orderly, cunninglye, and perfectlye layde downe and disposed, euerye matter and cause in his due 41 speaches, neat, pure and elegant, is in the other Chapter vnder aptnes of wordes sufficiently already described. The first and the last of these three, as they are greatly put forward by nature, which in some beeing far more curious of imitation and study of the best, then in other some, whose will and conceit alike, doe( by a very instinct) affect and couet far more baser purposes: so besides the furtheraunce continuallye achieued by often vse of reading, shall herein be greatly holpen, in that for the self same purpose, and to the intent the learner may aswell in his natiue tongue, know the right vse of figures & tropes heeretofore neuer by him vnderstood, as also discerne and vse them, out of others and in his owne writinges. I haue 42 at the latter ende of this booke, gathered togeather, all such Figures, Schemes, and Tropes heerevnto needfull and conuenient, and there haue by sundry familiar examples expressed their vses and seuerall effectes, bewraying also vnto the learners eyes, when anye of them are vsed. and to what purpose in euerye of the Epistles following, by noting them in the margent of the same. In diligent conceipt and aduerting whereof, the vse vnto the practizer, shall in short time be found greatly auaileable, by the benefite thereby attayned. euermore is also tyed to the argument and 43 substaunce of euerye Epistle: it is be regarded what stile maye generallye be deemed meetest for the common habite wherein each of them may ordinarily be published. In the recording whereof, we doe finde three sortes, especially in all kindes of writing and speaking, to haue been generally commended. Sublime , the highest and statelyest maner, and loftiest deliueraunce of anye thing that maye 44 be, expressing the heroicall and mighty actions of Kings, Princes, and other honorable personages, the stile wherof is sayde to be tragicall, swellinge in choyse, and those the most hautiest termes, commended, described, amplyfied and preferred also by Orators, with manye excellent Figures and places of Rhetorique. Humile , the lowest comicall, and most simple of all others, the matter whereof is the meanest subiect of anye argument that may be, entermedlinge in common causes, aduertisementes, and mutuall effectes of euery one, the stile wherof sweepeth euen the very ground it selfe, and is fittest appropriate to our familiar Letters, for that in such familiar causes and maners the same is soly perfected, in which neuertheles is Sua faceties & elegantia quaedam , his certaine kinde of elegancie, pleasaunt and neat conueiance, not altogether to be sequestred from that kind of deliuerance. Mediocre , a meane betwixt high and low, vehement and slender, too much and too little as we saye, in which are expressed histories, Declamations, Commentaries, and other intermingled actions, not of any in particular, but of all in generall, this stile of all others maye be adopted vnto these speciall kinde of Epistles. Thus then it follweth that whether we write familiarlye, or waightily, we must indeuour as neare as maye 45 be that each be perfourmed skilfully, for that to neither of them may want learning, without the knowledge wherof, what ornament can there be at all of this expected elegancie? The particularities whereof included in these two titles of Inuention & Eloquution , both nature & skill do put forwarde as we daylye see by a double instruction. This 46 therefore sufficing for those twaine, let vs see what parts are supplied in an Epistle, succeedinge in the other also, and ayding to Disposition . a beginning or induction to the matter to be written of, which is not alwayes after one sort or fashion, but in diuers maners, as sometimes by preamble, wherein eyther for our selues, or the cause we write of, or in respect of him, for or to whom we write, we studye to winne fauour and allowaunce of the matter, sometimes by insinuation, wherein couertlye, eyther in respect that the matter requyreth long debatement, or that mislyke maye be alreadye grounded in him to whome we direct our Letters, we seeke by cunning reasons to shew that the case so requyring is tollerable, or in the other that rather equitye, then selfe opinion must and ought chiefly to be waighed, in all which we vndertake to be directed by the right rule and square, of common intendment and reason: sometymes by a similitude, wherein by manifesting the lyke of that we take in hande to haue beene commended, tollerated, or equallye censured, we intende the same, or lesse force in our selues, at their handes to bee borne withall or 48 effect, wherein is declared or proponed, in the one by playne termes, in the other by inference, or comparisons, the very substaunce of the matter whatsoeuer to be handled. 49 for the agrauating or proofe of anye 50 disprooued or auoyded, whatsoeuer to be supposed, 51 recapitulation of that which hath beene vrged, the occasions moouing affection are immediately concluded. These are not altogether at all tymes vsed, but some or the most of them as occasion serueth, eyther admitted or reiected: besides which, others also are sometimes remembred. The vse whereof as in sundrye Epistles they maye be deemed necessarye, shall in their seuerall examples heereafter pursued, appeare more euidentlye and largely. Of certaine contentes generallye incident to all maner of Epistles. foure especiall contentes are alwayes continuallye incident. The maner of Salutation, an order of taking leaue or farewell, the Subscription, and the outwarde direction. Salutations 53 or inuiting to good hap, in the front or vpper part of the Letter: so did the auntient Romaines , and in like maner after their examples doe at this daye the most part of our Latinistes. But seldome or neuer (especially of the learned and moste curious writers) is the same in our Englishe directions, at anye tyme accustomed. Onelye this, where Letters are directed from one or more of the Councell to an inferiour Magistrate or person, or from some Noble-man to suche, whome he entertayneth not in anye degree of courtesie, or estate of societie or familiaritie, the maner of commendations (which with vs is reteyned for an order of Salutation or greetinge) runneth lightly in the beginning of the Letter, & customably is deliuered in this forme. After our harty comendations vnto your L. If it be from a number of ye Counsel to a Nobleman, or otherwise in the singular number vnto an inferior 54 person as thus. After my harty commendations vnto you: wher I haue bin giuen to vnderstand of an agreement &c. But otherwise writing seriously to any man, the greting if it be to one far our better is turned, to an acknowledgment of some kinde of duetye, or reuerent accompt, and that most commonly at the end of the Letter, which likewise 55 in equalitie falleth out in suche place to be mentioned. And beeing in familiarities is adopted to no place, but beginning, middle, or ending of the Letter, all is one, as seemeth most consonant to the vaine, and disposition of the partie, and these also at all times not deliuered in the selfe worde of greeting or commendations, but by diuers 56 Epithetts and fine conueyances, as falleth out to the matter of the Epistle, and the condition of the partye to bee handled. This beeing at the ende of the Letter, there shall imediately follow the order of farewell, which ioyning so hard therevpon as it doth, we will put them both in one example of wordes and Epithetts , togeather with the subscriptions, for the easier instruction of the learner and his better remembrance, referring the notes of euery of them to their places, where afterwardes they are vsed in their seuerall Letters. 57 Acknowledging my selfe deepely bounde vnto your L. for manye sundry fauours: I doe remayne in all humble reuerence. Finding my selfe manye wayes beholdinge vnto your exceedinge courtesies I end. Remembring hom much I am indebted vnto your L. for your sundrye benefites: I conferre the regarde thereof to my present imaginations, and do beseech thereof at your honourable hands an euerlasting continuance. All humble loyaltye and seruice protested vnto your honourable calling, I reste now and perpetuallye. Fearing in speaches, neuer with sufficiencie to manifest the conceit I haue of your moste honourable fauours: I solace my selfe with the remembraunce, and humbly leaue you L to your wonted perseuerace. Praying the Almighty to have your L. euermore in his gratious protection, I humblye take my leaue. Your worship in this, besides manye other occasions hauing perpetually bound me, how can I but reste such, as you haue expected and shall euer finde me. Eftsones recordinge my bounden seruice vnto your worship and my good Lady, I remayne as euer before. Not forgetting how manye wayes I am charged, in duetifull remembraunce towardes you, I rest as I haue protested. More greeued at my mishap and disabilitie, then wanting eyther will or liking to doe seruice vnto you: I affie my selfe euermore vpon the acceptance of your wonted courtesie, and humbly therewithall doe take my leaue. Commending the safety and good estate of your worship to the almighties protection, I rest in all dutifull regarde to the same. Rather desirous to shew my selfe thankfull, then otherwise able in like sort, to becomme in apparaunce so bountifull, I continue in full consent, &c. Binding my selfe by all possible indeuours, neuer to be freed from the charge of so exceeding benefites, I wishe I might as I would, be vnto you in verye deed, &c. UUishing vnto you and yours, as much happinesse, as my selfe am clogged with carefulness, I surcease. Desiringe vnto you no worse successe in these and all other your laudable endeuours, then my selfe haue estsones craued in performance of my cheefest trauels, I recommende you to the tuition of the Almighty. Not forgetting our accustomed greetinges and interchaungeable well wishinges, my hastye Letter taketh ende. UUeighing how much you are alreadie busied, and not willing to keepe you further occupied, I ende my long and tedious discourse, beeing in nothing exempted from wonted salutations and accustomed kinde of greetinges. Thinke not though my haste be such, but that I remember (notwithstanding all this breuitie) how greatlye I stande charged both to you and yours, to whom, and all the rest to you knowne I estsones commend me. Reioycing not a little at the health of you and all other our friendes, I hartelye bid you farewell. Reioycing my selfe on your wel-wishinge, and the hope I haue to be returned in safety I comend my hap to fortune, and our gouernment to the Almighty. Rendring vnto you as manye thankes, as I conceaued comfort of your good entreatinges, I leaue to detaine you. Omitting what els to be amplified in these or anye other occasions I expect your happie retourne, and in hope thereof do bid you farewell. Knowing how well I loue you, the lesse ceremonies I need to vse in greeting you, onely you shall remember to your parents in most hartye maner to commend me. Salute I praye you your friendes in my name, and thinke in my beste and most serious wishes I neuer forget you. My Father willed me in his behalfe to salute you, and all the reste of your acquaintance heere doe moste hartely greet you. Forget not in what sort I haue heretofore receaued you, and thinke in the selfe same maner I doe still entertayne you. My greetinges to our friende R. let not bee vnremembred, and deeme that in all my vowes I haue (vnto you all) most hartely wished. I had almoste let slippe my commendations vnto your brother, which for anye thinge I woulde not had beene forgotten, vppon whome, as of greatest choyce, I will make my reposing. The lyking I haue to N. maketh me heere to remember him, whose good demeanour as your owne, I haue in chiefest reconinge. My greetinges and paper haue all one ende togeather, onely our friendship indissoluble can neuer be forgotten. Thinke how exceedinglye I haue alwayes well wished vnto you, and accordingly thereunto measure the rest of mine affection towardes you. Haste compelleth me to ende sooner then I woulde, wherein notwithstandinge I can neuer omitte sufficientlye to greete you, eftsoones recognizing as behooueth your especiall good likinge towardes me. I ende as becommeth me. Innumerable of these and suche like might be imagined both in greetinges and farewels, the course whereof beeing furnished with suche varietie as it is, I haue left the residue vnto the conceipt of the Reader, accompting the plenty heerein set downe, for anye studious follower to be already sufficient. are (as beste they may be allotted in sence) to eyther of these to be placed, forewarned alwayes vnto the vnskilfull heerein, that writing to anye personne of accompt, by how much the more excellent hee is in calling from him in whose behalfe the Letter is framed, by so muche the lower, shall the Subscription therevnto belonging, in any wise be placed. And if the state of honour of him to whome the Letter shall be directed doe require so much, the verye lowest margent of paper shall doe no more but beare it, so be it the space be seemelye for the name, and the roome fayre inough to comprehende it, which Subscriptions in all sorts to be handled shall passe in this order or substaunce to be framed. Honours moste assured in whatsoeuer seruices. Your L. in whatsoeuer to be commanded. The most affectionate vnto your L. of all others. He that hath vowed to liue and die in your Honorable seruice. Your L. most faithfull and obedient Sonne. Your Lad. louing and obedient Daughter. UUho but by your L. is only to be commaunded. UUhose heart is your honours, and his lyfe by your L. to bee disposed. He that lyueth not but for your worship, and to doe you seruice. UUhose regarde stretcheth vnto your worship more then vnto any others. He that vnto your worship hath vowed to becomme most assured. UUhom none haue euer so much bound, as the desertes of your L. Your Lordsh. in all humblenes. Your honours euer to bee commaunded. At your worships gentle commaund. Your Lad. moste bounden and affectionate. At your honourable direction. Alwayes attendaunt vpon your L. pleasure. Your worships in all good accompt. Yours euer louing and moste assured. To none so much as your selfe. He that in all accompts tendreth your welfare. Whom by your only courtesie you haue euer conuinced. The same which I expect from you, and not otherwise. Such as I am, or as you wishe to finde me. He that in his likinge is onelye yours. UUhome you haue euer knowne, but neuer approoued. UUhose liking onelye accompteth of your worthynesse. Such as you have ever founde mee, and not otherwise. Yours in whatsoeuer to bee employed. More charie of your welfare, then carefull of him selfe. Yours as you like to haue me. Yours faithful and euer assured. Yours or not his owne. He who found you but neuer knew you. He that once fauored you, but sithence hath vowed neuer to regarde you. Whose liking by your ingratitude hath beene quenched. In whose accompt you once were, but now abandoned. Who once wished to loue, but coulde neuer hate thee. Whom thy deserts haue made an enemye. Whome hereby you may winne, if you list for euer to become a friend. To each one louing, but of thee most charie. Whose hart shall fayle in any thing, sooner then in conceipt towards thee. He whose in loyaltye thou didest protest to bee. UUho liueth not but to pursue thee. Who euer looked on, but neuer loued thee. The same as you left me. Such as you saw when you parted from me. The same and none other which I haue euer seemed to be. UUhose word hath bound him, and faith shall assure him. Yours most affectioned. Yours deuoted till death. Yours whilst life swayeth in mine inward parts. Yours as farforth as any others, &c. with many other applications, whose Epithets are infinite, and rather vpon the cause suggested then otherwise, to be euermore added, altered, or conceaued. These as the others may onelye suffice for the present purpose, referring what to be expected, to the regarde of a more curious or delicate inuention. And heerein I thought good to aduertize the learner, that some-times it falleth out, that this acknowledgement of duety, mentioned in the beginning of the greetinges and farewelles, is in diuers Letters expressed in 60 same in truth is one of the partes therevnto belonging effected in the personne or condition of him to whom we wryte) which to doe, if in his writing also the same may be deemed necessary, he maye then vse some other order of Farewell or taking leaue, eyther by imitation of others, of if he thinke meete, what herein els prescribed, consonant and agreeing to the state and reputation of the same partie to whome he wryteth. Now then shall follow the directions, which on the outside of euery Letter (the same beeing made vp and sealed) are for the moste part infixed, and commonly are termed by the name of Superscriptions. Of Superscriptions and directions. 61 perfection, and men first deuised excellentlye to write, there then beganne to be extant in memorye, diuerse formes of wrytinge immediatelye, by the name and title of Epistles, to be published to the posteritie. In the directions wherof, animated as I thinke with the virtues of their parents, and accompting it (as in truth it was then so reputed) to be a great honour vnto them, to be intituled with the adopted name of the principall authour of their families, they sought no farther stile of magnificence, but(were his parentage neuer so statelye or honourable)beeing therewith contented, did onely vppon such regarde intitle their directions. For who that hath beene but ordinarilye acquainted with the histories of their actes, but knoweth and hath read, with what reuerence, those tymes (greedye of virtue, fame, and glory) entertaigned the honourable desertes of suche, as for the common-wealth and publique aduauncement of the state, haue eyther aduenturouslye hazarded, or couragiouslye lost, a frayle, vncertaine, or transitorie lyfe, to the intent to purchase vnto their Countrye quiet, honour, or victorie, and to them selues and posteritie, eternized fame and euer flourishing glorye. Neither was their countrye vnkinde vnto them herein, which for their sakes, and for the reuerend regarde of their virtues, haue compensed the loue which to their parentes they coulde not shew to their children and succession in many degrees after them. Horatii, Metelli, milii, Scipiones , and Fabritii . UUhereby I coniecture, that the custome heereof, by such emulation adorned, became afterwardes a dignitie, and so succeeded in honour to euery posterity. write firste their owne names, titles adoptiue and surnames, after that, his to whom they wrote, and lastly their salutation or maner of greetinges, giuing also like additions vnto the other as to him belonged, whether it were by familye, office, or some other dignitye. And this was the forme. M. T. Cicero. M. Varroni Sal. Dicit , or C. C aesar: Cornelio Balbo salutem dicit . But that custome, according to the antiquitye of the tyme, is longe since worne out, and these dayes and seasons haue induced vnto vs for euerye estate of callinge, a more statelye reuerence, accordingly to the diginity and worthynes of the same. The reuerend Maiesty of Emperours, Kinges and Princes, beeing aduaunced with a more excellency and supreme magnificence. The names of Dukes, Marquises, Earles, Barons and other Magistrats, with more solemne and honourable titles. to their seuerall dignities. And albeit few are the number, that heerein shall be occasioned to occupy their penne,but (knoweth or almost euerye day) may vnderstand the formall application of euery personages honour or worship: yet in so much as all sorts are not perfectly skilled, nor euery man lyueth in place so conuenient to vnderstand it, and that it hath been parcell of a prescribed order so to doe, by those that haue wrytten the lyke method. I will set downe so many examples of estates for directions, as to the matter and purpose hereof maye be adiudged conuenient, beginning from the highest, that are or haue beene, latelye accustomed in our common-wealth (the soueraigne Maiesty excepted) vnto the meaner and moste or ordinarye vsed, and in present practize amongest vs. And first with the dignity of Archbishop, to whome in this sort we frame our direction. 63 To the most reuerend Father in God, the L. Archbishop of Caunterbury, or Yorke, Primate of England, and Metropolitane, his very good grace. To the right reuerend Father in God and my very good L. the Lorde Bishop of London. To the hie and mightye Prince T. 64 and my especiall good L. the Lord Chauncellor or Lorde hie Treasorer of Englande. To the right Honourable L. Treasorer. the L. Marquise of UU. Earle of UUilshire. &c. To the right Honourable the Earle of L. Lord liuetenaunt Earles and in office for her Maiestie in the, &c. To the right hounourable the Earle of H. Lord President of her Maiesties most honorable Councell established in the North. To the right 66 noble and my singular good L. the Lorde B. one of the Knights of the priuie councell L. of her highnesse moste honourable priuie Councell. To the right honourable sir W. M. knight, Chauncellour of her highnesse court of Ex. and of her Maiesties moste and my singuler good L. and father, or Lady mother, the Earle or Countesse of N. To the right honourable and my very good Lady, the Lady A. Countesse of W. To 68 the moste noble Lady, and Paragon of all vertue, the Lady M. H. one of the daughters to the deceased right honourable Countesse of P. To the prudent and vertuous Lady endued with al singularitie, the Lady F. D. To the moste noble and towardly young gentleman G. T. sonne 69 and heire, or one of the sonnes to the right honourable Gent. of estate. L. D. To the right honourable sir R. D. knight, L. Mayor of the Citie of London. To the right worshipfull W. F. L. Maior. Esquier sergeant ot law, and Recorder of the Citie of 70 London. To the right worshipfull W. L. Esquier one of Iustice of peace the Iustices of her Maiesties Court of common Pleas. To the right worshipfull and my singular good Lady mother, 71 the Lady, D. H. To my very good father, W. C. merchaunt of the Citie of B. Co the worshipfull his especiall  72 good maister M. R. Merchaunt and Alderman of the Citie of L. To my seruaunt R. D. at C.  &c. Other examples besides these were needelesse to set downe, for that if any alteration at all happen herein, it is by reason of familiaritie, addition of offices, or change of titles. Onely let herewith be noted, that when letters doe passe from some number of the councell, or from anie 73 L. of the same, to a noble man or knight, these directions of honour and worship are seldome vsed. But rather thus. To our very good L. Sir I. P. Knight. L. Deputie of Ireland. To our very louing friends, the L: Mayor of the Citie of L. and W. C. and R. P. Aldermen of the the same. To my very good L. the L. T. H. To my very louing frend, sir T. P. Knight. To our very louing friends sir R. S. knight. Custos rotulorum of her Maiesties Count. of B. and R. W. and S. P. Esquiers, Iustices of peace of the same shyre. The like directions also are vsed of an Earle, to anye of these estates to hym inferiour in callyng, and of a Baron to a Iustice of peace, but if he be a knight, he will commonlye adde vnto hym hys title of worshippe. After whiche titles or directions thus framed, it shall behooue (especially in the vse of the foremost)to set down the place, of dwelling or abode, as at the Courte or els where. At N, P. or D. geuing the name of the place, Mannour or house, where hee remayneth, to whome the superscription passeth, and so is the direction made perfit. Additions of other thinges in this methode to be considered. yet some fewe poyntes, which I haue not thought good to passe vnremembred. A speciall note to hym that would desire to be harkened vnto in his writing, in any wise to haue regard to his oportunitie,  74 which in the chapters before layd downe, I haue sondrie times concluded vnder the name of time. Neyther is the same time herein alleadged of such consideration, to bee esteemed of small regard, but rather in affayres importing the same, to be accompted of great weight. For that I haue seene some, and heard so manye, that by fauour of honourable and worshipfull, beeing in state to haue obtayned 75 great matters, haue notwithstanding by theyr great rashnesse, and not aduerting tyme conuenient, to require what they would, at the last beene of all hope of benefite vtterly dispossessed. it is straung to see the shameless condition of somme, and yet a thing that my selfe haue many times noted, yea euen in those of reasonable 76 accompt, whoe hauing large and great habilitie to wade thorough the weightiest of theyr causes, wyth honest quiet, and sufficient contentment, yet conceauing a delight, neuer to be sequestred from some toyle of the worlde, will still bee cloyed with many thinges, as it were of purpose to occupie themselues, and with theyr continuall bayting, to inure theyr friendes: In the course whereof the burthen of theyr vnprofitable acquaintaunce, becommeth so wearisome and tedious, that to hym that preferreth his competent quiet, before a superfluous & vnmeasurable encrochment, it might seeme more tollerable to paye out of hys owne pursse, for all the aduise, countenaunce, and pleasure that in a whole yeare might bee reaped for him at the handes of some other, then but for the space of one weeke to be pestered with his messages. Yea, it is a payne but to reade the letters of suche a one, so intricate, so importunate, so peeuishe, 77 so balde, and therewithall, so endlesse are the progressions of the same whereof not one in a week, but foure or fiue in a daye, shall sometimes come coursing one after another, because hee to whome hee writeth may stand the more assured, neuer to bee lefte vnoccupied. Hath not a man thinke you, a fayre iewell of such an acquaintance? especially when his nigeralitie shalbe such, as he had as leue (for all this) see him hanged almost, whome hee thus toyleth, as he should fare but the value of ten shillings the better by him, I meane that of his owne franke will the somme therof should drop out of his own purse to his safegard. But such as these, standing in the moste worste degree of so detestable and shamelesse importunacy, let them rest, and wee in the meane tyme may admit this regard, that hauing to doe with our betters, touchyng oure affayres wee are by duetie, estraunged from anye 78 kinde of tediousnesse wherewith to pursue them, bee it with our equalles, humanitie will not permit it, and standing with our inferiors, bountie and courtesie wil neuer allow it. And when as by anie occasion, we are with writing to commend our letters to any one, before our selues 79 preferred in greater accompt, needful shall it be that measuring the state of our cause with the weight of hys calling, we eyther diminishe or amplifie the same as by the one may be vrged, and by the other tollerated, knitting what we would (when leysure may not attend it) in as short deliueraunce as may be, and (hauing scope of allowance) 80 to confirme it agayne in as weightie force as can be. The humor likewise and accompt of the partie to be vnderstoode, shall not be a little furthering, as whether he be delighted with suche continuance of argument, or taketh pleasure in shorte sentences, whether hee would be sued to with difficultie, or commended by entreatie, whether he affecteth pleasaunt vtteraunce, or is amated wyth grauitie, whether he taketh felicitie in well doyng, or affordeth it hardly. Requisite it is, that whosoeuer taketh vpon him an entraunce into any such endeuour, be wel aduised of all these, the rather to purchase that opportunitie which otherwise at moste handes hee may perchaunce attayne but very slenderlie. For suppose the matter stoode to be handeled betweene my reasonable acquayntaunce 81 and me, beeyng such, whome perchaunce I hold in some degree of familiaritie, it might happe, that for the good suppose and credite I haue with hym, he would doe much in a cause for me, wherein if vnaduisedly I shoulde presse hym, by vehement writing, without respect of the present oportunitie, twentie to one but it might fall out, that he woulde vtterly deny me, by meanes wherof, I should euerafter become frustrate of any hope, to attayn from hym any courtesie. Opportunitie therefore is many times of greater force, eyther to commend, or vtterly disable the somme of eche mans habilitie, wherin care is chiefly to be had, that when those to whome our affayres are annexed remayne moste busie, we doe prosecute them with lesse vehemencie. And in like manner when leysure serueth, that a man writing or importuning may bee regarded, not to 82 ouerpasse by too muche negligence, what with ease and small solliciting may bee obtayned, yet this to be done with suche consideration of the matter and partie, as that we forget not (if occasion so requireth) that rather by bountie or other courtesie, our request is to bee harkened vnto, then by vayn challenge of any other respect tending to an inforced duetie. An other thing which I thought good to giue in notice, is, to admonishe the learner to auoyd, in his writing, the 83 giuing forth of anie vnused words, or confused kinde of deliuerie of anie thing, the phrase whereof impugneth the meaning of the writer, or is impropper to the sence or matter in handling or vnfitting the state of the partie to whome it is directed. As for example, one that somtimes intended not a little of hys owne inuention, tooke vppon hym to write a loue letter to a woman of very meane reputation. In which after he hadde drawne God Cupid by the name of the blinded boy , from those parts of fauour that neuer were in her, and shewed himselfe much passionate for the loue he ought her, he concludeth the matter in this sorte. Thus crauing your lawfull benouolence, in not me reiecting, your aunswere comfortable and not intollerable,  &c. The woman not accustomed to suche hote entertainment, and rather bluntly before tyme pursued, then daintily entreated, began hereupon forsooth to waxe coy, and to intend great matter of her selfe, and vauntyng her fauour at a higher rate, the he belike semed afterward willing to become a purchaser of, remayned as shee was, and himselfe at hys more profitable studies. The conclusion of his letter was very improper, in somuche as requiring 84 and seemed to induce a worde more sounding to a charitable reliefe, or courteous contribution of money, then to any such purpose as hee ment it. Besides your aunswere comfortable and not intollerable: If these had passed in a iest it had bene more conuenient, but vsed bona fide, it was too too bad, especially respecting the partie what shee was, from whome one would haue supposed, that suche a one as himselfe, coulde neuer haue receaued (but by too muche tolleration) anye 85 discontentment at all. This errour wee see is not onely common to the vnlearned, for aswell this one, who in his profession (as I was informed by hym that shewed me the letter) was well reputed of, but also some of the forwarder sort, onely by affectation of wordes, whiche they haue vsed, haue bene misliked and yet learned inough. Among which a doctor of phisicke long since, intending to bee very eloquent in wordes, and suche as euery Carter shoulde not conceaue of, began an Epistle to a booke by hym published in this sort. Egregious Doctors, and maysters of the eximious  & Archane Science of Phisick, of your Vrbanitie exasperate not your selues against mee, for makyng of thys little volume of Phisicke. Considering that my pretence  86 is for an vtilitie and a common wealthe. And this not onely, but also I doe it for no detriment, but for a preferment of your lawdable science, that euerie man shoulde esteeme, repute and regard the excellent facultie. And also you to bee extolled and highly preferred, that hath and doth studie, practise and labour this sayd Archane science, to the which none inartious persons, can nor shall attayne to the knowledge: yet notwithstanding fooles and insipient persons, yea and manie the whiche doth thinke themselues wise (the which in this facultie be fooles in deed) will enterprise to smatter  &c. Was there euer seene from a learned man a more preposterous and confused kind of writing? farced with so many and such odde coyned tearmes in so little vttering? But surely the man did it of a great conceite, for as appeareth by the course of all his Epistle following, his wittes were so pestered with an angrye mislike, of the bad demeanour of some vnlearned vsers of his science as he thought with himself that euery botcher should not be able to vent him, but he should be a man of some reach at least, Neuerthelesse how wise so euer stoode his imaginations: this one thing doe I knowe, that diuers to whome I haue shewed the booke haue very heartily laughed in perusing the partes of his writing. For these egregious,  87 eximious, vrbanitie, and exasperate although the wordes be in some sort tollerable, yet because anye of them almost are amonges vs neuer or very rarely vsed, and in this writing two of them especially very vnpropperly placed, the maner whereof soundeth nothing pleasaunt. 88 that is alreadie furiously bent in a thing, and besides by the action of an other manne then himselfe, who as it were of a resolute will, and meanyng woulde goe about to procure it, so that it may be well sayde, he did exasperate his furies the more, by inducing suche a speache, or suche an acte) selfe for suche a thing, especially when I am not therewith so muche as in anye mislike already, which no man can at any time be, without he first know an occasion. your Vrbanitie likewise being deriued of his latin worde Vrbanus,  90 which is ciuile courteous, gentle, modest or wel ruled, as men commonly are in cities and places of good gouernment, whereof that word taketh his originall, yt word is not comon amongst vs, nor so apt to yt sence as if he had said, your curtesie, your modesty, & so it might run thus: Let not your courtesies bee agreeued agaynst me, or Let it not be offensiue to your modesty, that for the benefite of a great many, I haue published this volume of Phisicke. The ground was very good, for his intendment was, that the cause belonged to a common wealth, wherein if anie particuler commoditie seemed to be lessened, wise men and suche as were more studious of theyr countries good, then of theyr own peculier gain, ought not to be offended. Then sayth he: And this not onely, but also I doe it for no detriment,  &c. UUhat confused deliueraunce is this? how muche more orderly thus, whiche soundeth also more to his meaning. And this also respected, in that I doe it not for anie detriment vnto  91 you, but for a preferment of your lawdable science. Then his comming in with arcane science, Inartious, fooles, and insipient persons, hadde it not bene lesse improper if hee had sayd profound science, and vnskilfull or vnlearned, for Inartious, and to haue cotented himself with his fooles, And many the which doth thinke themselues wise (the which in this facultie are fooles indeede) will enterprise,  &c. Here is, the whiche and the which, a phrase neuer with vs accustomed, nor with any good writer in his tyme (whiche was not manie yeares since) the sence whereof might in this sorte more plainly be deliuered, And many who in theyr own opinion doe seeme verie wise (but therein are in truth verie fooles) will enterprise,  &c. But of this inough, for that I thinke it now high time to proceede to the rest, these two examples being sufficient to admonishe the learner, of the congruitie of his speeches and sentences, with good phrases that be moste agreeing to the meaning, and not improperly, to be deliuered, whereby he shal auoyd the like error, and absurditie in conueyance hereby expressed, and already so much reprehended. The diuision of Letters, and vnder what titles al sortes of Epistles are contayned. Something haue. I digressed in order, contrary to that my former determination, yet not altogether from the matter or purpose hereby intended, in asmuch as the effectes of that I haue deliuered, is onely to induce the reader into an absolute and ready platforme, of sound and perfect inditing, and as neere as any diligent foresight may aforde, to lay down what eyther best beseemeth or in any wise impugneth the same, Herein could I haue discouered vnto you manye other imperfections that sondry times haue appeared vnto me in diuers writinges, the circumstaunces whereof, I willingly doe omit, for that the carefull imitator of well doing, shall by this already sayd, with good animaduersion easily finde out his owne disabilitie, and wherein hee varieth from anye perfection, (examples in our englishe toong thereunto leading, and those of excellent good penning being so plentifull as they are) which as it were by a line may conduct him, to the reformation or redresse of what soeuer offensiue, in anie part of hys writing. Now therefore leauing all other by-pathes, wee will directly proceede vnto the orderly deliuery and laying out of oure sundry formes of Epistles, the number wherof sorting 92 from the varietie of euery seuerall fancie may bee supposed (as they are indeede) to be infinite. Neuerthelesse as farre forth as the most learned discouerers of the chiefest perfection therein, haue hetherto left vnto vs, wee will by theyr imitation limit our two distinguishmentes before remembred, vnder their seuerall titles to be deuided: First speciall vse and obseruation of them contayned, wee will deuide vnder ye names & perticularities of Demonstratiue, Deliberatiue , and Iudiciall . The others termed generall in respect of the generall matter in them accustomed, shall passe as thei did before by ye name of Familiar letters . This Demonstratiue kind taketh hys name of Descriptio, manifestatio or relation of any thyng. Under whiche title are Partes: Demonstratiue comprehended all manner of Descriptions of Regions, Countryes, Citties, gouernementes, states, buildinges, fieldes, gardens, riuers, vallies, parkes, hilles, walkes, prospects, and what soeuer other like pleasures delightes, and commodities: according to theyr worthinesse, goodnesse, statelinesse, value and store: but chiefly, and wherin they take theyr greatest force, do beare in them all aduertisementes of persons, manners, conditions, applications, differences, affections, inclinations, or any other qualitie, substaunce, or vertue, incident to lyfe 94 or humayne gouernement, tending to the prayse or disprayse of them or any of the. The sorts wherof vnder this kind contayned are Descriptorie , in which is described any thing whatsoeuer, Laudatorie resting in prayse, & Vituperatorie which hath in it the dispraise of a thing. The Deliberatiue kind cocludeth Epistles Hortatorie , & Dehortatorie ,  95 Swasorie, & Disswasorie, Concilatorie & Reconcilatorie, Petitorie, Commendatorie, Consolatorie, Monitorie , and Amitorie: 96 Iudiciall  comprehendeth Accusatorie, Excusatorie, Expostalatorie, Purgatorie, Defensorie, Criminatorie, Exprobatorie, Comminatorie, Deprecatorie, Inuectius, and Complayning .  97 Narratorie , wherein wee expresse to those that are farre from vs, the affayres that presently are in hand with vs. Nuntiatorie , wherein wee aduertise the newes of any publike or priuate matters vnto our friendes. Gratulatorie in whiche wee testifie our gladnesse for the recouerie, returne, benefites, aduauncement; good happe, or likyng of our friendes. Remuneratorie , whereby wee giue thanks for courtesies, benefites, or good turnes receaued, or care or other liking had or shewen vnto vs. Collawdatorie by meanes whereof we recommend the name, person, vertue, worthinesse, actiuitie, value, or what soeuer, of any one to preferment or other seruice to be adapted, Iocaterie wherewith, by a pleasant and sweet kind of deliuerie of some prettie ieste or delicate conceite, we recreate the mynds of them, to whome we write Prestolatorie , Wherein vppon consideration of the honour, valure; worthynesse or vertue of some one, we tender vnto hym our seruices and attendaunce Obiurgatorie : In whiche we rebuke the ill demeanours of oure Children, seruauntes, kindred, friendes, or acquayntaunce. To these are manie letters Responsorie , and other Applications, the titles whereof are not certayne, but examples and occasions plentifull. All which I referre to theyr seuerall places eche one as they followe in hys kinde to be successiuely deliuered. Epistles Descriptorie and the partes thereof. Forsomuch as in Descriptions, are onely declared and set foorth at large, the manner, order, state, gouernement, proportion, goodnesse, or value of anye thing: the epistles consisting solie therof, be comonly without additio at al, either of praise or mislike, or any other intendmet, in respect wherof 98 force hereof comprehendeth chiefly a narration thoroughout, in which is contayned (by laying out the seueral partes therof) a perfect and playn demonstration or description of any thing: In these sorts of Epistles, the excellence of the writer, and paynter concurreth 99 in one, who the more that eche of them studieth by perfection, to touche all thinges to the quicke, by so muche the more nearer doe they bothe aspire, to that exquisite kinde of cunning that in eche of these differences, is absolutely to be required. The curious paynter in drawyng 100 conceite whereof is marueilous, for wyth great admiration we doe there seeme to beholde, the most pleasaunt and goodly vallies: woodes hye, and decked with stately trees (some coppes wherof the winde seemeth to wreathe and turne at one side) then goodly riuers, hye wayes, and walkes, large situate and hie climing hilles and mountaynes, far prospectes of Cities, Steeples, and towres, ships sayling on seas, and waues blowne vp aloft, the element cleere, fayre, and temperate, with some shining beames shadowing, and spreading ouer all these, wherein seemeth the delight so rare, and climate so perfect, as verye desire prouoketh a man to gaze of it, as a thing in present life, and moste certayne viewe. And doe 101 I pray you, our excellent writers degenerate at all from any parte of these? doth not the learned Cosmographer in acquainting vs with the vnknown delightes, situation, plentie and riches of countries whiche we neuer saw, nor 102 happely may euer approche vnto, admire vs oftentimes and bring in contempt, the pleasures of our owne soyle, and manye tymes a hudge woonder, of the vnhard secretes neuer before reported of, the incredible operations of diuers thinges, and state so high and magnificent. such as the very discription and liuely deliuery whereof, maketh vs beleeue that our eyes doe almost witnesse the same, and that our very sences are partakers of euery delicacy in them contayned. But omitting the weight hereof, cosisting in these worlds of such strange accompt, wt what fine inuention doth Virgill many tymes in his Aneidos , and 103 with how much varietie describe vnto vs the tides of the morning? how greatly in his first booke doth he amuse the reader, with the lamentable shipwracke and euen then (as it were) appearing surges, and intollerable turmoyles vpon the sea happening to  neas ? what darcknes, what tempestes, what rising and deepest fall of waues agayne, what windes, what mingling of heauen and earth togeather doth he there relate? Then after, his arriual on shore and presenting to Queene Dido , how is the destruction of Troy in the person of  neas to her described? In the fourth booke likewise what an excellent description maketh hee of Fame ? howe sheweth hee the banquet by the Queen to  neas made, & how liuely is the state and magnificence thereof deliuered? Innumerable of these, both 104 excellencie of eche being suche, as by the forcible vtteraunce thereof, breedeth as great delight as astonishment vnto the curious searcher of the same. And in asmuch as I haue vndertaken to conduct the learner by example, howe to behaue himselfe in some sorte herein, we will proceede with our Epistles Descriptorie , the 105 first whereof following, seemeth to bee sent from a traueller to a friend of his in England, the matter whereof ensueth. an auntient Citie by laying downe the seuerall partes therof. 106 you made at my departure out of Englande, bindeth mee, (at my nowe beeyng in quyet, and with good leysure setled in Germanie ) I shoulde returne the same agayne, with my accustomed and dutifull regard, in sorte as I haue euer indeuoured my selfe to doe vnto you. It may then  107 please you, that remayning with my L. the Duke but a fewe dayes at Geneua , we hasted thence to a Citie caled Norrumberghe , being Imperial, situate in the high partes of Germanie , where sithence, wee haue almoste continually remayned. And albeit I coulde somewhat write vnto you of our passages through diuers places of the Country, yet insomuch as there is no part therof so memorable as this Citie wherin we now remayn, the description thereof at this present may solie content you. The Citie therefore as it seemeth is most auntient, and as manye doe suppose and affirme, at that tyme when the countrey was first in subiection to thempire of Rome , was builded by Nero the Eperour, and of him taketh hys name, as Norumbergh , in signification, Neroes Berghe , and so much the rather doth it appeare, by sundry auntient monuments therin  108 yet remayning. The Citie (besides, that it is situate in a most delicate and pleasaunt soyle, wooded and watered moste plentifully on euery side, with goodlie trees, fayre and delicate riuers and springs) is both of great strength in the walls of the same, and plentifully builded with high  & stately towres on euery part. The edifices of the Citie are rare, & of most sumptuous and stately appearance, insomuch as there is no one house in any row that exceedeth an other in height, but all of them builded leuel, by a very geometrical proportion. The insides are not more polished with riches, & ornaments of great beautie, then the outsides with brauerie, the very fronts of all which, aswell of rich as poore, are moste curiously embossed in a hard kinde of substaunce (suche I thinke as is oure plaster of Parris)  109 with artificiall and liuely pictures, containing histories of diuers memorable, and strange effectes, & that with such wonderfull excellencie, as any wayes may be conceiued. The cost hereof is continually mayntayned, repaired, enlarged, and preserued, by a generall contribution of the most worthy and honorable of the city. Besides, the coullours so freshe, so braue, and delicate layd in oyle, for defence agaynst weather, wherewith they are beautified, and set forth, are very strange. The streetes are wide, fayre, and excellently well paued. The  110 stone they vse for the moste part is marble, white, gray, and black, wherof is great plentie, besides other kinds, which very wonderfully they cut and square in diuers small proportions artificially poynted and shaped. The houses are not high, but backward built, and inwardly large. This citie retayneth yet the auntient gouernement of the Romains , for at this instant, they haue their 111 Consuls, Tribunes, Senators, Pretors, Qu aestors, diles , and other interchangeable offices as sometimes had Rome , being in her greatest prosperitie. The attire also alyke to their dignities of all sortes of honourable personages, accustomed to their callings. Playn are their habits for the moste part,  & nothing sumptuous, retaining stil  112 one, & the self same antient fashion. The constitution of theyr bodies as well men as women, are fayr, cleer, and of sound coplection. Frugal in diet & expence, and no thing prodigal. My L. the Duke is here of great sway, & entertained with honorable accompt. Thus much haue  113 I thought good to aduertise you in discharge of my debt and your desire, attending by the returne of this messenger the newes of your good health. To whome and all other our friendes, in sound and good affection I eftsoones doe recommend me. At Norumberge this of &c. I Dout not N. but that thy hart longeth, and minde is yet vnquieted, because of my sodayn  114 departure from thee, and ignoraunce of my estate and present beeing, whereof that thy desires may nowe at full be resolued: knowe my good N. that not hauing beene scarce sixe monethes from thee, I did long since perceiue my selfe to bee out of Englande, and that it maye appeare vnto thee, that I haue iuste cause so to saye, thou shalt somewhat vnderstand by me the state of this Countrey. We liue heere in a soyle, delicate I must  115 confesse for the ayre, and pleasaunt for the scituation with good leysure I must tell thee may we heere attend  116 our deuotions, as hauing no cares wherewith to encomber vs, but the needles searche of that whereof we neuer finde likelihoode to annoy vs. As vncompelled by seuere decrees and interdictions wee limit vnto our selues an abstinence, thou mightest thinke we do it of  117 zeale, but in truth it is of want, wherein we haue more fasting daies by a great many then abilitye to beare them. Our conuersation is with elementes, with waters, with fieldes, with trees, with valleis, with hilles, in the generall vse whereof we finde nothinge els but their proper shapes. And if by chaunce anye other sortes of creatures doe appeare, they are naked shapes formed as men and weomen, fierce, sauage, wilde, not capable of anye our reasons, nor we of their speaches.  118 Our foode is rootes, dryed fishes, berries, and I know not what other harshe kinde of fruictes, and sometimes fowles, besides a kinde of grayne growinge in great coddes, whereby wee sometimes obtaine (though not the naturall) yet some vse of breade, vnlike to that you eate, in taste, goodnesse or propertye. Our lodginges and places of repose are caues, entrenched  119 in the grounde, the earth our beddes, and cloathes our coueringes. And these also hard as they are, enioye we not in quiet, but beeing awaited of the naked multitude (whose pollicies insinuate by nature are farre greater then their strength) we are faine by  120 much industry to preuent them: into whose handes if anie of vs doe chaunce to fall, our deade carcases in hastie morsels are conueyed into their entrailes. Here by iudginge of our estate, thou maiest accordinglye deeme of our pleasures. The next message that thou  121 shalt attende from me, shal be my speedy retourne, the Seas and windes being not lesse fauourable then they were at my going foorth. Meane while recommending my self to thy wel wishing, and our safeties to God, I ende as thou knowest this of,  &c. 122 Lad. the sight of these Letters, wherein I haue rather acquited my self of that whervnto by your honourable commaunde I was enoyned, then any waies satisfied the greife that by my selfe among manye others, for his losse is entierly conceaued. The maner whereof, maye please you now to be  123 informed of, which was thus. On tuesday beeing the thirteenth of this instaunt, hauing as it then seemed vnto his L. and others, beene reasonablye recouered from the wonted force of his long consuming desease, beeing importuned by the dispatch of some present affaires, as otherwise to haue some conference with her Maiestye, he went from his house of B. to the Court, where all that day he remained, and retourned againe at night, not for all this, finding him selfe at all disquieted, or the least motion of anye the panges wherewith before time he had so often beene vexed. The most part of that night he was very well reposed. towards morning the next day, he began somwhat to 124 be agrieued, but nothing as acustomed: in which state the most part of that day he also cotinued. At night againe, hauing eaten some small pitance to supper, towardes nine of the clocke, he began most vehemently  125 to be passioned, till which time we all had verye good expectation of his health and recouerie, which his L. perceauing, after he had beene a while set vp in his bedde, he sayde. I know my good friendes and faithfull louinge seruaunts, that the great zeale and loue you doe beare vnto me, is a vehement occasion to kindle in you a desire of wel-wishinge, and intendement of assured safetye towardes me, wherein I haue more cause to thanke your good willes, then meane thereby to imagine the force of my disease, to be lesse then long since I expected, and exceedinglye in my selfe haue euer doubted, what wordes of comfort, protraction  & delayes soeuer, haue by the Physitions to the contrary beene vsed. One great and exceeding comfort vnto me is, that liuing, I euer loyally demeaned my selfe, & dying, I shall depart this world in her Maiesties good grace and especiall fauour. Next vnto that, the loue of you my dearest friendes and entierly beloued seruaunts and followers, whose hartes I know doe pursue me, and whose affections euen to the last gaspe of death I am perswaded to bee euer firme and fixed towardes me. Your desires are I know, that I should lyue, according vnto which, the least mitigation that may be of my griefe, you measure by and by to the hope of amendment, which is not so. For that in all the comfortable speaches that sundrye times I haue receaued from you, my self to whom the inward effects thereof haue beene founde most forcible, haue euer mistrusted, and by many probable circumstances adiudged the contrary. Long time endure I can not, this know I well, happely a day two or three, I may yet be conuersaunt among you, for my decease, that standeth assured (the messenger wherof continually knocketh at the doore of my imaginations, readye euerye howre to assault my harte, and to carry away with him the spoyles of a dying carcase) will not permit I shall long time trauell in this sort among you. And for my selfe, stande yee all asserteined, that hauing long since peized in equall balaunce, the long continuaunce of a fraile, wretched, and trauailed life, the moste part  126 whereof is carryed awaye in sleepe, sorow, griefe, sickenesse, daunger, and the residue also neuer freed of care and all maner of disquiet, with the hope of an euerlasting ioy, happines, rest, peace and immortall residence: I finde no reason why I should at all affect the toyle of such earthlye tediousnesse. Insomuch as hauing liued now almost three skhore and thirteene yeares, and borne my selfe (honourablie I trust) in all mine actions and seruices, and further in the progression of my ripest yeares, yea in this very instaunt more then at any other time am regarded of my prince, and esteemed of my country, and among my peeres reputed in the highest degree of my fidelitie: I shall now die as becommeth my person, worthelye and honourably. Be you therefore recomforted I praye you as I am, and think that for all the loue you haue ought me, the seruices you haue done me, or tender care you do yet in my heauiest panges beare vnto me, the chiefest content you can doe vnto me, is that you be satisfied herein with me. That beeing verilye resolued in  127 my soule, of all that I haue heere sayde vnto you, and hauing ordered mine actions, and prepared my selfe thereto accordinglye, I doe willingly, and with a right contented mind, leaue this transitory worlde so replenished as it is with so manye greeuous casualties, and hartely do giue my body to his naturall course, & my soule into the hands of the Almighty creator, for euer in his glory (I trust) to be eternized. This speach ended, he continued till after midnight, at which time, he had about two howres slumber, and so beganne his paine to encrease againe. In which till wednesdaye following, almost in one state, he for the most part remained, often-tymes accustoming him selfe with those that were about him to prayer, many times recording to him-selfe the goodnesse of God, and his mercies to him remembred, and that with such zeale & enteire regarde of his hoped repose, as that it still seemed and was euidentlye apparaunt how muche he longed and thirsted for the same. In fine, drawinge by little and little to an ende, euen in the verye last pange, ioyning his handes vp to heauen, his hart & eyes thitherwarde fixed, he recommended eftsones him selfe to the mercy of his redeemer, and on thurseday last about two in the morning dyed, to the lamentable griefe of all that  128 were about him, who hartely sorrowing his losse, were forced to shed teares aboundauntly. The day of the funerall is not yet certaine, but the same is intended  129 very honourably. Recommending my selfe vnto your La. in all humblenes, I take my leaue. At our sorowfull house of B. this of, &c. yet diuersly handled according to the seueral matters in them contained, do beare in them two only parts of an Epistle whereof they be solye consisting. A briefe Exordium in each, and then Narratio throughout. Peroratio there is none, because by collection there is no inference made of any the matters continued: but a Conclusion vsed with breuitie, wherein eyther greetinges or farewell to knit vp the Epistle is mentioned. The Exordium of the 131 first ariseth from the person of his Unkle, whose authority was a charge vnto him, to informe the speciall notes of the country. The Narration by demonstration of the particulers of the City describeth therof the worthines, statelines, and the excellencye, as firste it is mentioned to bee 132 the sumptuous and statelye buildinges 134 138 the soile measured by their complexions. The Conclusion knitting vp the state thereof, mentioneth a discharge of promise, and courteous recommendacions, &c. 139 betweene both parties, each longing to be informed of the others wel-fare. 140 first they haue onely the commodity of the soile, which by reason of the ayre is well scituate, without 141 any fruite at all thereof, because it is not inhabited. Secondly there is nothing to encomber them with, but the care to defend them-selues, which is easie, and to get victuals 142 which is impossible. Thirdlye, nakednesse of the people without ciuilitie, and thereby barred from anye 143 common societie. Lastly the subtiltie of their disposition to lye in waite (beeing men eaters) whereby some of their company haue sometimes beene entrapped. The Conclusion sheweth a short return, & feruet desire of safty. honourable peere, and the desire of her to whome he wryteth, to be aduertised of the same. of his death, because by some hope of recouery it was at that time vnexpected. Then a recordation of 146 some worthy and honourable speaches by him deliuered, beeing an argument of the contempt he held of life, and the certaine notice and likinge hee had in him-selfe of death. After, his death. Lastlye the celebration of his 147 determination of the Letter, onelye in taking his leaue and there withall endeth. 148 Thus doe you see the speciall pointes, wherevpon euery of these Letters do consist, distinguished by the numbers in each of them seuerally contained, the matters and occasions leadinge to the examples, whereof be infinite. For what I praye you in particular, of anye generalitie can be set downe, but that the same of the methode hereof must needes be correspondent. In what kinde of argument can you wade, to recount any matter whatsoeuer, but the title hereof shall in some sort or other of necessity be handled? Insomuch as the vse hereof being so plenty as it is, it falleth out verye seldome in his owne proper nature of an Epistle to bee disposed, but in manye other sortes of Epistles is verye commonlye frequented: For examples sake, if in an epistle Commendatorie we endeuor to commende anye man to fauour, office, or seruice with an other, it is necessary that we manifest the person what 149 he is, & what be his qualities which can not bee without we fall into these kindes of descriptions herein vsed, in demonstration of his virtues. If in a Suasorie Epistle we shoulde aduise our friende to leaue the Citie, and to come and dwell in the country, we must of necessity by demonstration and description of the same place, set before his eyes the benefite, pleasure, vse, and commodity thereof, by meanes of which he may the rather thervnto be induced. The like also manye times happeneth in Epistles Consolatorie, Petitorie, Exhortatrie , and Monitorie , besides in Criminatorie, Defensatorie, Inuectiues and others, in each of which the virtues or vices of men are sundrye times eyther extolled, praysed, preferred, vrged, excused, alleadged, proposed, dispraised, misliked, or condemned. Needlesse were it therefore, to wade into all the particular examples heereof, solie to be conferred in Epistles by them selues: onely such as are needful we will proceed in, referring at the residue contained in this demonstratiue kinde, to the examples, wherein in anye other title they shall be tendred. Applying there withall to the Readers consideration, that if he shall be occasioned at any time to the description of anye other thinge or place heerein not mentioned, and not by imitation of these sole obseruations with facilitie sufficient to be conceaued: he may turne to the former titles aboue rehearsed, and in the margent hereof likewise expressed, in some of which he shall not fayle, in one sort or other of that he lyketh or searcheth to be satisfied. One example more semblable to the first as well for that it carrieth in it so rightly the nature of this demonstratiue kinde, without intermixion at all, as also in respect of the very perfect and orderly deliuery therof. I will preferre vnto your imitation, the matter whereof vpon occasion of the ambassage of Sir George Carie into Scotland, was written by M. R. Bowes being there then in his company, to the right honourable L. Hunsdon , containing onely a Narration of his enterteignement, with some occurrents mentioning the state of the countrye at that instant, which by chaunce (in the writing hereof) among other old papers happened into my handes. company came to the Town, with greater speed then the Ll, here looked for: causing them heereby (as they saye,) to omit sundrye complements of enterteingnement to haue beene shewed to him, both in the way, and also at his ariuall heere. And albeit audience was required to haue beene giuen on the morrow, yet it could not be obtained before this daye, which delaye was partly excused by our sodaine comming, but the chiefe cause appeared to be by the vnreadines of the king. On the morrow after our comming the Earles of Marre and Gowrie , the L. Lindsey , the M. of Glamis , Iustice Clearke, Clearke Register, and sundry other of the Councell and Gentl. came to Sir George , offering all courtesies to him, and good deuotion to her Maiestye. This daie audience was graunted, wherevpon Sir George deliuered to the king her maiesties directions giuen him in charge, with such discretion  & good order, as aunswered fullie the contents of his instructions, and sounded greatly to his own commendation, giuing me iuste occasion to thinke my selfe happie, to follow one that could with such sufficiencie discharge the dutie requisite on his part. The king appearing to be partly passionate at the first, did acknowledge him- selfe greatlye beholden to her maiestie for her great benefits, with offer and promise to be found thankfull for the same, excusing still the abuses of the Duke towardes him-selfe, and other vnthankfulnes shewed to her maiestye. All which he would haue drawn to haue come rather by the ouersight of councellors, aduising & consenting to the causes of the same, then by the Duke, that little medled (as he thought) in such matters. And for his further aunswer, he hath referred it to his next conference, wherin it is hoped he shall be brought to better vnderstanding of his state, and of the doinges of the Duke, as by the next your L. shal haue further aduertisement. The Duke continueth as yet in Dunbarton , accompanied with the M. of Seton , the M. of Leuinston ,  & sundry others besides his owne companye, he pretendeth to haue want of sundry requisits needful for his departure & transportation, & theron hath sent to the k. to pray longer time, which is denied, and order giuen this day vnto him to obey, & to keep the appointmet prescribed. The piece of Dunbarto is wel victualed  & furnished, & albeit it is deliuered to the custody & charge of W. Steward for the K. yet it is in the dukes power to comand  & dispose of the same as he pleaseth. Vpon sundry respects the K. & his Ll. haue deferred the conuention vntil the x. of October next, minding to haue the same at Edenbourgh ,  & thereby to establish both a good order for the kinges person, his house and reuenewes, as also for the pollicie of the gouenment. And thus referring al others to the next occasion, with my humble dutie, I pray vnto God to haue your L. in his blessed keeping. Sterling the of October, &c. Many aduertisments in this Letter, I haue purposely ouer-passed, as well for yt they were nothing furthering to example, as also something impertinent vnto the course herof. Now foloweth it next, yt after these Letters, meer Descriptorie as you see, we do treat of the other two parts apertaining also to this form, which are Lawdatorie & Vituperatorie , the vse wherof eyther soly or intermixed in any other kinde of Epistles, shall of one or more of these causes take their originall, that is to saye, of the Person, Deedes or thing it selfe to be commended, misliked, or dispraised. 150 byrth, discent, parentage or auncestry. 151 Secondly, of his Childhood, being therein eyther wel disposed, or vntowardly giuen, virtuously trayned vp, or vildly 152 behaued. Thirdly, of his youth, in which he is euer conuersaunt in studies of honest life, seriouslye giuen to the knowledge of letters, affecting alwaies vnto laudable exercises, temperate & sober in demeanour, or otherwise accompted dissolute & wanton, vnhappely led to the serch of whatsoeuer mischiefs, affectionat to ye most basest conditions & practises, not tied to ani order, but wholy pursuing 153 an vncontroled liberty. Fourthly, of his maly yeres being frequented with ciuile gouernment, or liuing altogether, without accompt. Priuately & publikely in al manly actions demened, or by apparant loosnes in each place discredited. In this place is the some & worthines of each mans behauiour, with all plenty to be described, or vtterly to be impugned. For herein are the seasons wherein all virtues with most regard are euer florished, or extreme vice with old age, the course wherof is with auntient grauity continued, or by all kinde of euilles most hainously misprised, whose siluer hayres are shining in virtuous happinesse, or miserable estate is drowned lothsomnes. Sixtlye, in his 155 No man maye be counted happye before his death. For that in the expectation or attayning thereof, as at no time more in all the life of a man, then chiefly appeareth, his virtue, constancie, strength and worthines, or otherwise his imbecillity, ouerthrow, shame, and ignominious filthines. Besides all these, many likelyhoodes are often taken eyther to praise or dispraise of the Person , by occasion of the Nation or Soyle fro whence he came, where he was borne or trayned. From the generall condition or application of him selfe or of the people thereof, by the habite, constitution of the bodye, complexion, lookes, fame or other circumstances therevnto incident by the virtues of ye minde, actiuity strength, swiftnes, nimblenes, fauour or beuty of the body. By the gifts of fortune, as honor, welth, worship reputation & kinred. And forasmuch as these demonstratios of persons are wholy occupied either in praise or dispraise of their personages or behauiours: the chiefest part hereof shal also consist in Narration , without peradueture it falleth out in the life of any one to haue some one or moe thinges happened or of them supposed, ill beseeming or vnworthye their reputation, which either by defence, excusation, Confutation or Confirmation muste in some sort be coloured, deminished or clearely auoyded. Examples wherof do follow according to their particular occasions. In comendation or vituperation of the deedes of any one we shal weigh with our selues what notable actions haue bene, wherein he or shee haue honourably behaued themselues, or by perpetuall infamye thereof haue deserued in each posterity for euer to be remembred. The goodnesse or badnesse, excellency or basenesse of each of these are, by all kinde of speaches and argumentes prouing or improuing, augmenting or lessening the same, to be necessarily maintained. And to the demonstration thereof, do require al the partes incident or belonging to an Oration therein to be supplied. 156 godlye or wicked, direct or indirect. Honest is alwaies linked to Uirtue. For whatsoeuer 157 is either virtue it selfe, or affined with virtue, or deriued from virtue, or conducing to virtue, is absolutelye declared honest. The distinguishment also falleth out into these particularities, as virtues of highest excellence adorning the mindes, that is, Prudence, Iustice, Fortitude , and Temperaunce . It is therefore to bee intended, that not onelye deeds and actions, but also things them-selues be of these and for these either praised or debased. That onelye is praise worthy, which beeing rightly done beareth the remembraunce thereof with pursued commendation. What soeuer then by sound & holesome perswasio tendeth eyther to the embracing of the good, or shonning of the euill. Whatsoeuer includeth either fidelitie, true friendeship, equitye, obedience or gratitude. UUhatsoeuer conduceth to true pietie to God, thy Countrye, Parentes, Children and friendes. UUhatsoeuer appertaineth to the seueritie of the law, to the admonishing of the wicked, and to the remuneration and defence of the well deserued. UUhatsoeuer tendeth to tollerance or pacient forbearing of euils, to longanimitie, entring into hazard and dangers for conscience for thy country, kinred or friendes. UUhatsoeuer concerneth chastitie, sobrietie, frugalitie and semely moderation in all thinges, that in each of these is onely adiudged honest and none others. likewise whatsoeuer is not virtue, or is estraunged from virtue, hindring to virtue, or in nothing furthering towards virtue, whatsoeuer io pertinent to Folly, iniustice Pusillanimitie, or excesse, whatsoeuer by the euill therin committed is exempted from praise. Whatsoeuer carieth perswasion to mischeif & seducement fro the good. Whatsoeuer appertaineth to infidelitie, falshood, treason, disobedience, slander, or ingratitude. Whatsoeuer withdraweth fro naturall regard & loue of thy Country, Parents, Children and Friendes. Whatsoeuer impugneth the wholesome lawes and estate of euery common-wealth, tendeth to a notorious example of euill, hindreth or blemisheth anye others good deseruing. Whatsoeuer enforceth reuengement vpo euery small offence, hath in it no mean of sufferaunce, or forbearaunce at all, entertaineth a lawlesse liberty of conscience to perpetrate or yeelde to anye vnlawfull action, or to become iniurious to thy Country, state or calling. Whatsoeuer is furthering to a dissolute liuing, vnbrideled luste, couetous tenacitie, prodigalitie, or detestable excesse. These and such like, as confounders of all ciuilitie and humaine gouernment, are confirmed to vnhonest. of the person, or the present matter in handlinge, or the necessitie of the time, or other enforcement, willeth a person of such rare virtue, or one of so vile accompt to be entertayned, preferred, expulsed or reiected. benefites or large commodities, ensuing of the action, or that by meanes of retaining the same, sundry nocuments, or instant hazardes, or daungers afterwardes like to follow maye be preuented. And the inutilitie by the contrary, when the matter therof by likelyhood may turne to as great damage.  160 in hande sometime respecting the person, sometimes the thing. The effectes whereof are comprehended in this verse following. Who, what, and where, whose means, why, how and when. 161 Confutation (belonging to euery occasion of praise of dispraise) frequented and vsed. furnished, in breife enumeration of all the argumentes whereof, and Amplification therevpon vsed, we mooue the mindes of those we write vnto, eyther vnto gladnes if the case so require, or to great compassion, if the matter in handling do so stand. the Deriuatiue and Iudiciall , when, and as often as either praise, dispraise, laying out, or enforcement of any matter shall therein be vsed or accustomed: the consideration of the points whereof, is as occasion serueth, to bee also adapted to those purposes. And now to the intent the particularities of all these, being orderly distributed into their peculiar places, may the better appeare in the seuerall ranckes wherein they shall be supplied, and that nothing so much as example conduceth to a most perfect and speedy instruction, I will both of the one sute & the other lay you downe such reasonable patterns, as to any consideration may be thought indifferent. And first will I begin with an Epistle Lawdatorie , framed in the person of him, from whom the very Idea & platforme of al princely excellency, in his time proceeded, the memorable worthines of whom, shal not faile in al worlds for euer to be remebred. The feruent loue,  & entier zeale  163 and regard, wherewith your L. euen in these tender and as yet vnripened yeares, seemeth to pursue the virtues and honorable worthines of the moste renomed and famous, and the reuerend accompt wherewith in your moste secreat imaginations you haue euer admired, and as it were emulated their highest progressions: hath moued me in recordation therof (and the rather to deliuer vnto your L. the verye true image and  164 liuely counterfeit indeed, of vnblemished honor, adorned with all princely and most surpassing noblenes) to propose vnto your view, a paragon so peirles, and of so rare and excellent performance, as wherof no historie hath the semblable, no Region the match, nor anye world hereafter may eftsones be supposed to produce the like. You shal not need my L. to ransack volumes, to search out the liues of the most honored Scipio amogst  165 the Romaines , nor out of Greece to fetch Themistocles , or Alcibiades from Lacedemon or Athens , Let Hanibal reste with his predecessors, who sometimes by vnbearded fortune did honour to mightye Carthage , and (before them all) Achilles and Hector , that made the fall of Troy so famous: And come we into our owne countrye, the  166 land wherin our selues inhabite, the soyle to vs natiue, and of all others most dearest, and see you here my L. a prince of so rare and incomparable worthinesse, as your selfe will confesse thorough out all the course of his lyfe, to haue beene of all others the moste happye and virtuous Edward , my L. young Edward (so helde in his fathers life) vnder whose raigne he died, in England  167 surnamed heere for his noted excellencye, sometimes the black Prince . This is the prince whom Nature, Fortune and Virtue , to the intent to yeelde some apparaunt. 168 shew of their wonderfull and mightye operations, had aboue all others so especiallye enabled, with all kind of wished and most exquisite perfections, as in that present season, in which the delicacie of his aspiring glorye arached the highest braunch of honour from out her lofty seat of dignity, it was denied to anie other whatsoeuer, to exceed? Nay, but so much as to become partaker with so rare a paterne of the like fruictes of virtue, and neuer dying glory. And to thend (in rehearsing some few of the many particularities of such sound  & vncorrupted maiesty) the radiant shining beames resiant in so hie a personage, maye with more facilitye the sooner be discouered: we will first begin with his originall and formost infancie, that by deducing from thence his complementes of all princelye excellency, euen in the verye mouth of his entombed  169 graue, his bones maye not be reposed without an immortall recordation, and the fame of his verye name celebrated by an endlesse memory. Needles were it  170 my L. that I should tell you of this stately prince, that he were sonne and heire in succession, to the moste mighty and most renoumed Edward the third, king of this noble realme of England, the most regarded virtues and inuincible cheualrie of whom, being then eueryewhere so surpassing, and of suche redoubted force, as (were it not that suche memorable issue had sprong out of his kingly loynes, as wherwith the states of the mightye were daunted, and Europe made to wonder) might hitherto haue remained of fame compotent inough, to haue beene compared vnto the mightiest: but that I may rather report vnto you, that  171 as golde, in the riches and glorie of it selfe, beareth price and valew with the moste precious, yet hauing annexed vnto his proportio, a diamond of inestimable beauty, valour  & goodnes, becometh therby far more excellent then before, more shining and glorious: so this soueraigne and puissant Monarch (admirable no doubt by himselfe) yet hauing thus tied vnto the sunshine of his happie raigne, the obscurer and eclipsing glory of all other nations, the very Loadstarre and direction of all others tropheis, the sunne it selfe of worthinesse,  172 and absolute concluder of euery honourable enterprise, how could it be but that the extinct of hys prerogatiue must of force exceed, & go beyond all others, when himselfe, by the very chayre of honours selfe was so farre aduaunced aboue any others. And albeit the high and kingly worthynesse of so stately ofspring  173 and parentage, might no question in sundrye sortes, yeeld great and mightie glory to the issue: yet that it may not be alleadged that in taking vppon vs to commend the personage of one, we should intimate the soueraigntie of the other, as it were by a defect of prayse sufficient, to supply the want of our owne, and that the honourable reputation of another cannot fitly be sayd to be this mans worthinesse, without by the braunche of his owne desert, hee hadde in his proper right moste effectually approoued the same. Vnderstand you then of him, that which all men deem most  174 princely and honourable, and there is none (were it the stowtest ennemie that euer liued) but will moste highly commend. This Prince, this honoured Prince 175 my L. Who euen from the very cradle seemed to be adicted to the knowledge, and feare of God, and verie pietie of sincere and Christian Religion (besides that he was naturally so well formed & instructed in good  176 documentes as anie might be) became in those very tender yeares also, so apt vnto learning, as the matche or like of hym therein, was seldome or neuer in those dayes any where found, and in these tymes also may not easily be heard of. Insomuch as of those that then knew him very well, it certainly is deliuered, that being but of th'age of 12. yeares, his vnderstanding & knowledge in the latine toong, was so perfect, his progression in the greek so excellent, his skill and deliuery of forraign languages so wonderfull, his princely towardnes in al things so rare and so plentifull, as manie times moued al the regarders to admire him, but foud none of al his associats, in the same exercises, that were  177 euer able to followe him. Nowe if we shall come to his riper years, and how therein hee profited in the towardly exercise, and vse of armes, beseeming a Prince of so hie and expected admiration, what could be wished in any one that in him was not fully accomplished. So comly, and with such vncontrolled dexterity could he sit, ride, and gouern his horse, so couragiously, and with such nobility could he welde and vse any weapon, either at tilte, barriers, or turney, with such hie and approued direction, ordered he al his complementes to eyther of these  178 belonging, as did wel manifest the magnanimitie and worthines of his mind, and what maner a one he wold afterwards become, towardes the bewtifiyng of hys Countrey. A more playne and euident demonstration wherof, did at any one time in nothing so much apeare as euen then, when he was yet in his minoritie. For when there was remayning as yet, no signe or token at al of manly shew in his face (being neuertheles of stature seemly and tall, and of goodly constitution in hys body, wel beseeming the yeares he then caried) also attendant  179 on the mighty king his father in the warres of Fraunce, what thinges did hee there performe? what weightie enterprises and those beyond all expectation would he vndertake, in honour of his royall progenie: was it not to to strange, that beeing in comparison of yeares, as it were a childe, deuoyd of so confirmed and auntient graffed experience as beseemed the warres, he  180 vndertook notwithstanding at xviii, yeares of age, with halfe his fathers power (by incessaunt intreatie vppon a most couragious desire of an euer thirsting glory committed to his leading, with condition and charge eyther there to eternise his death by an euerlasting memory, or backe to return agayn with triumphant gained victory) to ioyn with the whole and mighty power of Fraunce, and al the chiualrie therof, wher(to his immortal and surpassing hie renowne) he attained vppon  181 them by the permission of God, a moste memorable tropheye? But why dwel I in these slender discourses, (small God knowes in respect of those mightie conquestes by him afterwardes atchieued) in deteining you from the sweete and ardent remembraunce of the rest? If he being yet sequestred in yeares from any ripenesse  182 at all, when it was then to be supposed hee moste needed gouernment, could by suche stately and inuincible valor, so moderate his great and weightyest actions, as to become at that verye instaunt so redoubted and famous: what might wee deeme of hym afterwarde, beeing once perfectly established, in all kinde of manly directions, but that of necessitye hee should by many degrees exceede, and goe beyond the formost shewe of all hys excellencyes, and the greatest expectation that might bee of all hys progressions? and so vndoubtedly he did. For beeyng once attayned  183 to mans estate, hee grewe immediately to become a Prince sage, discreete, polliticke, and wise,  184 in all hys actions of rare and singular circumspection and prouidence, benigne, and of all others most fauourable and courteous, fortunate, and euer inuincible in the warres, liberall to hys followers, and  185 of a hye replenished bountie to euery one, a verye Patron and defender of innocents, absolutely fauouring always the right, Magnanimous as touching his estate  186 & the high and weightie enterprises he took in hand, exceedingly feared abroad, woonderfully beloued at home, mixing alwaies thinterchaungeable exercise of armes, with continuall studie of learning. Of suche exceeding modestie and temperance as is merueilous: Insomuch as the king his father being heere in England, when in the great fight of Poicters hee hadde discomfited and ouerthrowne in one day three mighty battels of the French, and taken in the last of them king Iohn and his sonne prisoners, he was not puffed vp at all with the honor of so stately and triumphant victorie, neyther grew he insolent vpon the same, but entertained the king  & his son in his own tent so honorably, and therwithal with so great nobility and surpassing courtesie, as that hee neglected not to serue them himselfe at supper, and seemed verely at that  187 season in all thinges, to haue bin reputed in hys own intendment, as if he had neuer bene conquerour. The shewe whereof, so much encreased his incomparable bountie, and so mightely honoured the estate of hys victory, as that the king then confessed, that to become the prisoner of suche a one, it coulde bee no disparagment vnto so mighty a soueraigne as himselfe, seeyng that hee was by the force of that onely ouerthrowe, made companion of the greatest nobilitie that euer he  188 saw. Manie honourable partes could I heere inferre vnyou of him (infallible arguments of his incredible modestie) for long after this, when this mighty Prince had atchieued so many and weighty honours throughout all Fraunce, as the regard wherof made his name a terrour, and his becke a commaund to compell theyr soueraigntie vnto his fathers obedience, he was required by king Dampeter of Castile , to help him agaynst Henrie his basterd brother, who had then expulsed hym  & vnlawfully vsurped vpon his kingdom. Wherupon hauing by the couragious endeuour of himselfe and hys knights, and by their sole and only prowesse, brought downe the vsurper, and driuen him cleane out of the country (albeit his strength was suche and the admirable fauour of the people so great, as might easily haue inuited him there, to the wearing of a crowne) hee neuerthelesse of a high and noble disposition, holding it far more honourable to make a king then to be a king : so farre forth declared his temperance at that very instant (not  189 commonly happening vnto euery one, especiallye in causes of a kingdome) as that hee vtterly abstayned so much as to beare an appetite or liking thereunto: but to hys immortall renowme, placed and restored therin againe the true and lawfull inheritour of the same, setling him (according as was first intended) to hys  190 crowne and kingdome: Could there my L. in any one haue appeared greater argumentes of magnanimitie, Iustice,  & Temperaunce, then was remayning in thys Prince? Was euer any more replenished with all kynde of excellencies, then those wherewith himselfe was posessed?  191 And yet if continuall happinesse in all worldly attempts, if neuer ceassing and eternised famous victories, if the commendation and honoured done vnto hym of his mightiest enemies, if strength and glorye of hys country, and honoured titles of his victorious father, if confirmed leagues of diuers mightie Princes, Confederates and Alies, if feruent and of all others the most principall and ardent loue of his knightes, subiectes and followers, if all or any of these might anye wayes haue induced him to the breache of eyther of 192 these vertues, what wanted to the furtherance therof, that in and vpon him, was not alwayes attendant & (as it were) continually powred. Was he not then wedded to Honnor, euen in his formost cradle? Did not Fortune 193 immediatly acknowledge him, and confesse that hee was her darling? Seemed Uertue euer proud, but in hys onely perfection? grew Fame at anie time so vnpatient as euen then, when as the most couenient harbor of all her worthines, she sought out his dwelling? Agreed they not all with one voyce to abandon the statelines of anie others, onely to be resiant with him whome they held most charie of all others? Witnes among manie other his more then ordinarie attempts, the three battels (then which no one thing throughout the worlde before or since became of more greater remebrance) by him in his moste youngest yeares, so miraculouslie foughten, the one of whiche was at Cresseye against the French whe he was but 18 years of age (as you haue before remebred) the 2. at Poicters , where died the king of Boheme ,  & king Iohn of France became his prisoner, the 3. against this bastard Henry , for the kingdom of Castile wherin one whole intier fight the same Henry bearing a mighty host was by meer surpassing valure  & most worthy prowesse of this Prince discomfited, and by mayne force thereof expulsed his seignorie. Al which exploits and manie moe besides, celebrating therby his eternal praises, when hee had with greater glorye, then well  194 may be conceiued, furnished and finished, to the aduancement of his immortall dignitie: see deathe despitefull death who ioyning with the malignitie of the wicked world, hatefull alwaies to vertue, and satisfying euer to malitious enuy, bereft the vnworthie earth of his most worthie life. But how? not as falleth out to euery  195 common creature, deuoyd of after memorie, for why? the soueraigne commaunder of earthe, and skies allotted it otherwise: neither beseemeth suche stately Patternes of honoured Vertue , whose spirites carried with greater efficacy of aspiring eternitie, then  196 those whose duller conceits are adapted to more terrene and grosse validities, shuld be exepted theyr perpetuitie. And albeit in al the progression of the wished life of this mighty Prince, anie one thing was neuer foud cotrariyng, blemishing or in one sort or other impugning his honour (one sole imposition or taxe contraried in his gouernment of Gascoigne excepted) yet in the hiest estate of happines wherein hee alwaies liued, was he neuer more happy or glorious, then euen in his very death: Insomuche as he then died at which time in most honour  & highest top of all prosperitie, he was principally established and chiefly flourishing: at that  197 instant in which the tipe of his excellency was in no one title or iote obscured: at that very season when in the whole course and practise of his life, hauing still adicted himselfe to found out the incertaine and momentarie pleasures of the worlde, he hadde by perfect triall found out the small validitie and little affiaunce that was to be reposed in the transitory & fading glory of the same. Euen then when in exchauge of the eternall habitation, (the incomprehensible ioyes whereof no eye hath seene, eare hath heard, or toong can expresse) he best knew how to leaue this wretched life, and to compasse the sweete and wholesome meditation of the other. Hee dyed my L. as hee euer liued, vertuously and honourably, the determination of whose deceasing corpes, was preparation to newe ioyes: and commutation of momentarie pleasures, an  198 assurance of euer flowrishing gladnesse. Thus see you my good L.before your eyes, the most certayn and assured counterfeite of very true nobilitie, furnished in the discouerye of suche a one, whose personage beyng in no kynde of excellencye inferiour, to that in the hyghest degree may bee of anye other imagined: deserueth by so muche the more of all honorable  199 estates accordingly to bee embraced. Great is the ornament of prayse, and pretious the renowne that longeth to such vertue: the diamond glimpse whereof equaleth in bewtie the fayrest, and dimmeth by the very shadowe thereof the glittering pompe of the mightiest.  200 Bewtie strength, riches, and comelinesse fadeth, yea the worlde decayeth, pleasure vanisheth, and the verie face of heauen it selfe perisheth: Onely sacred vertue is immortall, she neuer dieth, euer quickeneth, absolutely triumpheth, and ouer all other earthly monumentes  201 euen out of the deepest graue for euer flourisheth. Liue therefore my L.vertuously and die wheresoeuer or whensoeuer, yet howsoeuer honourably. My paper burdened with his long discourse, desirous rather to recreate then toyle your L.enforceth an ende. Recommending my humble dutie in whatsoeuer to your honourable acceptance. Prince, haue carried in the matter therof, the very shew of the highest and chiefest vertues, whervpon al commendation may be principally gathered. The seuerall vse and applications of which, doe in those partes herein mentioned specially appeare, whose distinguishementes (as of all others following) are quoted in the margeant, with other necessary additions, together with such Figures, Schemes, and Tropes, as eyther for ornament of speach or apt setting forth and deliuery of the places therin vsed are occupied in the same. For the better signification whereof, if either Scheme, Figure whose right and readie vse, cannot by the learners simple conceite therein be gathered, let him but turne to the latter part of thys booke, and there (as before I promised) shall he find euery one in his true nature and kinde to him perfectly and at large deciphered. And now to the other examples, the next we haue in the other, sought by all occasions and circumstances thereunto incident, what to the furtherance of such requisite commendation might be alledged so will we herein imagine vpon what grounds or respects the occasions of disprayse, may as farre forth otherwise in any other qualitie be tendered. Sir, the straungenesse of an accident  202 hapening of late amongst vs, hath occasioned at this instaunt, this discourse to come vnto your handes. There was  203 if you remember, at your last being with me in the country, a man of great abilitie, dwelling about a mile from me, his name was B. and if I fayle not of memorie therein, we hadde once at dinner togither sitting (by occasion of a pleasaunt gentleman then beeyng in oure companye) great speaches of him: the man I know is not cleane out of your conceite, and therefore I will cease in farther speeches at this present to reuoke him. What generall hate the people bare him, and howe ill he deserued from his first conuersing among them, you haue  204 not I am sure forgotten, in somuche as hee was called the Hell of the worlde, the Plague of a common weale  205 the Mischiefe of men, and the Bondslaue of the deuill: And no maruell, for what iniury might be conceiued, that was not by him imagined? What euill could there  206 be that he shunned to practise? what mercilesse dealing that he woulde not proffer? what apparant wrong that hee ceased to iustifie? what execrable extortion that he cared not to commit? what villany so damnable that he durst not put forward? O God, it is incredible to think  207 and vnpossible to be surmised, how great, how forcible, how manifold, how mischieuous, how insufferable, how detestable, hath bene the originall, progression, continuation and determination of his moste wicked and shamelesse life, and were it not that by the incessant  208 outcries, continuall cursinges, and horrible denuntiations of the innumerable multitude of those, whom in his life time he yoked, whome with his actions hee feared, whome with the weight of hys endlesse wealth, he poized down, that they durst not the whisper in secret, what now they openly discouer, whereby the force of his wickednes being then secret, became not as now so open and apparant. I durst not me thinkes of my selfe so much as surmise but the one halfe of that, wherein  209 he became so notorious, so rare and vnused are the euils, wherein hee seemed so thoroughly to be fleshed. I haue woondered sithence with my selfe many times: what soyle it might bee, or what constellation so furious, as effected theyr operations in production of so bad and vile a creature, at the tyme when he was first put forward with liuing into the world: In the searche wherof, I haue bene the lesse astonished, insomuche as thereby I haue grown into some perticular knowledge of his original and parents. His sire I haue vnderstoode 210 was a vilain by creation, by nature, by soyle, by discent, by education, by practise, by studie, by experience, his  211 dame the common sinck of euery rakehels filthinesse: the one of whome (after innumerable offences committed whereby he deserued a thousand deathes) was at the last for a detestable and notorious crime burned peacemeale vpon a stage in hollande, and the other (after sundrye consuming and filthye diseases, neuer able to ridde her) was in like maner hanged aliue in chaynes for a moste horrible murder in England. Expect you not then, that the procreation and generation  212 of such an issue, must by argument of the Parents condition, sorte to some notable purpose? you doe I know, and in truth howe could it otherwise be likely. Now if hereby we shuld conceiue of his education, and  213 how his child-hood passe away, being fostered vp as he was, from one place to another, without any certayne abiding, but only Coelum omnibus commune , the common habitation of the worlde, wee must no doubt suppose that he saw much, knew much, practised muche, ouerpassed muche, and was glutted with very muche. And surely if I should giue credite to somewhom I durst beleue, that knew him euen then when he was not much  214 more then a child, the very yeares hee lastly bare, gaue not more assured testimonie of what he now was, then the season in which he then passed, did yeeld an inuiolable approbation, what in time following he woulde become, for euen then, what rapine, what thefte, what iniurie, what slander, what lying, what enuy, what malice,  215 & desperate boldnes, and daring to enter into any mischiefe, was in him thorowly planted? There was not (by report) any one thing whereby a man might afterward be coniectured to become infamous, but was in him fully replenished. Credite me, I coniecture so manifoldly  216 of the sequel of his actions, as whe I vnderstand what he was, so ripely, I maruel that he liued thus long so wickedly. But shall I turn here from, to hys Adolescencie, and shewe what therein I haue heard? Truely it passeth all capacitie to be censured: and it it is too too muche to be thought vppon. His pride, hys  217 bouldnesse, his shamelesse continuance, hys lookes, his gesture, his shewe, his liuing, hys conuersation, his companie, his hauntes shewed still what hee was,  218 There was no rakehell, no ruffian, no knaue, no villain, no cogging raskall, no hatefull companion, no robber on hie waies, no priuie pilferer, but his hand was in with him, and that he was a copesmate for him, no brothel house but he haunted, no od corner but he knew no cutter, but hee was a sharer with, no person so lasciuious, abiect, vilde or dissolute, but hee would be a copartner. Yet after all these trades, hauntes, sharinges, and partakinges, hee became at last to serue an olde miser, aged for his yeares, and miserable for hys couetousnesse. This wretched olde man (as eache one  219 fancieth as hee liketh) conceiued so muche of the odd youth, that he tooke him into his seruice, where, wyth bad attire, and threed-bare diet, he liued with him a pretie season, somewhat more then quarter mayster. In the'nd by whose theft God knowes) the man had a chest broken vppe, and a little coyne and plate stolne, wherewith (becomming desperate) it was deliuered he hong himself for griefe, and being now dead, left no issue or other heire, to succeede hys wretchednesse and doble barred hoord, but B his man, who being a strong lubber, was by this time grown a sturdy knaue,  & wold needes be compted a man, & therupon became owner and intrudor to his maisters pelfe, wretchednesse and  220 miserie. To recken vnto you since, how hee came into the coutry here, became a purchaser, how he hath spet his youth, passed his old age, what briberie, extortion, wrong, crueltie, rapine, mischiefe and al kind of villany, he hath bolstred, perpetrated, folowed: what infidelity, falshood, reuenge, priuy- guile, trechery, betraying the  221 innocent, beating down the poore, fatherles widows: how much euil hath he done, & what litle good he hath deserued, what shuld I clogge my self with the remembrance,  222 or troble you with rehearsal. It is to much I am not able, I cannot, nay it were vnpossible to performe it. What resteth then, but that I reache the scope, as  223 in the foremost purpose was intended, that hauing deliuered his shamefull life, I doe report vnto you hys shamelesse and vnaccustomed death. See then the incomprehensible power and iustice of God, see the weight of hys measure, see the woonderfull demonstration  224 of his secret iudgement, howe of a carelesse lyfe ensueth a cancred death, of wilfull liuing a wretched ending, of such money misers, so manifolde miseries, as whereof I sigh to thinke and greeue to remember. The man somwhat before his sicknesse grew into an extreame numnesse, insomuche as hee that neuer  225 lusted to helpe others, was not nowe able to helpe himselfe, nor any cared to relieue him, afterwards fretting and fuming, with himselfe as it seemed, that notwithstanding his great masse of money, and huge heap of wealth, none could be entreated with prayers, or hired with treasure, so much as to meddle with him, hee grew into such a frensie, and consequently into so rank a madnesse, that he sate swearing, blaspheming, crying, cursing and banning, and that moste execrablie, hys lookes were grimme, furious and chaunged, hys face terrible, his sight fiery and pearsing, those that saw him  226 feared it, and they that heard of it, durst not come nigh him. In conclusion, some that pitied him more then his deseruing, & grieued to see that, they coulde not redresse in him, caused a company to watch him others to provide warme brothes, and in conclusion vsed all meanes possible to comfort him. But what can man do to preuent the secret determination of tha'lmightie? For loe, whylest all men-lefte hym, and eche one stoode in doubt of hym, a companie of rattes vpon a soddayne possest his house, hys tables, his chimneyes, hys chambers, yea hys verye bedd, and hys lodging, vpon which & about which, they wer so bold, as in the sight of the beholders they durst appeare and come before them, and beeing stroken, abode, and wer killed, and others come in their places: what shal I  227 say, the sight became so vncouth as al men shuned, ech one feared, and none durst abide it: whereupon the miser being left alone, thus pitifully died. The stench of his  228 corps admitted neither dailight nor copany wherin to be buried. Two only that were the coueiers of him, sickned vehemently and one of them died, the other is yet  229 scarcely recouered. The matter hereof seemed vnto me so strange, & therwithal so importunate to warne vs of our actions, considering how seuerely God punisheth when he is once bent to correction, as I could not but deeply consider of, weighing with my self that such as was his life, such was his death, the one being hated of  230 many, the other not to be tollerated of anye. The circumstance whereof, referring herewith to your deepe, consideration, I do bid you hearily farewell. extol the incoparable worthines of a hie & mighty Prince, as the argument of this letter hath occasioned vs to discommend the person of a moste vile & wicked liuer: either of which, haue bin the more amply set forth, to th'end to manifest therby how much and wherin ye excellency or dignity of one thing, may be either iustly aduanced or worthely condemned. Now touching the deeds and actions of men. In what sort they are to be preferred or disabled, is also to be collected out of the places before remembred. And herein it shall be necessarie to call in question whereout the partes therof are to be drawne, as from the body, wherein is included either plentie or want of strength or actiuitie. From the minde as whence ensueth Prudece, Iustice, Fortitude, or Temperance or ye contrarieties Wealth . Out of all or some part of these, doe proceede the weight and matter of any action, as if the state thereof consisteth in bodely force, I doe vse thereunto valor, and strength, if it rest in sway or gouernment I conferre therein Wisedome, Iustice, and Modestie, if it be in causes of common weale, bountie, estate, or liberalitie: I herein applie Honour, Worshippe, Habilitie, or Riches . The action standing in regard of Pietie, reputation, Honour or fame, for the conseruation whereof any one hath delte worthilie or wonderfully: hereunto must we indure Fortitude, whose propertie is stoutly to beare, in whiche is contayned, Magnanimitie, to couet and aspire vnto thinges excellent, and to contemne thinges base and lesse permanent. Longanimitie constantlye and resolutelye, to indure. Patience, meekely and willingly to tollerate. Then Temperaunce, the partes whereof, are Modestye, Chastitie, Continencie, Sobrietie, and Meekenesse . The Confirmation and Confutation occupyed in all which, are gathered of Honestum or Inhonestum, as I sayde before, Vtilitie or Inutilitie, Difficulcie, or Impossibilitie. Goliath, first ab honecto in that he beeing the seruaunt of God fought against a blasphemer, also in his Princes quarrell and the defence of hys Countrey: ab  aequo, because 232 it is meete and conuenient, that in causes so perilous, the strength of eche one be applyed, A necessitate insomuch 233 for that he killing such an enemie brought to theyr own countrey: peace & quiet, & also draue 234 the more waightie, by howe muche himselfe was as it were an infant agaynst a mightye Gyaunt, vnarmed against him that was armed, vnfurnished, against him that had all maner of complementes of warre, weake where the other was strong: besides that, the terrour of his challenge and hugenesse of stature had before daunted the armie, and put them all out of conceite, insomuche as the doubt was so generall as no man dared, to vndertake the quarrell: herein onely is praysed of bodily force, his Actiuitie and nimblenesse: of Vertues his wonderfull Magnanimitie yt by a couragious desire durst vndertake the same, his affiance in Iustice, and equitie of the cause. His Pietie spared when eche one drew back, to be brought in hazard for all these. Now in causes of sway and gouernement, a man might be praysed for his great wisedome, wherby in handling of some notable actio in ambassage or consultation, he hath onely by graue aduise, industry, discreet serch, perswasio, or circumspection, copassed waighty matters to the comon weale, or thence auoyded huge & imminent dangers, Cicero in the coniuration of Cateline, being a mightie ennemy against his owne city of Rome, might herein be an excellent pattern, who without stirring the people at al, without any maner of bodily resistance or force of armes, without passing by any priuate or indirect means, did by the sole matter of his Wisedome, weightines of speech, forcible reasons, enforcements, rebukes, and perswasions, driue him cleane out of the Citie, and being expulced (to the common peace, tranquilitie, and suretie of the same) did afterward by like demeanour, industry and circumspections so preuent his purposes, so circumuent his pollicies, so turne him vpside downe, as hee dared not, he could not, he shamed to perpetrate what so often he hadde sworne and so many wayes intended. For some one rare & singuler point of Iustice men also might be extolled, as besides common expectation executing the same. A president hereof might be the L. chiefe Iustice of England in the obseruation of Iustice, as hauing one of the princes seruauntes arraigned before hym at the kyngs bench barre, for a fellonie, and being one that the young Prince greatly at that time of his youth fauoured. The Prince came to the barre, and at the Iudges handes requyred his seruaunt: who aunsweared that he was the kinge his fathers prysoner, and stood there, vpon his triall by law for his offences, and that he coulde not in iustice, nor woulde (by his pardon) permit his deliuerye without his triall. The Prince mooued with such denial, strooke the Iudge on the face, and woulde by force haue with drawne the prysoner. The Iudge with-drawne him, and aduertisinge him mildly of the offence he had done to the seat & place wherein he sate of iustice, in such sort to strike him, stoutly caused handes to be layd on him, and committed him to warde, wherevnto (vpon such aduertisement) the Prince obeyed, and accordingly remayned in durance, attending the aduertisement and knowledge of his fathers pleasure. Here might be a great contention, whether the worthy Iudge in his equal administration and execution of iustice, without feare, whereon stoode the hazard of his owne life, beeing vpon him that was in succession to become his Soueraigne Lorde, were more to bee commended: or the Prince, in his subiection, and of all other moste singular obedience were more highlye to bee extolled, the one daringe to doe that was lawfull, vppon whatsoeuer hazard, the other humbling him-selfe to authoritie which he might easelie haue impugned. For no doubt there was as much virtue in the ones obedience, as there was excellencie in the others sentence. Ouer and besides these in the honour, worship, or wealth of any man, his deedes of Charitie, eyther in Erection, Contribution, Conuersion or Repairing of anye thinge, whereby the common-wealth is benefited, virtue furthered or the needie prouided for. Patience, Obedience, Sufferaunce, willing acceptaunce of death for conscience, for fidelitie towards their Prince, for their country, for their faith, these seuerally 236 for or by them-selues, aswel as in others are sundry kindes commended. Presidents hereof might be of Bounty, as in pardoning what we might execute. Liberalitie 237 Courtesie in meeke and gentle vsage, harkning to the complaints of the poore and greeued, to the redressing of their 239 of glory, or commendation due for our well deseruinge, in acceptation of honours, in shunning foule and yrkesome shewes, in lookes, countenance, and demeanour, 240 preseruation of Virginitie, in puritie of thoughtes, wordes and deedes, be it with losse of life. Continencie, in 241 withdrawing our selues from seruice of our appetite, and what naturally we couet. Patience, when gladly, meekely, 242 adapted and made readye to take anye crosse or affliction vpon vs. Now by the laying out of al these particularities, you maye perceaue which way, and wherein the effectes of euerye of these places are chieflye furthered, and what be their actions falling out in their seuerall diuersities: By choyce and example whereof, the learner may be the better prepared, in whatsoeuer he shal vndertake or proceed vpon. And for asmuch as it is a thing so vnused and difficult (as I once sayde before of Letters Descriptorie ) to enter particularly into anye one of these partes by them selues, without sorting to some other end or purpose, the effects thereof. As by the deliuery of praise or dispraise of a person to commend him for some vse, or discommend him for the same, or in furthering or condemning the actions of anye, to exhort or dehort others from the like, or otherwise by some occasions to defende or inueigh againste eyther of both. And so also touching things for, or by them selues to be proposed, either in respect of their goodnes or badnes, to procure a receipt of them, or otherwise to abandon their forces. I should deeme it superfluous in this place to put forward any more examples, contenting my selfe that for instrucion sake. I haue so plentifully giuen forth already these peculiar notes, which at such times when they shall be then vsed, may be according to their directions orderly and with great facility applied. Omitting therefore, what considerations might herevnto otherwise be deemed pertinent, to the places in which they maye bee frequented more conuenient: let vs now passe vnto the next title of epistles being Deliberatiue, and herevnto in order next ensuing. Of Epistles Deliberatiue. Few precepts more then already set downe, maye serue, eyther in the generalitie of this Deliberatiue kinde to be considered, or in the other part Iudiciall to be pursued: for that in whatsoeuer hath before been enioined in the precedent parts of Lawdatorie and Vituperatorie, are here in al respects to be followed. The first therefore of these sorts presenting them-selues to our handling, are epistles Hortatorie & Dehortatorie,  the argument whereof being deriued fro the parts afore sayd shall besides consist of the motiues therin to be suggested. These kind of epistles reteining 244 ordained as it were certaine prickes or prouocations within vs, whereby to induce the ready & direct way to Virtue, or terrifie vs by like degrees from pursute of vices) haue in them sundrye oppositions, correspondent vnto all their properties. In exhortation therefore to any thing, ouer and aboue the matter, in the Epistle layde downe, we haue these occasions and circumstances wherby to incite those we write vnto, to the acceptaunce or allowaunce of the argument we haue in handling, as praise that maye ensue thereof, Hope, feare, or hate of some one thing, loue liking or compassion of the cause, emulation of somewhat therein proposed, expectation thereon depending, examples and intreatie. 245 The efficacie of praise is no doubt, of rare and singular force, to exhort and stirre vp to well doing. For what I pray you is it, that preferreth and encourageth the common actions and endeuours of all men, but the generall allowance and regard that is euery where made of them? Is it not accompt alone that giueth encouragement to Virtue : Is Virtue so fullie aduaunced in anye thing, as in the honour and commendation that is attributed vnto the same[illeg.] For so and in such maner hath Nature framed the mindes of mortall men, that there is no one of them liuing, that is of so base and contemptible a spirite, but by praise and commendation he may be drawne vp into a liking: which being so, the force therof in Exhortation must of necessity greatly preuaile. This shall we well perfourme, if we firste conceaue of the party with whom we haue to deale, what disposition, habiliments or other matter is in him, furthering and conuenient to the purpose wherevnto we exhort him and the likelyhoodes of the same therevpon greatlye to put foorth and commend: or otherwise if he haue anye thing before time waded into that action by him- selfe, then to praise that which is begunne, and thereby exhort him to proceed in so good a purpose, vehementlye setting foorth the accompt and worthines of the same. And if before time he haue behaued him-selfe well therein, we shall encourage him to the better, shewing that the more excellent 246 ae pulchra, and yet the difficulcie, not so great as the praise, glorye, and recordation thereof, shall thereby afterwardes be retourned honourable. Likewise, if the state of the party do serue there vnto, it shal not be amisse to put him in mind of his parentage, fortune, virtue, nobilitie, witte, towardnes of great expectation, and of all sorts generally well reputed, his discretion, abilitie, age, and conceipt, framed to such purpose, all of them requyring no lesse then that we wishe to be put forward at his handes, but all this with great modesty to be deliuered, that in seeming to preferre the certainty of those virtues which are of good accompt, we doe not palpablie glose with the partye, to draw from thence those thinges that neuer came neare him, and this order of deliuery shall herein auaile greatly. exhortation, & the other to the terrifiing and withdrawing. Loue & Hate Loue is, what may be found difficult, the same also ensueth to Hate, for what can not hate and mislike compasse, be it by any possibilitie to be attayned. If therefore we sort these two contraries in one lincke togeathers, challenging one waye, that in respect of the loue and regarde he hath euer borne to this or that, or to such occasions as maye prouoke the same, and vppon the iuste hate an other waye, he hath so long time conceiued vppon so certaine a ground as may be alleadged, he will now take in hande such a cause, or vndertake such an action. 249 Commiseration, or Compassion of the lamentable estate of a thinge, and the insupportable wracke the same is like to fall into, is also of wonderfull effect, and vrgeth many times, so much as what more may not be requyred 250 whereof is gathered of Enuie, (not that sluggish and execrable malice, which when it selfe is no wayes able to performe anye thing worthelye, snatcheth and continuallye gnaweth at the desertes of others) but that generous and noble kind, which sage Nature her selfe hath insinuate in our mindes, emulating by a feruent desire to compasse, or possibly to goe beyond what mightely, by others hath beene performed. 251 Expectation is not the least of the rest, the doble force wherof, effecteth hereunto mightely, as in the actions we take in hand, to consider how much standeth vs vpon, zealouslye and happely there in to proceed: in asmuch as we haue enemies as well as friendes that are lookers on, wherein we shall frustrate the hatefull desire of the one, who seriously doe awaite the worst successe to all our enterprises, and satisfie the courteous intendment of the other, vnto whom (not to haue good successe) should be most intollerable and greiuous. 252 Examples likewise, whose authoritie is most weighty herein, are greatly to be preferred, by meanes whereof we do vpon sufficient and grounded warrant of liking, diligentlye commende, what certainly is to be followed. 253 often times beare great sway, especially among honest mindes, prepared euermore to well doing. The weight hereof is preferred diuerslye, as in regard of himselfe to whom we write, of his Parents and auncestours, of the worthines of the thing, or for the commodity thereby likely to ensue, we vehemently beseech at his handes the effectuall performaunce of that wherevnto he is perswaded. Thus haue we passed as you see, thoroughout all these partes, the rather to laye open to view all maner of meanes that maye be, ayding and furthering to the vse of this present method, the sutes of euery of which, are now to be sorted out into particular examples. I haue many times desired with myself (good cosin) to obtaine  254 some necessary meanes, whereby to manifest the great good will I do owe vnto you, and in some sort or other to giue you to vnderstand, how much and how greatlye I haue tendered those good partes, that manye times I haue seene and approoued to be in you. And for asmuch as Fortune hath denied vnto me the estate, reputation, and wealth, that manye haue gained, and the most doe couet, whereby I can not if I woulde, bestowe vppon you suche riches and treasure as might breed content vnto others: I am determined to impart vnto you, that, which vnto your present condition seemeth moste requisite, and wherewith vse and common experience hath heere tofore inuried me, in stead of wealth to giue you wordes, in stead of golde good, for riches reason, and in lue of liuing, to afforde  255 you a louing and constant hart. And whereas I am informed, that contrary to the expectation of some (who ouer peremptorily haue here tofore deemed of these your young yeares to be laden with loosenes, and led  256 forward by liberty) you haue of your selfe, and of your own motion and free- will, obtayned licence  & allowance of your father to goe to Cambridge , in minde to giue your self wholy to study,  & the sole fruitio of learning, whether I shal more commend the motion hereof,  257 or the action that therby you haue taken in hande, I doe stande in great doubt, in so much as the memory of the one can not be for the worthines thereof more permanent, then the glorye of the other to your euerlasting commendation approued most excellent. It is reported of the mighty Alexander of Macedon , that he was a king, that he was puissaunt, that he was warlicke, that he was famous, that he was a Conqueror, and that he subdued the whole worlde, but when he came to him-selfe, to the conuincing of his owne appetite, to rule reason by the square of right, he became a meacocke,  258 a Childe, an infant, what should I saye, he was no body. How much more greater then he was, had the worthy Prince remained, if as in the conquest of sundry mighty kinges, Regions, and prouinces, so in al other thinges tending to the suppression of his owne peculiar effects, he had beene no lesse or fully so much  259 as Alexander. Scipio , the most honoured and renomed Scipio amongest the Romaines , for his sundrye great exploites done in Affrica , surnamed Affricanus , we doe read, atcheiued manye valiaunt and incomparable victories, and were it but that sole battaile which he fought (when Rome was now at wracke, her nobilitye spoyled, and her glory trode vnder foote, ready almost vpon anye reasonable condition to be deliuered into the handes of the enemye) in which he then freed his Citie, repulsed Hannibal by a mightye ouerthrow, and thereby daunted so farre foorth his pride for euer, as expelled from him all hope thence forwarde, at anye time els to become a conqueror: It coulde not otherwise  260 be sayde without question, but heerein, yea in this onely action, he deserued eternall memory, but was he herein thinke you,  & for this onely matter thorough out all the prouinces recounted so famous? No assuredly. It was also his rare & most singular virtues otherwise, that fully perfected & pollished the glory therof. It was also his rare Temperaunce, Modestie, Continence ,  & Sobrietie , wherein with wonderfull admiration he exceedinglye flourished, and became extolled aboue all others.  261 This was it, wherin more then Alexander he became regarded  & famous, the conquestes that by this meanes he daylye made of him-selfe, retourned more glory to Rome , more firme faith, and reuerence, then the forcible progression of all other his fatall ouerthrowes and victories: of so great and wonderfull reputation is Virtue to all her followers. This being so, how can I then saye, but in this your action, you haue of your selfe right well begunne, how can I thinke, but aboue many others you haue therin chiefly deserued. Wherin should I augmet your praise, if not in that you haue hereby so well performed, the force, operation,  262 and effect of all which, hath onely consisted in subduing your owne appetite. Great commendation haue you won I must needes confesse, and more then with common worthines haue you in this action demeaned your self, but (my good cosin) it is not inough to haue well begun in a thinge, without also therein you doe vse perseueraunce. Hannibal knew well how to subdue, but he knew not how to entertaine his victoryes. As you haue already in this your resolution gotten great good liking, so behoueth both for the preseruation of what already won, and to induce a perpetuall encrease  263 to the same, that you doe euer more frequent, and by earnest and zealous prosecution seeke, still to entertaine the fruites thereof. Proceed then a Gods name, and go on, with good luck in your enterprise, the more harder and greater you finde the difficulcie in attayning to virtue, the more vehement shal be your glory, and the more honorable the reputation that thereby 264 is pursued. For what hath a man of all that may be left vnto him in this world, wherof to vaunt him-selfe, but the memory of that wherein he hath most worthelye trauailed. The rich reap possessios, which when themselues are once passed awaye, are immediatly distributed to others. The pleasures of the world are momentarie, and after we are once dead we perceaue them no  265 more. Worship, honor, and dignitie, perisheth euen in the very selfe remembraunce. The reuennewes of the mighty, when life is once fled, are no more to be tendred. Shall we then for a nomber of fruitles vanities, (the regard wherof doth neuer last longer, then whilst  266 we are in present vse of them) neglect the serch of that which is of all other most permanent? No surely. So behooueth not such as your selfe, that of your auncestors haue had so manye good encouragements, beseemeth not the remembraunce of their excellencies in you alone to be perished. Tis Virtue beleeue me, that procureth Fame , and solie Fame that makes men immortall. All other meanes are feeble, as the originall from whence they are deriued is incertaine. At leastwise,  267 it shall many other wayes stande you greatly vpon to continue this course, in so much as by the  aemulation of the virtues of others, you shal therevn to be constrained, besides the loue and regard that all men haue  268 borne, and euer doe beare to the remembrance of virtue, the expectation of your entierly fauoring, & careful louing friendes, who with great longing do attend  269 the prosequutio of your worthines, the il conceipt, malice and spite that some haue had towardes you, whereby to ouerthrow the good opinion of your father, who  270 with greater greedines then wolues them-selues, with more enuye then the Crocadile , and farre more poyson then the serpent, do lie in waite but only to harken after the newes of your declination, and the dissolued purpose of this your good intentio. Finally my dearest  271 and best fauored kinsman. I do adiure you, pray you,  & as earnestly as I can beseech you, by the very pure, and intier loue of virtue, wherof you now shal become partaker, by the immortall Fame thervnto only awarded, by the care you are bound and ought to haue of your selfe, by all the kinred that hath tied vs in affinitie, together, by al the loues and possible intreaty that I can, you do persist, continue, and remain firme, in this your intended purpose. In pursuite whereof, you shall minister  272 vnto your friends ioy & comfort, to your enemies shame and reproch, to your selfe praise and eternall regard, and to al sorts of your acquaintance occasion to admire you. Preferring many times my care & earnest affection towardes you, with my manifold greetinges vnto your good selfe. I do bid you farewell, &c. The exhortation contained in this letter pursueth not any one thing in particular, but Virtue in generall, ye intendment of the writer therein, was to praise the well doing of his kinsma, in abandoning such suspected affects 273 as gaue occasion to some (ill fauoring his person) to speak largely of his credite & therevpon to disable him to his father. In which he obserueth this meane, the Exordium cocludeth the liking of him that wrote, & the fauored partes that were in his accopt, concerning the party to whom he wrot. Then he explaneth the purpose of his letter by Narration, & thervpon the rather to encourage his wel-doing, he commendeth the act, confirming the worthines therof 274 by a doble example. Afterward proceedeth againe by amplificatio of the goodnes, & exhorteth to stability & perseuerance, approuing by many circustances, the frailty of al mundan things, & the sole immortalitie of virtue. Besids, by the couenience of ye matter required, by necessity, example of his predecessors, expectatioo of his frends & enemies, loue & hate of either of both, hee preferreth ye same. Lastly, as needfull to be vnderstood in the particular occasions hereof as anye of the others: I deeme it not amisse, to set downe the aunswere to each of these Epistles as they follow in sequence, that being conferred togeather in one selfe matter, the disposition therof may the better aunswere the expectation of the Reader. exhortations (my very good cosin) haue moued me many times to think on you, and to thank you for the same. I take no little comfort of your great good liking of my determination, and that the indeuor therof beareth so forcible allowaunce at your handes, as to reckon the same in so  276 hie and great accompt, as you do. I did I confesse erre a while, but how? as a yong man, I went a stray I grant, but not with perseueraunce, for I reclaimed my selfe  277 ere I fell, and stoode vpright, ere by ouermuch weight I slided to far in my purposes, Errare, est humanum, sed persister, belluinum . The course I haue taken, as it was estraunged from the opinion of many: so in the prosecution thereof, I hope to vse such pursuite, as willingly  278 by declination, therin I meane not to become offensiue to any. Feare you not sir, the accompt is already set down, for notwithstanding my greene yeares must yet of force continue their note of imbecilitie. This prerogatiue yet remaineth, that I maye as I liste adapt my opinion to grauitie. You shall (good cosin) doe me  279 a great pleasure, if as I am partaker of your loue and entier affection, so I maye sometimes be partner with you of those exercises and sweet pleasures, wherewith your studie is frequented: I meane that with discourses  280 of yours, you will now and than remember me. The expectation of your good conceipt maye become a great spurre vnto me, the assuraunce whereof let rest I pray you, by note of your letters, wherby you shal often prouoke me. Thus assuring my selfe of that I neuer yet distrusted at your handes, your zeale and fidelitie  281 towardes me, I regarde you as faithfull as I haue euer founde you, and so will alwaies accompt of you,  &c. Touching these Letters of aunswere, there is seldom in them any obseruation at all, whereby to bind them to the vse of those orderly parts, that in all other Epistles are to be followed. For that the matter of euery answere dependeth vpon the places of the former direction, whervnto the same is euer more applied, so that vnlesse it be in an Epistle Defensorie, which is framed in an aunswere to the accusation of an other, it rarely or neuer admitteth anye partes at all: but in that kind, by reason of the sundry argumentes, inferences, confutations, disproofes, and other circumstaunces that therein are to bee alleadged, it beareth the like order of the other Epistles, as in the example thereof shall be hereafter declared. And now let vs see one other example of the same sute, wherein exhortation is giuen to the profitable study of learning. good N. the great trauail, cost, and paine, dayly employed by  283 your dearest beloued parents, to induce vnto you the precious, and of all other most delicate  & sweete pleasure of learning the valew wherof is without all estimate, and the comfort therein conceiued, in no wise to be comprehended: the louing regarde of whom, & the most lamentable want of the other, whe I do see you either with some ill fauoring aspect, to encline vnto, or with some more then straung or vnused termes to accopt of, I can not but grieue with my hart, respecting the linck whereby I stand charged to either of you, in so great apparance as I do behold the same,  284 True it is, that you are a Gent, that you are heire apparaunt to large and very great possessions, that you are (for the yeares you beare) of comelye and goodly personage, that you are in all things well accomplished, & euery way as beseemeth:but yet when I behold this fauour, this comelines, these accomplishmentes, & know you to be a Gent. & thinke vpon your large ensuing, reuenewes and possessions, me thinks there should yet be an ornament to all these, and a thing of farre more goodly shew, & more surpassing valew wanting to the same, that might if it were wel entertained, adde more glorye vnto all the others, then the waight of the reste were euer able to purchase. For suppose that all these  285 complements of yours are of large price, & very necessary as they are in deed, and such wherwith the state of man is greatly beutified, yet are they al but things pertinent vnto the body, by force wherof (setting only our shape aside) we do communicate in euerye thing, with beastes, for with them we liue, we moue, we go, we eat, & enioy the sensual appetite of inward & outward abilities, But by benefit of learning, of knowledge, of skil, we  286 make difference of things, & are only therby in our selues distinguished fro beastes. And if man which is the principal work of god, was fro the beginning a chosen  287 creature, endued aboue any others, & therefore pointed to exceed and go beyond all others, how much the more nedful shal it be for euery one, according to such appointment to prefer and put forward the vse of the same. And seeing aswell by the ordinaunce of God as common vse of reason, whereby we are gouerned and led, euery man is induced to propose vnto him-self the exercise of things that are good & honest, and that the same also among these which maketh a man nearest to his creator in perfection, is of all others the most to be desired: how much auaileable the and important is it, to euerye man to be frequented with learning, the vse  288 whereof freeth him of comon ignoraunce, and maketh him capable of the hie & lofty misteries. And if in any study whatsoeuer the reputation of honest & good is  289 to be sought for, what I pray you, the learning may be adiudged more honester, which hauing with it a certain kind of deuine and sacred original, hath fro the beginning of the world, bene with al men in greatest price & estimation. What may be deemed more honest, then that which from very asses and blockes, and (if it were  290 lawful so to say) from brute men and beasts also themselues maketh difference, and without the which, there were left vnto vs fro such, no place at all of distinguishment. What then that can be saide to be more honest, which draweth a man vp to the deuine contemplatio of the sacred maiestye, to the knowledge of the hie and heauenly thinges of worthye and iminent virtues, and being sequestred by the want whereof he becommeth no other wise then as a hogge, still groueling on the earth, searching onely wherewith to fill his bellye, neglecting in the meane time the expectation or regarde  291 of anye other statelye or eternall soueraigntie. Now therefore if the vse of learning, as the thinge of greatest accompt and most worthy, is here set downe to be so generallye, comended to all sorts of men, how muche more consonant and agreeing is it then to the reputation of a Gentleman, who by what distaunce so  292 euer he is measured in capacitie, mind, order, state and gouernment from anye other common or ordinarye person, by so much the more ought he in all endeuors to aspire and seeke to goe beyonde them. For where as all other men in their seuerall vocations are for the most part, and thereby as it were withdrawne from the  293 speciall notice and eye-marke of all publique administration and gouernment, the Gentl. contrarywise the more worthye and noble that he is in callinge, the more nearer he is to aduauncement, which by nothing so much as learning is and ought to be preferred. And to say the truth, what profitable member can he be in such a place, whose ignoraunce is farre greater then his wit, and whose knowledge is lesse then the leaste of that, whereof he ought to take notice and experience. And seeing learning is of all other things a store-house  294 so plenty and precious, as whereof the wise man maketh his treasure, the poore man his riches, and the wealthy one his pastime and pleasure, shall the Gentl. who in all other things by nature striueth to be excellent, be in the greatest action of all others so carelesse and negligent. Omitting that you will here alleadge  295 the tediousnes of studye, and a certaine impossibilitie almost to attaine thervnto, I must answere vnto you againe that this cometh not of the labor thereof, which to those that willingly aspire vnto the delicate taste of the same, yeeldeth great facility with pleasure to be receiued: but of a slouthful & sluggish endeuor & dispositio. Far be it therfore good sir, that you being a gentleman  296 in all other thinges so towardly, and the sonne of such a one as you are, shoulde with the touche of so  297 great a blemish, be so thoroughly stayned. So worthie a discent as whereof you are deriued such infancie and childehood wherein so exquisitely you haue ben trayned, so great loue, and charge of parentes wherewith you may be animated, doe inuite you farre otherwise, and to a more excellent purpose. Let the sweete and vnapprooued delight thereof prouoke you, the  298 prayse and commendation solie to vertue appropriate and belonging, once pricke you forwarde, the honour  299 and aduauncementes thereby continuallye pursued. And if none of all these preuaile, yet the riches and rewards  300 farre greater the anie earthly treasure, which are therunto incidet. Think of the worthines of those who  301 by howe muche the more noble they were in byrthe, by so muche the more zealously they haue trauayled, not shunning any labor, sweat, tediousness, skorning yea bondage it selfe, whereby to compasse vnto themselues the glory and rewardes annexed to the dignitie hereof And if no other remembraunce may bee sufficient to stablish you, regard yet your liuing father, and grandfather, the one of whome neglecting his ease and quyet at home trauayled all Fraunce, Germaine, and Italie to the intent to attayne vnto the greatnesse of that whereunto you are so hardly perswaded. Neither think I that you in whom all other good actions do so plentifully flowe, will herein alone with a little labour bee  302 terrified: wherefore my good N. I eftsoones entreate you againe and againe, by all the loue you haue ought to your name, fame, parentage and stocke, and by all the expectation that in them or any of them, is of your happinesse conceiued, you wil proceed in thys purpose: the weight whereof besides the commoditie and pleasure redounding to her selfe, shall vnto your parentes  & al others returne most comfortable and pleasing. Al which, recommending to your courteous & gentle disposition, I do herwith take my leaue. &c. couertly slideth into ye commendatio of learning, the worthines & necessitie therof, the rather to win the party vnto the fauoring of ye same. This Insinuation is vsed (as in this place) when we do suppose that ye thing we intend to write of, or to persuade, is not so farforth liked as it might be, & according as it doth deserue at ye hands of him to who we write For which cause, we do first couertly induce the necessitie, to manifest that without reason, the matter is not deemed 303 excellent, as wherof the praise is infinite, & the argumeent therof wtout compasse, it admitteth by such occasion the more greater circustances, wherein largely but not fully, the worthines therof may be described. Al places of proof therfore are herein vsed, in declaration wherof, ye order perticipateth with the places Descriptorie before remebred, as in many like examples it comonly falleth out to be oftentimes frequented. For in the distinguishment of the particularities therof, the circustances are deliuered of Honest, profitable, necessary, not difficulte, or easie . The places 304 pleasure, delight, honour, example, and intreatie . And here is to be noted, yt where this Hortatorie kind for the vehemencie therof doth cary in it many tymes a certain maner of reprehension, diffidence, or mistrustful enioyning of the party to whome it passeth, and that the disposition and carelesnesse of some sortes of men are such, and so hawtie as they wil scarce permit any admonishment, direction, or exhortation at all: it shall for the lenifing hereof, be requisite to entertaine with our selues, this one speciall regard 305 that in writing to such persons, we do endeuour by many reasons to qualifie the sharpnesse hereof, and by a contrary course to deale with them. And for that an honest and lawdable opinion of euery ones actions, seemeth by manifestation and deliuerie thereof vnto the partie, to induce most credence, and that there is no man liuing, of so peruerse and bad accompt, but he desireth at least, and reioyseth to be well deemed of in accompt among the best, it shall herein principally appertaine, that wee doe rather frame supposals of such mens willingnesse, then quite to condemne them by any note of negligence. As for example we may affirme, that not, for that wee deeme him slowe or not prompt inough to such things as wee require, we doe excite such a one to well doing, but as it were calcar addere currenti: we put forward his readinesse by our perswasions and entreatie performe the same. Or otherwise, that we speak hot to such a one, that our exhortation could preuaile aboue yt, wherein long since he hath shewed himself to be a dealer, and therunto most willing, but rather to manifest the reioycing we do therein conceiue,  & the glad expectation we haue of his farther continuance. Or thus, yt he will pardon those exhortations, which not so muche for the weight of theselues, as ye liking we receiue of his vertue, we haue suggested, some wherof more of plenty, then necessitie are fallen from our pen, whereby we confesse by such cullour to egg him forward, who rather needeth a bridle then a spurr in pursute of the same. The applications hereof may no doubt, be of great force in the selfe will of a number, who eyther by the supposed expectation, that they imagined men do conceiue of them, or by the weight of the greatest reason laid down to their view, may be induced to many things. For suppose yt a matter  exhortatory herein so stood, as therby in discourse of liberality to induce a gent of great possessions, and euery good discent to impart some pittaunce of that wealth whiche hee might well spare, to cause of a common wealth or contribution for the poore, were it amisse (hauing both by the prayse, goodnesse, and worthinesse of the act, and by example of some others, put him in minde of the well deseruings thereby attayned) to suggest some inclination of his own vnto the same, either by a surmised report to be deliuered of him, or by likelihood, or by some demonstration, how farre of so euer the veritie thereof do appeare to aunswere the matter? Uerely it seemeth vnto me, that if there shoulde be any sparke at all of good condition resident in such a one, hee might by like degrees be drawne to some affectation therein. And insomuch as the course hereof is not many times vnfrequented. I will shew you a like example, wherein a gentleman of some accompt is in the selfe same maner induced to the regard of a neere kinseman of his owne remayning in London, to whome his allowance was so short and skant, and the feare of the other to displease his graundfather so great, as by sorrow thereof it had like to haue cost him his life, and this was the maner of the same. lenified, by a more gentle or submissiue kinde of deliuerie. 306 Sir I doe not knowe whether by the great affection I doe beare vnto you and yours, or by some straunger motion of my selfe, friendly wishing to all men, or perchaunce supposing it a percell of my duety charitablie to exhorte, or what other cause you may deeme that moueth me in sort following to take vpon me to write to you. Neuerthelesse intending sufficiently of your courtesie, I haue thought meete in the behalfe of the young Gentleman your sonne,  307 whome with muche ado I haue entreated home to my house lying there very sickly, both in respect of hys sicknesse, and for the better remedie thereof hereby to become a meane vnto you. And albeit (such is his gentle  308 condition) as from his own mouth I cannot gather the occasion, yet is not the surmise thereof vnsuspected of others, nor my selfe by many circumstances am ignoraunt from whence the originall doth proceede. For the better opening whereof, it shall not be amisse to call in question his owne estate, what you are vnto him present, and what in tyme to come, you both may, and (in respect of nature) wil, or ought to become vnto him. Principally therefore touching his own state, it is yet greene, weake and almost of no force, and by abilitie so much the lesse, by howe muche the more hee hath sundry occasions to be endamaged, namely by reason of his sutes in law and otherwise. Next drawing to your selfe, you are his Graundfather, the onely patron of his succession, and the principall parte from whence the full remainder of his ioy, comfort and happie quiet is drawne to be reposed. Lastly, you are in present vnto him a seuere gouernour, and a districte commaunder: In time to come both of your selfe and hys good inclination encouraging you, may and shall be a resolute and setled foundation, whereupon the life following which it pleaseth God to lend him, shall more substantially, and with greater maintenance be led and continued. And albeit in all present actions and things  309 afterward to be hoped, I may not finde meanes to discommend your grauitie, who vppon great wisedome, auntiet experience, and perfect proofe, doe best knowe what beseemeth the education of those, whom fatherly care chiefly concerneth, yet because the conditions of the sonne, are nothing such as craueth so hard looking to, and that you may not be nimis durus & perquam seuerus pater : such as in Terence delphus is alleadged, that would induce an ill disposed sonne clam patre , and as it were in secrete, to doe many enormities, not so much as the sound wherof, should perchaunce euer attaine  310 the curious searche of his fathers hearkening. I would be thus bold to say vnto you, that being frequeted with so milde a condition as is in your sonne, in whome no ill disposition is found at all, you should so farre forth, yea in all outward shew and common actions (being at this state and at these yeares as he is) become such vnto him, as of whome hee might presume, be bould to vaunt, and the worlde to take notice and accompt of, seeing that libertie neuer turneth to loosnesse, that by nature is charged with so many vertuous directions. Leauing prophane aucthorities and morall argumentes, doe wee not see that in the holye people of God, the seed of Israel, old Iacob himself, hauing happily  311 transported his old age, to see the blessed succession of Ioseph , how louingly he reioyced vpon them, beeing the children of his youngest sonne, and accordyng to theyr vertues, as bred of his owne loynes, tendred and blessed them. What made Dauid hauing constrayned the rest of his children (whose liues he knew) from hys infancy, and aboue al other, to nourish Solomon , and to edopt vnto him, hys princely seate in succession, but vertue that followed hym? What made manye good menne besides, whose examples are innumerable, to geue libertie to some of theyr of-spring and seuerelie to correcte others, but the contrarye suppose, conceiued in eyther of them? But what? doe I inferre hereuppon, that to your pupill, you are not a lo-Parent? no, for that I knowe the contrarye. What then doe I complayne of, woulde you knowe? Forsooth for that thys loue of yours, is mixed wyth too muche seueritye, you keepe hym too shorte, you restrayne hym too muche. What though, when God  312 shall call you hence, you leaue hym in succession, you mean to do wel and more besides, is that inough? when hee hathe by sute in lawe, whereunto, you haue put him forward, endaungered hymselfe, spent the greatest part of hys lyttle, is crossed wyth manie euill practises, martyred with a thousande cares, defectes, and wantes, and hathe thereunto, little or almost no reliefe, supplye or good encouragement, but perchaunce harde lookes, and euill opinion of some, who in respecte of nature, ought to be more friendly vnto hym besides your selfe, is it marueyle if hee be sicke beeyng thus wearyed, so greeued, and in suche sorte turmoyled? I doe promise you Sir, it greeueth me to see it, and that I haue so muche cause to reporte it (supposing your owne condition to be flexible inough towardes  313 hym, if it be not peruerted) I doe thinke if redresse bee not geuen, and that he haue present comforte, assistaunce, and good encouragement at your hands, hee will not be long liued. Be therefore (good sir) fauourable to your owne, in respect of your selfe, and that you are the originall: he is not his fathers but your childe, you ought, you muste, you are bounde to tender hym, to furnishe hym, to care for hym. Needefull is it, you doe now  314 call to remembraunce, he is no more an infant, but at mans estate, whome you haue brought vppe to your likyng, ordered for your likeyng, and bestowed at your likyng, because as all menne coniectured you made him your liking, by reason whereof you can not nor may in any sorte withdraw or call back, what you haue before determined. Nature, deuine and humaine lawes, common custome and societie, do hereunto  315 perswade you, vrge you, nay compell you. Behooueth not, you suffer that gouernment, for which you are knowne to be wise, herein alone to be blemished. But what doe I inferre thus much vnto you, who (farr better then my selfe) doe knowe what beseemeth you? Certes sir, not for that I doubt therof, but because the care I haue of the action, maketh me more zealous hereof. The long notice I haue had and estimate, I retayne  316 of your acquaintance, the reputation of your selfe, and absolute expectation of the young gentleman, haue thus farre incited me, wherin if I haue proceeded farther then I ought, thinke that it is in respect of the great good will I haue ought. In the acknowledgement wherof, praying al that possibly may be intreated at your handes for your sonne I doe right heartily bid you farewell. this of &c. qualified, wherin presumptions and arguments of a louing care, are for the more facilitie of the exhortation in many places suggested. Neyther is the deliuerie so vehement, or expressed with so many circumstances as are the other, because the reputation of the party to whom it passed, and the declining matter of his aged yeares somewhat bent to selfe opinion (managed by others likeing) would not admit it. The matter hereof wrought yet so naturall a regard in the old man, as limitting his accustomed seueritie being before time without measure, hee was contented euer afterward, with more fatherly acceptaunce to entertayne his sonne in al manner of occasions, as may something appeare by an aunswere hereunto returned, the effect wherof I haue collected into this forme following, the rather for the orderly setting foorth of the same, remembring that, whatsoeuer heerein to be deliuered, by the name of a letter, supplieth ye roome of an example or president, which importeth somewhat therin to be followed. And in yt I shal many times hereafter according to the course of the matter, bee heerein occasioned to put 317 down diuers  Epistles Responsorie, as occasions may serue for presidentes. I thinke it not impertinent if in this place I do somewhat inserte concerning some obseruations in the same. Euery Responsory Epistle therefore, because it chiefly dependeth of the partes of a former letter, requireth this consideration to be had in ye framing therof, that it do fully answere euery point of the Epistle wherunto it is appointed. That therin aboue al other things we indeuour to auoyd al tedious rehearsals (the peeuish affectation wherof is so vnpleasant and burthensome vnto the reader, as nothing more intollerable) for yt I haue seene the letters of some, who to euery point wherunto they haue bin charged to certifie, or make answer, haue repeted ye perticularities verbatim of al the former letter, and therewith haue made such a hotch-potch as hath bin inough for two dayes togither to clog any mans conceit,  & that with very slender recreatio. The custome hereof is too too il. But if necessitie  318 so requireth yt there must be some rehearsal made, let it remain for a direction to those yt wil endeuour to write wel, that they study to gather but the principall matter therin, and the effectes thereof so briefly and closely to compact together, as yt no length of the letter may therein appeare. Which done, we shal by degrees passe forward from point to point, & return euery thing as occasion ministreth. And if any other matter fal out of new to be deliuered, it shall not be il in such kind of answers, somtimes to haue ye same inserted. Thus much haue I thought good to lay down for the respects hereof. And now to ye answer of the last letter. Sir I haue wel conceiued of your letter sent vnto me in the behalfe of my sonne. T. and doe take verye kindely whatsoeuer therin with good affection you haue so plentifully tendred, I am very sorie to heare of hys sicknesse, and doe thanke you manye tymes for your louing conceit towards him and vs, in that you haue bequeathed for our sakes his carefull attendance to your own looking to, the courtesie whereof, shal neither by my self, nor by any other his neerest friends be at any time forgotten. In signe that your good cousel hath preuailed with me, and that the weight of your wordes haue bene of force vnto me, I haue sent him a letter heerein closed  & ten poud in mony, by this bearer, which I pray you of all loues see disbursed to his vses, You shall also so much intend of me, as in my name to cofort him, & assure him hereafter (vpon his no worse desertes) of good expectation from me. For such farther charge as you haue bin at with him I leaue to my self in as ample maner as I may to see requited, In the weight wherof, I doe pray you to bee assertained that you shall finde of me suche a one, who will not fayle to hys vttermost to stand assured towardes you. Because the vacation is now long, I hold it not amisse if vpon hys safe recouerie, my sonne doe come downe into the countrey, the better to recreate his wearied conceites from his former melancholie, I haue appoynted my man to attend him a while that returning back againe, hee may bring vnto me, the more certaine and assured notes of hys safetie. Not holding my selfe ill besteade to remaine charged to one so courteous as your selfe: I giue you to the protection of the almightie, and my selfe to a speedie requitall, L. this of &c. wherin by the varietie in them contayned scope is giuen sufficient, for anye reasonable imitation to be gathered. And were it not that there is yet one subiect behinde, whereunto (of some especiall lyking that I haue to the matter therof) I am most affectionate, I coulde herewith content my selfe without wading anye farther. But insomuch as the same is but my labour, to pen it, and the deliuery therof may also make the example the more plentifull, I will indeuour to put it forwards among the rest, the effect being as followeth. forwards in the profession of Armes, and seruice of his Prince and Countrey , Sithence the time of my little abode  319 heere in London beeing scarse fortie dayes, vnderstandding of the beeing in towne of my La. your mother, I repayred thereupon to her presence to visit her: there did I receiue notice of your being in Ireland,  & that vpo your honorable behauior & good seruice there done, the L. D. did not only testifie the same by his owne hand-writing vnto diuers of the priuie Counsell, but also in especiall letters besides commended the weight thereof, vnto the regard of her most excellent Maiestie. 320 I did not a little reioyce to see that in suche young yeares wherein commonly falleth out a contempt of al excellencies, and fantasticall desire of counterfeit vanities, you could (besides the common trade and custome of the worlde) addicte your selfe wholly vnto so weightie and honourable an exercise, as by laborsome trauell in the seruice and honour of your Prince, and country, to put forward your selfe so timely. Credit me it is not a little pleasing vnto mee to thinke thereon, neyther standeth my affection so slender vnto your fathers off-spring, but that I must euer hold the reputation of their well doing an aduauncement to my imaginations, and the sound of their good successe the very hermony of mine inward soule. It is no new thing I confesse, to see in these dayes a gentleman honourably discended as your selfe, and of  321 like worthie education, to attaine vnto learning, to become practised in armes, to put forward themselues in seruice, but to continue with resolution to performe it with labour, to atchieue it with vallor, to beare it with honour, here is the excellencie, this is the rarenesse, hence springeth the noueltie. Vertue retayning yet her auntient Maiestie, though not pursued as in olde time, with such woonted vehemencie, hath three entrances, leading directly vnto her  322 bewtiful passage, by the ports wherof, whosouer is desirous to attayn her in her purest and most glorious estate, must of necessitie enter. First Fortitude , wherby he must be enhabled to endure whatsoeuer labor  & trauel to be imposed, accounting nothing difficult, to th'end and sweet reward wherof her excellency is appropriate Next Magnanimitie , whiche by a vehement and hawtie desire, reacheth vnto things most excellent and of hiest and statelyest value, not regarding the hard tough and maine force of the passage, with what pursuit so euer it must be followed, so be it by such meanes it may be wonne, and the glory thereunto due, may at last be attained: the reach whereof, tending to the last ende and scope of all his determinations, sweetneth all maner of trauell, and induceth therewithall a contempt of what soeuer lesse valued or hindering, to the worthinesse of of the same. Then Longanimitie , enhabling by great constancie with rare and accustomed patience, to awaite and endure the end, neuer giuing ouer vpon whatsoeuer assaultes, till the determined scope be by all kinde of industrie fully and perfectly furnished. For this cause, the most renowmed part of Vertue is  323 sayd to be excellent, for that many do contemplate her a farre of, but fewe or none at all doe almost come so nigh her as perfectly to see and discerne her, insomuch as some nothing regarding the singularitie of that, whose sweetnes they neuer tasted of become forceles of the pursuit of so deuine an excellencie, and some other sauoring a little the deintines therof, yet ouerreached with the tediousnesse of the enterprise, and hindered by the opposition of a thousand vanities, are so astonished in the first onset, as beeing therewith ouercome, doe by and by giue ouer their purposes. Now therefore my C. if you will be a right fauourer of Vertue in deede, it behoueth that by these possibilities  324 you doe (as a faithfull regarder of her deuine and sacred essence) onely seeke to pursue her,  & that with such and none other respectes, and to no other ende and purpose, but for the sole fruition of her stately and immortall deitie. The time now calleth you forth, your Country, and soyle wherein you were borne and nourished inuiteth you, your praise already gotten, and hope of renow neeuer after to followe, perswadeth you, the honour of your house and parentage constraineth you, yea euery of these solie and altogether doe ioyntly exhort and commaund you, that becomming the selfe same, 325 you vowed and they long since haue lookt for, you doe now shew your selfe such as was promised, and wherin the expectation first conceiued of you, may in no wise be frustrated. Consider I pray you, that the reward of Vertue is Honor , the guerdon of Honor, Fame , the scope of Fame, ternitie ,  326 the seate of  ternitie immortall & euerlasting glory. In liuing in the seruice of your Prince and Country, the profession you haue taken in hand is honourable, the charge honorable, the purpose honorable, and th'end and successe thereof must needs be honourable, behoueth then that your continuaunce therein and your owne desertes be also deemed honourable. Thinke when you tooke vppon you to beare Armes, you then receiued the first cognizance of Vertue , you were entertained with Honor , you became apprentice to Fame , and it was assured (that being with loyaltie demeaned) you should at length receiue reward of euer flourishing glory: It is beleeue me no smal matter, that being a perticuler member, you are put forth as a piller, vpon the proppe whereof reposeth one part of the weight of a comon weale, that the ioies of your whole  327 country are fixed vpon your well doing, that in pursuit hereof a mans priuate cause is not his own, (the secret reuenge wherof may happily turn to an infamed mischiefe) but the cause of the Common good , the publicke matter of all, and that wherof the scope is of all others most sacred and honoured. Beeing entertained in sorte as you are, you shoulde highly wrong the opinion of a great many, in drawing backe from that, wherein you haue beene alreadie so worthely behoued, and in becomming lesse then that whereunto in your very cradle you were at the beginning so principally ordained, for vnseemly were it that you shoulde not haue beene hereunto at the first committed, vnlawfull not to haue persisted, and dishonorable (in due sort) not to see it accomplished. Proceede then my C. in that wherunto your vertue your parentage, your soyle, and your fidelitie haue called you, thinke what how much and how greatly it importeth  328 you, that hauing had so many of your stately ancestors since their first original, that haue bene deemed so worthy, it fitteth not your self alone in (so important actions, concerning especially the honour of your Prince and country) shoulde bee found otherwise then equall vnto them in the highest qualitie. So and in  329 such maner, and by such kind of meanes haue the most auntient & renowmed worthies of the world become termed honored, and mightie. So Epaminondas and Alcibiades among the Grecians, milius Paulus, Fabij and Scipiones amongst the Romaines , haue bin deemed most stately. For such cause the actes of your predecessours and nobilitie of your deceased father haue bene registred  330 with the most worthie. O so sweetly might sound from out his breathing ghost vnto your liuing eare, that excellent verse of Uirgill. Disce puer virtutem ex me verumque laborem, Fortunam ex alijs. The signification whereof, what other thing may it els importe, but that betweene them who beeyng neuer eternised by any memorable action, hauing confounded theyr death with obscuritie, and such as neuer were borne, there resteth in maner no difference at al. Ardua virtutis est via . T'is labours force that maketh way vnto Vertue , great matters vnto the furtheraunce of her are but easie, the meaner trifles, the lowest, of no value. To ouercome others by vertue is a thing moste honorable, but in pursuit therof to be conuinced of any  331 other, is a thing moste vituperable. You are nowe brought by Fortune vnto a district passage, whereby of necessitie you must either by reputation of most excelling worthines finish the iourny, or recreant  & discomfited, confesse the vtmost of your imbecilitie. But what doe I conferre vnto your view, the notes of such and so many doubtes and hazardes, knowing a minde insinuate  332 in your selfe by nature, that could neuer so muche as thinke or imagine of thinges contemptible, or of anie vile or seruile qualitie at all? truely for no worse meane, nor to any other end or purpose, but thereby to egge you forward by all kinde of possibilities, to th'increase of your highest worthinesse, that by howe muche the more you shall goe about to exceede any others, by so much the more greater you may bee commended and extolled aboue all others. 333 Ease and securitie, are two pernitious ennemies of euer flourishing glory, the industry wherof, preuenteth yet all circumuention, which either by slouth or negligence may be imposed: the victory hereof is not any others, but your own, nor the honor to any other appertaining but vnto your self. Be therefore such in cotinuance, as may fully be aunswerable to ech part of your noblenesse, and God who is the creatour of all things, and fauourer of ech stately accident, blesse your endeuours with the sustentation of Vertue , whiche is euer permanent, At, B. this of  &c. Vnnecessary were it to make further declaration of the order of this Epistle, then hath beene already said of the others, for that the generall places hereof, are no more then were deriued from the former examples. Onely I must note, that heerein is no Exordium at all. But the Narration is the foremost induction to the matter of the Epistle, as the learner maye finde out by quotation of the margent. And now will we turne ourselues vnto the next sort of this Deliberatiue kind, which falleth out to be Dehortatorie . The nature whereof, is by all forcible arguments that maye be induced, to dehort and with-draw from any matter offensiue, or that may be counted euill. praise, fortified in diuers sortes, as of the Person , of the  Action called Honestum. Now these contrary wise, are enforced by the kinde of dispraise, or discomendation of that which we dehort from, be it in the Person, Action or Thing, and is deriued from Inhonestum . In the matter hereof, it is tollerable, by all sortes of argumentes that may be, to infer and obiect any thing, to the diminution or defacing of that which we go about to impugne, as for example, if I should dehort a man from rebellion or infidelitie towardes his country. I will touching the action, shew how vnnaturall the cause is he taketh in hand, being against his natiue soyle. how horrible, by laying out the greatnes of the offence: How vniust, in respect that it is against his alleageaunce to his Prince: How impious, in that it retaineth no piety, turneth to the disturbance of a quiet state, and breedeth the subuersion of all peaceable gouernment. How insufferable, by reason that good and holesome lawes are thereby infringed, all sortes of honest and good men wronged, and cosequentlye the common-wealth by such meanes topsie turuie tourned. Wisedome, that might be alleadged, I will affirme it to be Follie, Lewdnes, and finally whatsoeuer other good part or Uirtue in him, to the worse and contrary qualitie, as he that by so bad an endeuour, hath ouerthrown what otherwise might in him be els deemed praise worthy. For the demonstration of these, all necessary circumstaunces maye be implied, whether to the aduauncement of the opposite good, or codemnation of the present euill, be it by argument, likelihood, comparison or example, or by any other waies or meanes whatsoeuer. And for that in the last Epistle, the exhortation thereof tended something to the putting forwarde of a valiaunt noble Gentl. in the most honourable part of his progression, consisting in his faithfull and loyall seruice towarde his Prince and countrye. This Dehortatorie therefore shall now in like maner bee, to pull backe and with- draw an other from a pretended matter, of iniurie, infidelitie, or faithlesse dealing, by him to be perpetrated to or against his countrye, whose seuerall effects shall be accordingly suted into these particularities ensuing. withdrawen from infidelitie or rebellion. 334 My good G. my faithfull louing countryman and dearest of accompt (whilom all and either of these vnto me, so be it the frowning heauens and despitefull wicked fate, had not once harbored the contrarye) what shall I write vnto thee, or by what termes may I now salute thee. Erst wonted were my letters to pursue thee careles in anye cost, and familiarlye and boldlye to regard thee, now blushing at thy vncouth hap, and carefull of thy carelesse vsage, they can not without griefe approch thee, nor once without sorrow intentiuelye behold thee. Alas my G. what fury hath led thee, what madnes  335 hath bewitched thee, what hatefull destinie hath pursued thee, that being such as thou wert, on whom nature and the heauens as it seemed had powred al their gifts most plentifully, thou wouldest yet be led to deface so many parts of excellency, with one hatefull, ignominious and shamefull blot, of so shameles, wicked, and most heynous trecherie. Didest thou for this cause take vpon thee profession  336 of armes, to become iniurious to thy countrye, to bereaue men of their patrimonye, to be a destroyer of vnitie, a patterne of infidelitie, the dishonour of thy, family, and consequently to thy selfe and dearest soile, a professed and open enemye? Ah happye in all other thinges but in this sole enterprise, in the brochinge whereof thou wast put forwarde to be made onely vnhappy, behoueth with such ingratitude to reward the first fawtor of thy familye? Was this the ende of thy byrth, thy parentes education, thy estate, thy wealth, thy possibilitie, to become a traitor to thy prince, and a rebell to thy country? No no, my G. vilde and too ill beseeming is the drift that hath so ouer-taken thee, and ignoraunt was hee of that became thee, that firste therevnto perswaded thee. When thou liest armed in the feildes, and (mustering  337 thy ranckes in the daye time) beholdest and lookest round about thy country, thinkest thou not then with thy selfe, in this soyle was I borne, within this land lyeth my patrimonie, here had I first sucke, and sithens haue the fruites therof nourished me, and could I then become so farre ingratefull and vnkinde, as for all these benefites to destroye thee? Not so, nor in such maner haue the virtuous in the field beene accompted so worthye, not for this cause or in suche actions, haue men beene sayde to beare them-selues honourablie. Corolianus , thou wast conuinced by the veiw of thy Citie and mothers entreatie and shall I vnhappy man for all this persist in this cruelty. 338 Iustly and by great occasion credite me, mightest thou thus complaine of so great an iniurie, and all this beeing so true, as nothing more true: can it be sayde that in prosecuting the same, thou maist be freed from  339 infamy? What I pray thee hath made men famous, and canonized their memory, was it not their munificence and valiaunt demerites in and towardes their countrye? For in what one thing are we more likened vnto God him-selfe, then in the worthines of our mindes, the conclusions whereof, ought they at any time to be  340 stained with such hatefull obloquie? The Asse runneth thorough fire for the safegard of her issue, and shal the valiant man become negligent to the aide of his country? How farre more waightely then shall he be accused, who not onelye giueth no ayde at all to his country, but also is therevnto a confederate and most cruell enemy? How carelesse are such men of their fame, and how vnlike of all others to those memorable worthies, the precious regarde whereof, vnto them hath beene suche, as then goods, possessions, riches, kingdomes, yea life it selfe hath beene helde moste dearest. Peruse but the auntient historyes of Rome , and looke  341 there, of Mutius Sc aeuola , the most inuincible Romaine , with what confidence went he solie into the tent of Porsenna his and their countries capitall enemie, with intent onely to destroy him. The good Furius Camillus ,  342 who after many high and honourable seruices by him don to the common-wealth of Rome , was by his own Citizens vniustly banished, how farre off was he think you, from this your opinion? For the Galles whome before he had expulsed, hauinge in the time of this his banishment asseiged the Citye of Rome , and beeinge then very likely to haue distressed the same, in somuch as they had already forraged, burnt, and destroyed the whole country round about, he more sorrowful at the likely ruine of his Citie, then grieued at his own proper banishment, (moued therevnto of verye pietie and loue to his natiue soyle and country) entred councell with the Ardeats , and by his wisedome, pollicie and great manhoode so perswaded those people, that in feare of their owne mishap, they were content to leuie a mighty armye vnder his conduct, wherewith he not onely put backe the enemy, but therewith so mightely pursued them, as by such meanes he vtterly freed and set at libertye his dearest beloued Citye and countrye. What need we search abroade for such forraine examples,  343 and why draw we not rather home into our owne soyle of England? What Cronicle shall euer remayne,  344 or what english historye shall be euer extant, that shall not euerlastinglye report, the deserued fame of that right worthy and very noble act in deed, of Sir William 345 Walworth Knight, once L. Maior of this our Citye of London, the remembraunce wherof (to his perpetuall praise, and endlesse confusion of all others, who not onely abstayning the putting in vse of suche his memorable virtue, but which is worse, shall endeuour by cruel force to tender violence vnto their sacred anointed prince, and of all others moste fauoured countrye, shall yet flourish for euer. Ill do you conceaue or think on the worthines of that good-man, who in the tyme of king Richard the second, when with a most sodeine and straunge kind of rebellion, the king was troubled, the Realme pestred, and the strongest of the Kinges subiectes greatlye feared, euen at that time when the proud fawtor and captaine of this rebellious and rascally multitude, durst hatefully and most vndutifullye to beard the king in his owne presence, and each man shunned to impugne the contrary: This valiaunt, this  346 good, this right noble and most worthy Citizen, standing by, when the wretched and presumptuous varlet, with so little reuerence approched the king, and remembring the seruices of many worthye men, that by an honorable aduenture and hazard of their liues had to their eternall memorye, before time freed their country with liberty, greuing that with so hie an abuse his soueraigne Lord being yet as it were a child, should there in his hearing, be so far forth amated, he couragiouslye stept vnto the rebell, and taking him by the gorge, proud varlet quoth he, that darest thus conteptuouslye demeane thy selfe, vnto thy king and statelye soueraigne, foule death betide thee, and shame quickly consume thee, why aunswered the vilaine in great disdaine, is it thou that greeuest at that I haue said? greiue  347 replied the stout couragious Citizen, yea euen I, t'is I that greeue at thee, and haply should think my self accurst, if thou shouldest scape fro me vnreuenged, wherwith drawing more close vnto him, he puld him from his horse by maine force, and stabbed him to the hart with his dagger. The destruction of whome, bred such confusion vnto all the residue of his headstrong army, and sight wherof kindled so great a fury in the residue of the kings company (who for that present vpon speciall considerations was there, attended on but meanly) that the whole rebellious rowt were by such means euer after discomfited vtterly, wherwith before that instant the whole realme had like to haue beene turned topsie turuie. He and such as he laboured not by ambitious pride to arrogate vnto the selues a lawles extremitie, but studied of meere loue and entier zeale, how and which way they might performe best seruice to their prince and country. O more then ordinary affection,  348 and feruencye of hie and statelye worthines, in the regard whereof, life was not sweet vnto these men, whose liuing might not redound to become for their dearest soile to be honoured and famous. What then maye I saie my G. of that by thee, and thy copartners taken in hande, whither will you be driuen, what shall become of you, how doe yee behaue your selues, who  349 may receaue you, in whose inward conceiptes (not the pietie  & regard of any of these) no nor so much as one sparke of their loyalty, could so deeply be impressed, as whereby to with-drawe you from these vnnaturall broiles. What haue you founde in your deare prince,  350 what in your louing country, what in this city, what to any one of al your selues in particularity, that might in such hateful maner incite you, and by occasion wherof you shold thrust your selues into so great an enormity.  351 Beleue me, and it shal verily be approued, the successe heereof to returne vnto you none other, then the very rewardes of such infamy. I haue known thee, being far lesse in yeares then at this instant, to haue bene able to rule thy selfe, and with plausible moderation to be indued in all thinges, couldest thou then beeing a childe perfourme this in thy selfe, and beeing now a man art not able to indure it? There be I know about thee, that  352 will perswade that all thou doest heerein is virtue, that therin thou hast great wisedom, much fortitude, & notable moderation, that the action is hauty, the occasion libertye, and the end glorye. But howe greatlye they doe erre in so sayinge, let this sentence of good Camillus stande for you and vs indifferentlye, whose notable speach spronge vp from those his inuiolable virtues, spared not this, to affirme in presence of al the Senate vnto the people. Let others (quoth he) deeme it a thinge euill and reprochable at anye time to bee  353 found faulty, in not yeelding ready succours and ayde to their country: Camillus for his part is and shall be of that resolute determination, that it is and ought to be reputed for euermore a thing detestable and vilde, and of all other the most hatefull and replenished with all execrable miserye. How thinketh then your gentle minde, of the action by this time? Is it (suppose you) anie  354 virtue that therevnto preferreth you? Camillus adiudged that it was not reprocheable, but vilainous, so much as to be founde failing in ought to his countrie, and may it then be thought a thing honest to become a persecutor of your country? It is not Fortitude : but Timeritie , that conducteth  355 your enterprises, for Fortitude aspireth to far more noble and statelier purposes. The action,  & determination, you prefer therin is not (as fondly by you is coceaued) Honor but Haughtines , not Libertie but Loosnes , not Virtue but Viciousnes : why then continue you in this sort togethers, vpon so wicked and deuilish a purpose? Why returnest not thou rather to thy selfe my C. and hauing long before striued to emulate the praise of others by an vnstayned gentilitie, wipe now quicklye off this foule blemish from thee, and couering the filthynes thereof by a most incomparable fidelitye, become once againe like vnto thy selfe. At the least wise, if the loue of thy country, thy fidelitie towardes thy prince,  356 the example of Virtue her self, and so many her famous and renoumed followers (then which no one thing on earth ought more to allure a man) maye not herewith conuince thee, let yet the execrable and immortall  357 hate, that all good men beare to the practize of suche kind of crueltye, the feare of euer harboring shame,  & erected ignomy, and neuer after hope (thy credit once consumed) againe to recouer thee, let these I saye constraine thee. Whilest there is yet but one craze or slender flaw in the touchstone of thy reputation, peece it vp, and new flourish againe by the greater excellency, the square of thy workmanship. A few daies are to be passed, in which there is yet time, fame wouded in life maye once be restored, if death do preuent thee, thy shame and destruction is for euer shrowded. The next  358 newes I heare from thee, may make thee fortunate, or me for thee alwaies vnhappy. My longing would be satisfied of this wherein I dehort thee. If onely herein thou condiscende vnto me, my selfe am thine, and to none so much as thy selfe absolutely, I loue thee, I require thee, I praye thee, and praye for thee, that thou maist as I wishe, and wouldest as I bid, bee for and to me. Fare well if thou doest well. In this Epistle is set forth at large, the chiefest nomber of al occasions, inducing effects, and withdrawing from the purpose thereby discommended, wherein I haue endeuored as amply as I may, to sort euery part thereof to his greatest efficacy. Further might I proceed in these titles with some others examples, but that the order heerof beeing so nerrely annexed to the other following of Swasory and Disswasorie Epistles, it seemeth the very selfe same obseruation of the one, runneth almost both in the Hortatorie that in all thinges the disposition of either of these Epistles, are for the most part a like, vnlesse it maye be sayd this onelye difference to remaine betweene them, that as the Hortatorie stirreth vp with prickes, the Swasorie teacheth by prooues. The perswader chaungeth his opinions, the exhorter putteth forwarde his suggestions. In Swasorie Epistles we aduise them that erre, or otherwise are staggering in doubt. In  Hortatorie we pricke forth the slouthfull, and encourage those that are willing. And yet if we should touch these, as they are layd out to the quick, the parts Hortatorie of necessity must somtimes then be ioyned to this other of Swasorie, especiallye in the Epiloge, consisting euer of effects & nothing of arguments. In conclusion the one and the other being so indifferent, and of such likenes as they are, we will proceed fro hence (leauing this long dehortation, which for varietie of matter was in such sort continued) vnto our Epistles Swasorie, and the residue omitted in the other, in these also deuise to be considered, adding by the way, that in searching the seuerall places of these Epistles, wherupon they may be sayde to consist, the selfe same partes are herein to bee required, as in the aduertisementes before the Hortatorie Epistles are already remembred. The extreme griefe wherin my  359 selfe was a partaker with you of the death of your late husbande, woulde not suffer me (good Mistres E.) at my last being with you, to deliuer what then I thought meet for your estate, and sithence haue more at large considered vppon to be for your profite. And albeit your selfe are I know of discretion sufficient, and the nomber of your friendes of regard compotent, both to consider and councell, what vnto your present affaires maye be deemed most correspondent: yet may it not be ill accepted, if my self of a great many, that haue wished well to your person, and fauoured euermore your good condicion, do here in also amongst the rest, put forward my meaning, and perswade you therby vnto that, which (though not already may be fitting to your instant liking) yet to your present behoofe may returne no question of soundest and best consideration. And first I deeme it not impertinent to referre vnto  360 your knowledge, what I haue throughlye conceaued with my selfe of your being, viz , that you are a widow, a Gentlewoman of very worshipfull parentage and discent, the wife before time of a Gentleman of as good reputation as liuing, as good aliance as credite, that you are reputed modest, discreet, wise and well gouerned, that you are and ought to be warie in your actions, and such as whereof the babling multitude maye reape no aduantage, and finally that by reason of the ouer hastye determination of his life (whose continuance might haue ridde you of innumerable cares) you are pestred with some troubles, the most part of your liuing in suspence, and that whereof you deeme your selfe most assured, hanging vpon so many hazardes, as hetherto remaineth doubtfull, in what sort you shall compasse it, or with what liking to your self you may happely ouerpasse the same. Touching the first, I warne not that according to  361 your present estate you doe minde what you are, what you haue beene, of whome you are discended, and in what sort you may best prouide with warines, to deale for all these: but drawinge to the latter; and weighing on what termes you stand, how hardly you are bestead, what slender meanes to auoide it, I repute him not the worst well willed that coulde aduise you with contentment, and little hazarde, in what sort you mighte beste indeuour in all effectes to aunswere 362 it. It is reported vnto me, that by the procurement of some, fauoring your aduauncement, there is now preferred vnto your liking a yong Gent. virtuous, discreet and well ordered, the sonne and heire of a worshipfull Knight, on the choice and regarde of whose parentes, dependeth the best assuraunce of your whole porcion, in whose condition and behauiour, albeit you find no one thing to be reprehended, yet disclaime you to bee married, you will heare of no suters, there must be in your hearing no speach at all of liking, and you meane not so soone forsooth to set forward for a husband. The course you do take herein, seemeth in my opinion  363 very euil, insomuch as contrary to that, which both your yeares, your estate, your liuing, and present occasions do require, you forciblye are indeuored to make so vndiscreet and setled a resistaunce. Why La. doe you think it profiteth at all the deceased ghost of him that loued you (a yong gentlewoman as you are scarce, exceeding twenty yeares) to liue thus solitarie? Hangeth the censuring of your modesty, and acceptance of that which your best friendes do wish for, and the wisest do allowe of, on the tatling humors of common supposes? If it be deemed once fit for you to marrye againe,  364 and that vpon the warie and circumspect choice therof dependeth a maner of necessitye, and that now, before any one of yours almost suspected it, the plenty of that might be charilie wished for, is layde already into your bosome, behooueth the respect of a little time which (being sooner or later so it be perfourmed with modestye, and aunswered with discretion) mattereth not at all do deteine you so much, as thereby you are not able to see into your owne profit? Is it not I praye you a purpose honest that is tendered? Is it not a  365 matter lawfull to bee intended? is it a thing vnmeet for your present yeares at this instaunt to be reputed? Is it not all in all whatsoeuer, in the best sort vnto you, that might at any time be regarded? Why then abstain you the entertainment of your owne good? why draw you thus backwarde from your owne aduauncement? Why cease you to accept that whereunto in the ende, you must by meere force be compelled? If you will beleeue me in any thing, or do suppose the waight of my credite to be auaileable vnto you in ought, I woulde aduise you in other sort, considering that by declyning from a selfe opinion of that wherevnto without such manifest reason you are induced, you shal do most good vnto your selfe, and giue occasion to them that loued you, to think that by so doing, their good counsels haue happely wrought the same, for aduancement towards you. I had thought with my selfe many times sithence the death of your husband, how much imported the vnsetled reach of your liuing, to be renued in match with one of good calling: see now God  & Fortune 366 more fauouring your happ, then your selfe your owne wel doing, haue sent you such a one, as of whom you might vaunt, and iustlye in all thinges be occasioned to accompt of. It now appertaineth that either by fond selfe wil, or to much vnkindnes, you shake not of from you, the formost occasion of your succeding happines.  367 I reck not what of the common sort (more of ignorance then wit) may in suppose of the hasty conclusion be in secreat alleadged, their errors like their fancies, are as incertaine as peeuish. Be you onely herein perswaded, to what most of al beseemeth you,  & think, that both in the waightines, and regard attributed to his and your owne worthinesse, you can for the present  368 frame your selfe to nothing, that to your estate may returne so commodious, whereunto though no other matter at all enioyned you, it were now sufficient that so forced a necessitye constraineth you, whereunto the  369 regard of your selfe and your owne good fortune willeth to obey. Longer could I debate vnto you the great liking of many, conceaued of the partie, to the deliuery wherof, by the report of your nearest kinsmen, I doe solie refer you, onelye studying in this, and whatsoeuer els I maye by all endeuours to pleasure you, whereof praying you to bee most assured, I doe in all courtesie leaue you. At B. this of, &c. The maner of this Epistle differing somewhat in order from the rest, after the Exordium therof (in which is a declaration made concerning the person to whom the same is directed, and limitation of time for the deliuerie of the intendment) comprehendeth next a peculiar, discription and laying out of the party by insinuation, wherin whatsoeuer inferences thereof to be obiected againste the matter in handling are consideratly preferred. After all which, followeth the Narration and Proposition togeathers. Then Distributio , in which the partes proposed by the narration are particularlie distinguished. And so Confirmatio , &c. The places frequented herein are from Honest, Necessitie , and Vtilitie : which also in the residue of this sute, are most commonly pursued. The vse of Swasorie kind, admitting such and so manye diuersities as it doth, is herein often beautified and set foorth with those Descriptorie partes, either concerning the thinge it selfe, or the person of any one: to the which is commonly annexed a certaine kinde of praise in the putting forwardes or aduauncement of the same. Wherein let it be supposed that my selfe (hauing beene a trauailer and delighted with the pleasure thereof) would goe about to perswade my friend, (being a yong and towardly Gent. and one that hath sufficient maintenance therunto, also of a good and sound constitution of body, able to endure labour, and to away with chaunge) to leaue the delicacie of his own soile, & now in his primier iolity, to pursue straunge coastes, and the admirable scituation, brauery, pleasure, noueltie & vnknown wonders of other countries: needfull shall it be that I do first make a description of the same places, their diuersities and pleasures, either by skill or experience, to be laid down as near as may be gessed. In which if any one thing chance to appeare, more excellent, more pleasing, or more wonderful then the rest, that will I set forth at large, and according to the worthines, quantity or admiration therof, preferre it to the vttermost, the rather to draw him to that wherein I endeuour so fully to haue him perswaded. If also I should go about to induce an vntoward sonne to the obediece of a wel disposed father. I must first describe the office and duty wherein aswell by the lawes of God, as by impression of nature, children are tied and bound to an humble and reuerend regard of their parents. Next I will by doble example commende and extoll with praise, the tendred duty and louing obedience of those, who in al memory and accompt are registred to haue well deserued of their elders, and then the infamie, shame, wicked ende and destruction of such as by a secure, stubborne and carelesse demeanour, haue neglected or attempted the contrarie, the generall praise or common mislike of each of the one or the other, shall be a meane that our perswasions in such a cause may be deemed the more waighty. Perswasion likewise of Friendship, of Loue, of Conuersation, Virtues, formerly in our Hortatorie Epistles remembred, maye heerein by their seuerall descriptions and praise of their worthinesse bee plentifullye perfourmed. As in Friendship the description may be shewed in the efficacie, which by nothing so much as example is confirmed, and approoued by the common affinitie that each thinge hath with other. The prayse also by the sweetnesse of Societie is preferred, by the firme, trust, repose, and loyaltye thereby assured, by the equall participation of ioyes, of sorowes, of euils, of losses, of discomfortes, by a similitude of the same condition, the same intendment, affection or liking, by the somme of ioyes, happines and felicity therin contained. In Loue likewise, charged by nature, by dutie, by obedience, the descriptions and praises, are to bee handled in their seuerall arguments. As by Nature, beeing descending from parents to their children, being interchaungeable also betweene sisters and brethren. By Dutie, which principallye belongeth vnto God, to our countrye, to our kinsfolke, to our benefactors and followers. By Obedience to our Prince, to our Parents, and to our superiours. Conuersation also Gouernment entertainment of companies, moderation in all sortes of common and vsuall exercises, chast, sober, and laudable kinde of liuing of euery one. The praises vnto them incident, deduced from the estate, betternes, or nobilitie of any, indued withall or the greatest nomber of these. To all which particularities may be added suggestions and diuers inforcements, whereby to perswade a man to the acceptaunce and embracing of either of them, as wherin the weight of all good counsels are chiefly preferred. These and such as these are comprehended in epistles Swasorie , by the neat conueyaunce whereof, we moue the affects of any one to the allowance of our writing. For which cause it shall behooue, that such reasons of inducement as shall be laid downe, do carrie with them their pithines and validitie, beseeming the argument we haue in handling. To which end these briefe aduertisementes may be receaued, beeing as it were steppes and degrees, wherwith the learner may be stayed vp to a more perfect consideration, of the purpose and deliuery, of whatsoeuer he shal be occasioned to write of, by the parts of this, or any other example, to be the more plentifully ordered. acceptance and regard of one brother to an an other. The sound and entire familiaritie wherwith your Parentes in their life time sometimes entertained  370 me, and the neerenes of neighbourhood twixt both our friendes, and long education wherein ioyntly we haue conuersed together, moueth me at this instaunt somewhat to write vnto you in respect of the reputation, credite, and accompt that in the world you now beare, and also the rather to winne you to the regard of that, which to the state of your present being, and worthines of your former offspring may be found meetest and conuenient. It is giuen me to vnderstand of a younger brother  371 you haue here in London, who at the time of your fathers death being committed to your charge, is for default of maintenance, badly inured, worse trayned, and most perilously by all kinde of likelihoode, thorough such sufferance in the loosenes of his liuing, already hazarded. Trust me, I woondered not a little when I heard it,  372 and so muche the more was the matter troublesome vnto me, in that respecting it was not tolde in secret, it seemed vnto me by the lookes & gestures of the whole companie, that heard it, your good demeanour therby was very hardly censured, in that standing in suche case of credite as you doe, your wealth so aboundant, and, and your Parentes so well accompted of, you would in this sort, and in that place of all others suffer him to wander carelesse, whome you ought to haue constrayned, by any possible carefulnesse. How ill beseeming it is both to you and yours, that it should so fal out, you may by supposes many wayes coniecture. For my part it greeued me when I heard it, and I was not quiet till I found conuenient time to aduertise you of it And if my opinion may at all preuayle with you, you shoulde quickly call him home from hence, and see him more better to bee prouided for, and more worthily to bee trained vp. Consider I pray you, the life hee taketh in hand, befitteth not suche a one, whose originall was  373 so honest, is ill beseeming the yonger brother of your selfe, vnworthie his birth or name of a gentleman, and altogether repugnant to the qualitie of your behauiour or anye part of your liuing. You are to remember that he is yet very greene, now pliable to whatsoeuer may bee impressed in him, as chafed waxe apt to receaue any figure, like vnto a new vessell to be seasoned with whatsoeuer licour, what he now taketh taste and sauour of, that he holdeth, what habit you now cast vp on him, the same shadowe hee lightly beareth: Great cause haue you therefore now to be warie how and in what sort he liueth. Your industry, your brotherly care, your loue, your especiall regard and kindnes it is, that must be aiding  374 in this, you and none other are the same on whome he relieth, you are to prouide for him, and it is your selfe that must aunswere him. Think that Nature, Loue, Duty , yea verie Pietie bindeth you vnto him, who hath none other left to depend vppon, but suche as by possibilitie your selfe may become vnto him. In the consideration  375 of which, let I pray you my words become thus muche regarded vnto you, that heerein as in all other thinges you performe that beseemeth you. Longer could I occupie my selfe to trauell in this action with you, but that I deeme it (more than alreadie) impertinent to require you, Greeting your selfe many times in my name, I omit therefore farther to detein you. From my house in B. this of  &c. store and plentie of example, the patternes of which, being heere seuerally set downe at large, would make the volume ouer great, and the habit too cosome for the wearing. Suffiseth therefore, that in the matter preceeding this Epistle, I haue shewed you diuers other occasions inducing argument, wherupon these sortes of letters may be framed, according to which, or any other imagination not here supposed, whatsoeuer is intended to be written, may be orderly carried. The difficultie is nothing if the learner do but first consider wyth himself, what it is he goeth about to aduise or perswade, by in sight wherof, he may forthwith imagine what parts and places are therin to be occupied. Nowe then if this argument fal within ye compasse of any one of these herein specified, he may distinguish the same by the description & laying forth hereby already deliuered. If not, then by Imitation of the like, it may as fully be perfected. And seeyng we haue intended by al these to proceed for the more easie instruction as plentifully as we can. Let vs first adde the letter Responsorie to this last Epistle, and concluding solie with one other example, referre whatsoeuer after for this title to the readers consideration. Sir it discontenteth me not a litle to be informed by your letter, of the iniust suppose that men so vnkindly conceiue of me, touching the ill disposed behauiour of my younger brother, but moste of all misliketh me, that you who haue so long knowne me, shoulde with the rash conceite of the residue, adiudge me so peremptorily, as partly being of common opinion with them, to deeme by the naked shew of his ill estate, that the same proceedeth either of my too little care, negligent indeuour, or ill circumspection, in not respecting and prouiding sufficiently what needfully beseemeth him. Beleue me sir, the conceit of all or any of these, touching what concerneth mine own peculier regard, are vnto me most iniurious, neither (to whom soeuer haue knowne me) did I in all my life as I thinke, giue anye such token or matter of likelihood, as wherby I might be supposed so muche to impugne my selfe, or to haue bene iniurious to any. The boy I confesse in nature is my brother, deare and charie inough vnto me, in respect wee had one father and mother. Howe warie I haue euer bene ouer all his demeanours, how watchfull in the first preuention of all hys vntoward purposes, howe willing hee might be trained vp in that beseemed his parentes, the cost I haue bin at, with him his tutors that should haue cared for him, those that haue had most doings about him, can chiefly testifie. If I shuld tel it you, you would not thinke it, if it should be reported to many others, they would scarce beleue it. Before God sir, I must tell you, it is straunge and very straunge vnto me, that being in maner a childe, so well fostered as he hath bene, so little knowing of want or penurie as he hath done, so vnwoontedly accustomed to this hardnesse by hym newly begunne, in what sorte he can endure it, & with what appetite he can so grosely away with it. Witte he hath inough I confesse, but too too euill addicted, conceite plentifull, but most vntowardly followed, qualities to be accompted of, but vilely misled, Alas the remembraunce greeueth me to thinke on it, and I would I had spent largely to redresse it. It is neither want of care, loue, liking, or looking to, that hath procured it, permitteth it, or hindereth to reclayme it. It is the frowning heauens and his wicked destinie that performeth it. The fire the more it is couered, the more it breaketh out and flameth. The swift currant neuer so little 376 stopped, ouerfloweth the threshold . I would be loth to inferr vnto you that (by what decree I know not ordayned) hee is thus violently caried. Neither woulde I gladly stand vpon these determinations, that the force therof may not in time bee suppressed, But knowing the meanes I haue thereto applied, I promise you for my part, I hold it to be greatly feared. This one conclusion may rest(sir) for your generall satisfaction. The boie is nowe neere about you, finde meanes I beseeche you (for the loue I knowe you owe vs) to winne him once vnto you, myself wil be at anie cost whatsoeuer, to satisfie you: so thee hee may be redeemed, order him, deale with him, place him, doe to him what you list, or can suppose to bee[illeg.] n[illeg.] there shall not want, to enlarge it, to cherish it, [illeg.] the vttermost to mayntaine it. Meane while till you haue approoued what I haue wished, and gladly would care to bee accomplished, deale fauourablye and no worse with me I pray you, then I deserue for your own, and all others opinions. Thanking your good care, and consideration had in hys and my behalfe, I doe herewith bid you hartily farewell. R. this of  &c. The order of this letter seemeth vnto me very pertinent vnto the matter of the former Epistle, aunswering fully in eche point vnto theffects of the same: In the formost part wherof, is declared the discontentment of the supposed obiecte because it was vniuste thoughe the shewe of the partie ministred an outwarde imagination thereunto very likely. Next that he who knewe him so well woulde enter so rashly into the common conceite of those, that little vnderstood and lesse did intend of him. Afterward he openeth his endeuors, studie, and inforcement of good education, excusing the hardnesse of the one by the diligent preuention of the other, if possible it might haue preuailed. Then the abruption into lewdnesse, and the il hope of recouerie, which not resolutely is concluded but doubtfully by Allegories coniectured. Lastly for satisfaction of all opinions, he requesteth his owne triall in the cause, with offer of whatsoeuer expence needfull to procure a remedie which hee greatly coueteth and thereupon endeth. The argument of the next example tending to a reformation of the studies of some one therein supposed, perswadeth a pursuit of matters enhabling to farre greater profite. And (as once before, and many times after, also it may in other [illeg.]sties fall out) there is in this no Exordium, but the beginning hereof beareth solie a Narration, of whose nature and of another the partes of euery Epistle I thinke needlesse in this place, or els where, more largely [illeg.]to speake of, for that in a chapter before passing in the generall aduertisemente of this booke, I haue not left the same altogether vnsignified, each of whiche to the intent they may the more fully appeare in all sorts of Epistles wherein they are placed, I haue, and still doe adioyn theyr notes in theyr seuerall applications, wherunto by conueyance of the matter, they are alwayes intituled. fruitlesse vanities, to more learned and profitable studies. I Receiued on Saturdaye last a  377 letter from your vnkle, wherin amongest sundrie other matters I was aduertised, that leauing your formed learned studies, wherunto with great cost and charge of your Parentes, you had bene trained, you haue giuen your selfe whollye to certaine things, the regard wherof albeit in theyr moderate vses, I cannot discomend, yet in respect of your former intendments, I can terme the none other then meere follies, and of all others most fruitlesse vanities. It is reported with vs for certayne, that you are become  378 an excellent good dauncer, that you are growne prettilie skilled on instrumentes, whereon you plaie reasonably, that you spend the time limitted for more profite in the Vniuersitie , in makyng of songes and most curious ditties, that you are very fitly seated for wantonnes, and worthily behaued for all curious and carpet conueyaunces. I would for mine own part nothing at al mislike what herein you haue frequented, weighing in deed that as  379 they may be in sort intertained, these qualities do very much beseeme a gentleman, and are in their kinde seemly ornamets adapted to euery youthful rekoning: but studying them as you doe by themselues, inuring your selfe wholy to their delight, abandoning whatsoeuer might best honor and bewtifie their worthinesse, in respect of the sole propertie of themselues and their own peculiar goodnesse, I say they are vanities, trifles, thinges of no moment, and (in such respect) to be held in eache sound opinion of farre lesse valew and iudgement. The intendment of your going to the Vniuersitie was for learning sake, to th'intent to become an excellent  380 scholler, not a curious dauncer, a mayster of Arte, not an vnthriftie maister, a curious thetorician, not a conceited Musition, your vnkles care, was by vilefieng his wealth vnto you, (the weight wherof by imminent perilles we see dayly perishe before our eyes) to purchase for you the endowment of a farre more greater and assured treasure, by knowledge to decerne trifles, to winne skil, to despise trifles, that leauing small riches to inherite you, your selfe might gather possessions whereby to enriche you. Farre misconceiued are you in my iudgement, to relinquishe the hoped reckoning of that you came for, to apply your selfe to that which few doe accompt of, and the wisest woulde neuer sweate for, you shall therefore if you wil nowe be ruled by me, returne your conceite to a farre more better purpose. You shall call to  381 mind, that all studies whatsoeuer, by howe muche the more excellent eche one appeareth before the other, by so muche the more assured are they in theyr kinde,  382 and aboue al the residue, with farre greater estimate to be preferred: if so? then must you graunt me that no one iote vpon earth (then sweete Learning , then precious and most sacred Skill , then aboue al earthly things whatsoeuer most honored and heauenly Science ) is of so great and surpassing excellencie. To laye out vnto  383 you herein, how much more glorious is her shining hue aboue all others, howe sugred her plantes, howe deintie her fruites, howe delicate her pleasures, howe incomparable her high and statelie reach, how she participateth the skies, the elementes, the venerable conceite of hie and sacred misteries, I need not, you know it, you haue felt and tasted of it. But to shew how much  384 you misprise the force of her vertue, how ill conceiued, and farre wandring, you were from the due searche of her glorie, to make loue to her handmaydes, to professe liking to her seruanntes, to become sole intertainer of her vassals, hereon resteth the iniurie, this is it I complayne of vnto you. And if either the somme and tipe of honestie placed in the weight of the action, the necessitie, meetenesse, and worthinesse, the Vtilitie and benefites seuen hundred fold copensing the trauel, may (as earthly things haue often power to moue one, aboue things of farre  385 higher estimation) induce you to her most deerest and pretious fruition, search then the fauour of these your  386 louing mistresses, and (seemelie I graunt you may finde them) but neuer shal they approoue either, so wealthie or so bewtiful. What then should let you to returne to this glorious Ladie, will you because you are an earthly substaunce, follow the common reason of euery earthlie creature, humum sapere & alta spernere ? or saying that  387 the appetites of the one are muche pleasanter for the time, or farre lesse tedious then the other, welde your opinion by a peeuish conceite of ease, to become a creditor to wantonnesse? These imaginations as they are meerely bad, so are  388 they ten times worse in pursuite, then they are sweete in the foremost thought. Peeuishe were it, simply for you to stand vppon these vanities, (things wherein children haue delight and young weakelinges doe prooue conning:) you must suppose and harpe vppon the end that must succeede vnto your trauaile, and finding the reache thereof, pursue it with feruencie: Suche actions as these doe onely beseeme menne, and heerein alone shall you shewe your selfe suche as you may desire to bee, and your friendes doe heartely wishe you to approoue. Alexander restlesse in the daye time gaped for worldes, but onely in the night was rocked a sleepe by the Muses , the pleasure whereof surcharged his appetites, and content of which, gaue rest to his trauels. Too muche impertinent were it for me to hale you  389 on with argumentes, who onely goe about but by apparaunt shewes to perswade you with warrantise: Neyther thinke I in the end you will approoue otherwise, then euer I haue expected from you. Much more coulde I inferre, that might greatly induce you to that whereunto your owne willingnesse must in the end, of necessitie conduce you. Onely if in the weight hereof my perswasions may something preuayle: I shall not forgette in anye worthie parte thereof, at all tymes to commend you. In whiche reposing my selfe for the present I end: this of &c. VVith these perswasions, I thinke it meetest for this present to ende, the better to aunswere the partes of these examples so farre foorth alreadie discoursed on. Let vs in the contrarye hereof also, see howe manie wayes and with what forcible argumentes, menne may be disswaded and withdrawne if neede bee, from what to themselues or to anye other that maye returne preiudiciall or offensiue. For the better vnderstandyng whereof, it behooueth first to bee aduertised that the nature of these Epistles, beeyng tearmed Disswasorie, they not in theyr deliuerye so vehemently as the others, stande vppon the vilenesse, badnesse, or lothesomnesse, of the thinge disswaded from, but as the Swasorie differeth from the Hortatorie, the one perswadyng to a thyng meete or indifferent, the other pricking or spurring forward to that whiche is most excellent, so falleth it in these two, to be at this time in lyke manner considered. For the Dehortatorie in hys propper kinde, declareth (as in the example thereof you founde) and goeth about by all manner of circumstaunces to approoue, the impietie, hatefulnesse, shame, ignomie, or perill iminent or almoste ineuitable, by prosequution or continuance of such an act. This nowe farre otherwise, for where commonlye a 390 thing standeth indifferent in the vse thereof, to be eyther good or bad, with howe great facilitie, if the likelihoode be any thinge, may wee mayntayne by diuers reasons, the same to bee materiall, needefull, good, and profitable: so in the contrarie thereof, what can appeare so sound, but by insight and curious searche into the bowelles of the same, some one thing or other there may appeare, vnfit, vnworthie, or to be but meanly accompted of. As for example, let it be supposed that I would go about to perswade a man, to whome something it importeth to marry, and yet is thereunto greatly vnwilling. Who doubteth but manie inducements may be laid down in to the waight therof, seeming very much furthering, as (besides that it may be reserued for a matter vrgent, to shewe by what necessitie be may be tied (as it were) to ye same, as in ye decay of his house if he do not marrie, or the continuance of a solitary, loose, and bad kind of liuing, the dying of hys wealth and name at one instant together, hauing no heire of his offspring to succeed in his Patrimony) it may also be inferred as very much pertinent, ye sacred solemnization therof in paradise first by God himself appointed, then his pleasure to enioyne the same to the worldes increase, then the care that naturallye wee haue of issue to succeede vs, the loue and mutuall societie and comforte betweene manne and wife, beeing of suche mightie efficacie as whereunto no liking is to bee compared, the 391 sweete pleasures, cares, and delightes interchaungeablie passing betweene them, eache so dearely affieng themselues in the others contentment, solace, and pleasing, the ioy of procreation when there shall be a childe produced, whose infancie tatling with a pleasaunt lisping sounde, shall become an incredible delight to the parentes hearing, with infinite other suggestions to be added hereunto in the places of Confirmation. Now agayn. if I shuld goe about to disswade an other from the selfe same thing, 392 what might be imagined, that hereunto could bee found wanting, as (not reckoning the age of a man, whiche manie times more of dotage then discretion, pursueth the same) it might be intended, the sweetenesse of libertie, how muche it conduceth to the estate of a manne, whiche naturally coueteth, vnrestrained and without controlement to doe that him liketh, the matter whereof enioying, hee may ride, goe, walke, rest, eate, drinke, studie, recreate, solace, and whersoeuer and in whatsoeuer companie pleaseth him best, vse the conceite thereof to hys own appetite. Now hauing a wife (suppose she haue al maner of perfections that may be in a woman, yet is the delicacie hereof bereft him, for beeing once married, hee is no more to himselfe but to her, for her pleasure, to her choyce, at her liking with her contentment, must he then order hys humors, his houres, his gestures, his companions, his iournyes, his recreations, and what els he before tyme might freely haue vsed, his own liking is quenched, his libertie restrained, & yet the losse hereof a heauen to yt which foloweth if very happily he be not matched: for imagin yt woman chosen do proue a scolde, waiward, lesse-wild, malicious, frowning or suspitious, what a hell then is he driuen into whose serpentine and more then adder like disposition 393 shall be such as would terrifie a thousand Deuilles. If shee be wanton dissolute, lewde, or loose in liuing, how on the other side, shall hee be then turmoyled, what is it that she will not presume vpon, and dare to hazarde, how infamous shall her life become then to his liuing, howe little will shee esteeme of him, in respecte of the large accompt shee holdeth of many others. If she be proud, then is shee insupportable: if her wit be more then hys, then is shee arrogant, if shee be foolishe, then a mocking stock, if she be fayre, then a spectacle to gase on, if foule, then a simpering poppet to woonder on, if she be riche: presumtuous, if poore: then becommeth shee odious. But beeing what she may be, or touchyng her owne person the best shee can be, what intollerable charge bringeth shee with her, what cost of apparell, what care of dyet, what housholde of seruauntes, what expence for attendance, what prouision for Children, what furniture for house, what dayly continuall and neuer resting carke and toyle for her and hers, in conclusion, what one discommoditie may be reckoned, that with her or for her, is not eyther tendered or hazarded. Thus doe you see what large scope resteth for a manne to wade in eyther of these, the lyke whereof falleth out in all other thinges, that may seeme indifferent. As if I shoulde perswade one of a weake disposition, or whose constitution of bodie, for phisickes 394 sake or otherwise, sometymes needeth wine to drynke, it might by manye reasons bee declared by the necessarie vse, goodnesse, propertie, vertue, and holesomnesse thereof, the operation of the same, how it recreateth, driueth away heauinesse from the mynde, reioyceth and is confortatiue in the moderate vse and acceptance, howe muche 395 needefull it may also be in some other causes to be receaued. Contrariwise, if I woulde disswade from the dealing therewith, then as many waies will I bring in, the hurtfulnesse thereof, as howe by taking too much, it dulleth the sences, occasioneth dronkennesse, maketh ill digestion, engendereth superfluities, weakeneth the spirites, driueth a man to forget himselfe, enforceth hym oftentimes to committ that whiche otherwise might verie euill beseeme him, and consequently ladeth the bodye and minde with all sortes of impedimentes and diseases. The like of these might be occasioned in the education of children or seruauntes, eyther to perswade from too little, or to disswade from too muche looking to, sharpnesse, or correction. Like wise in causes of right or wrong, in perswading to one of which, we shal doe furtheraunce to Iustice, & in disswading fro the other, yeeld matter of benefit. The selfe same also (to speake generally) may be inferred to any one thing whatsoeuer, wherein the vse or abuse may be adiudged to bee either commodious or offensiue, in the practise or execution of the same. The argumentes of this Disswasorie kinde, are chiefly enforced by the inhonestie of the action, the indignitie or ill beseeming of the cause, the discommoditie, inequalitie, difficulcie, insufficiencie, impossibilitie, ill conceite, or intollerable admittance in the vse, or compassing of the same. All these notwithstanding in one sole Epistle, not at all tymes vsed, but eyther admitted or reiected, as is in the matter & circumstaunce thereof many times to be required. As in a cause of wrong, the Inhonestie of the thing in handling, by ilnesse, vnusednesse, iniustice, oppression, detriment or damage there by ensuing is to be disswaded, the Unworthines by the credite or reputation of him that tendreth the same, to bee measured, the Il-conceit by the mislike that all men generally doe retaine of the action, and high contempt wherwith they are woont to entertaine the memorie therof, the Discommoditie, by the exclamations of the party iniured, calling his honest fame in question, the Difficulcie by the stoutnes of him to whom the same is offred and his knowne abilitie to withstand it, the Intollerable admittance, by the haynous apparance therein deliuered. Disswasions also may be vsed to a man not to entermedle in hie or meane occasions, so termed either in respecte of hys owne desertes, respecting or regardant to farre better or more lower purposes, or in weight of his habilitie or disabilitie, wherby he is put forward or drawne backe in the acceptance therof, either by reputatio or wealthines. Here the insufficiency, impossibilitie or difficulcie is to be required, the more effectually therby to disswade, by what therein coniectured to be hindering or disproouing to the matter intended. Now by this alreadie said, and by the application of the seueral partes herein debated, to anye other lyke occasion in writyng to be ministred, it may with more facilitie be adiudged, where and in what sorte, and to howe muche purpose, the whole or greatest number of these in any lyke Epistle may be effected. The example inducing the orderly laying out of which, in theyr seuerall places now next of all succeedeth. disswaded from the marriage of his daughter, to the riches of an olde wealthie Miser. Sir, I am not a litle greeued for  396 the loue I ow you to see that in these ripe years of yours, wherin men commonly are freight with discretion, you neuerthelesse doe verie indiscreetlye goe about to compasse a matter so repugnaunt to reason, or anie manner of considerate, and sage aduisement, as whereat the worlde can but wonder, and whereof al that know you, or by anye meanes may vnderstand of the match, wil no question greatly accuse and for euer condemne you. It is deliuered with vs here for certain,  397 that you are intended, (vpon the doting affection of a miserable olde man your neighbour, whose yeares are as wel freight with diseases, and his manacled and benummed olde ioyntes with imperfections as his barred cofers with coyne) to marrie vnto him my neece and your yongest daughter vpon a soddain, and that to the furtheraunce thereof you offered to contribute of your owne store, a reasonable and sufficient portion. Trust me, when I heard it at first, I deemed it as a  398 counterfait iest, thinking that the man whome I so wel knew before time, could not on a sodain become such a paragon, as whereon a mayden of her fewture youth accomplishment and fauour, could so quickly become enamored, neither thought I that howsoeuer the dotage of the olde man stoode as a conceite to smile at, that you for your part woulde so muche as vouchsafe  399 to hearken to it, especially at any time so seriously to speak of it, muche lesse to open your purse to become a purchaser of it, or by constrainte at all, to inforce her fauors, to giue signe or token anye wayes vnto it. Alas sir, was there no one thing more wherin besides  400 you could ouershoot your selfe, but onely in so bad a purpose, an action so vnhonest, an intendment so vile, a matter so much impugning nature, as that the verye  401 earth, or hell it selfe, coulde not belch out against the fayre Virgine, so huge and so intollerable a mischiefe, to matche I saye, the matchlesse fauour of soe yong  402 and dainty a peece, to the filthy tawnie deformed and vnseemely hue, of so wretched and ill fauoured a creature? What nature is this, to worke, vnto her (whome of your owne flesh you haue engendred, whom so long you haue nourished, whom to such and so many perfections you haue trained) vpon a sodeyne, naye euen in one moment, so manifest an occasion to cast her away, not yeelding vnto her heauye censure, so great a benefit  403 as death, but tenne thousand griefes, the least of all which is worse then anye death that maye be, wherein comfortlesse she may complaine, grieue, and bemone her selfe without any reliefe at all, but by the precious price and hazard of her owne soule. How vnequally do you deale herein, to render vnto  404 her beeing scarce sixteene yeares of age, a husband enfeabled by foure skore yeares and vpwardes, whose toes are swolne with the gowt, and legges consumed with the dropsie, whose leane carkase beareth no apparance but of olde scarres, and stiffened limmes become vnweldie supporters of his pined corpes, whom furres must fence from the least blast of cold, and dew of nappy ale cherish with warme fiers, whose night cap  405 carieth more store of heat, then all his bodye doth of agilitie or strength, and nose farre more fruitfull then sauorie, with distilling drops down trilling fro thence in freshest spring of the ioliest seasons, maketh ill fauored refections. What wrong do you tender the poore maiden therein? How vnworthye and farre ill beseeming  406 is the same to her, who hath such a father, and apparantly shalbe known to be such a mans daughter? shall you not therein be noted of great follie, will not all men laugh at it, pittie it, crie shame of it, and her selfe poore soule pray to God to reuenge it? It is too muche intollerable beleeue me that you  407 should endeuour in this sorte by collour of your fatherly aucthoritie to constraine her, whome (albeit she is your childe) yet may you not thus forciblie compell vnto so vnused and vnnaturall extremities. Consider with your self how greeuous the thing you goe about to compasse, maye retourne vnto her, and whereas lyking  408 and choyce, is of all other thinges in case of marriage to be accompted most dearest, you not onely against her wil, doe endeuour to induce a breach thereof, but also doe giue her ouer into the handes of such a one, whose inequalitie so far foorth disseuereth from her appetite, as that it can not otherwise, but (as vnto all others so vnto her chieflye) becomme insufferable. Haue you no more care of her that is your daughter, but when now you haue brought her to that passe, wherein shee should participate the virtuous and modest vse of that, whereunto her yeares haue adapted her, and for which ende and sole purpose, mariage was by Gods sacred ordinaunce at the firste ordayned, in steed of a louing and contented husbande, to giue her  409 a withered olde truncke, in lue of sweete and mutuall societie, to wed her to sorrow and euer loathed griefe, to endow her with larger profite, then with honest contentment, thinke you that she is a stone, that  410 her sences from others are different in their right operation and qualities, that shee more or lesse in stranger sort then any others, can become therein forcible or lesse iniured. No sir, assure your selfe, you muste needes heape vp no other but extremities vppon her, it can not be but if you proceede heerein, you must of force vndoe her, the ende and conclusion is so vtterlye bad, as it can not be indured. Returne now therefore vnto your selfe, and think  411 herein what best beseemeth your Daughter, remember that what you take in hande in that action is vngodly, iniust, seuere and vnnaturall, that in giuing such a husband, you shal giue her (without the greater grace of God) and him both to the deuil. Consider, that you are with pietie, and to a christian purpose, and ende to moderate your authoritye, weigh with your selfe that the couetousnesse wherewith you are ouercome is no purchase to her of safetye. And balancing all these in the weight and cordes of equality, withdraw your self, and by such meanes become disswaded from so great an absurditie. So may you the more easely perfourme that vnto her belongeth to a kinde and louing father, and for the profite by this trauaile reaped at your handes, binde her and all vs with greater feruencye, to loue you. Wheron concluding the scope of all my former desires, I end, &c. In this Epistle, the matter (tending to a disswasion from so iniurious and hard a match, as might fall out in two so indifferent and vnmeete of complexion & ages, as was that threed-bare forworne olde creature, and this fayre, yong, fresh and tender maiden (impassible hetherto of any man as it seemed, and therefore so much the more vnfit in such bad sort to bee bestowed) hath in it these enforcements whereby to draw the purpose therof into the greater mislike, viz . the Vnhonestie of the action, by vndertaking a matter so far different from nature, reason or societie, the Discommoditie, as vpon the admittaunce whereof, standeth so great an hazard, as the losse of her own soule, the Inequalitie, by comparison of youth and age together, the manifold imperfections of ye one, so much contrarying the alienated desires of the other, the Indignitie, wherin is measured the reputation, credite & abilitie of her parents, in respect of whom, so indiscreet a match ought in no wise without the greater necessitie in that sort to be put forward. Now will we proceed to one other example of the same forme, though vnlike in substaunce, and see what points therein may hereunto necessarilye be further then already conceiued. vices in generall. 412 About seuen dayes passed, I receaued Letters from my brother N. the longe expectation whereof, and desire I had to be informed of your well doing, made me inwardly to reioyce at the first view of them, supposing that as I deliuered you out of my handes, I should still haue found you in the same predicament, without alteration, or so much as any surmise at al of that, wherof I haue thereby beene to my small content and lesse satisfaction, at large aduertised. 413 It is long since in deed that you were with me, at which time you were in maner a Childe, neuerthelesse in those tender yeares yet so towardly giuen, and of so milde and gentle disposition, as there was great cause why then I shoulde esteeme of you, and much matter offered to all others that knew ye, wherupon to commende you: But now if it be true as I am informed, your actions are tourned quite contrarye, you are become a chaungeling, you are no more the same, but an other in qualitie, minde, and operation. The matter  414 beeing so, it seemeth vnto me you haue taken a wrong course, in so much as in exchaunge of Virtue you haue  415 chosen vice, in steed of laudable exercises, a nomber of leud qualities, in place of good and honest vsage, a life vnciuile, leud and sauage, your companye keeping is without any order, your studies are carelesse, your pastime recklesse, your tabling dronckennes, your liuing vnthriftines, finally blushing before time at all things, for their nouelty, you dare boldlie now to aduenture any thing, bee it with neuer so great infamie. These  416 thinges my good cosin, I must needes tell you are vnfit for a Gentlman,  & much ill beseeming that education of yours, wherunto they were neuer accustomed. From these by mine aduise you shall weld your speedy course, and quickly depart, and with some facility giue ouer, calling to your remembrance, that what approcheth the condition of euerye ordinary person, is not meete for your credite, and what in men of common accompt appeareth to be no blemishe, is in your reputation adiudged to be a great and notable faultines. When men desire to be well famed, and by true renoume to rise vnto worthinesse, they flie slouth, and  417 giue them selues to auoide all occasions of idlenesse, they endeuour to become painfull and industrious, to couet thinges of hiest accompt, and to be in company with the most virtuous. Their credite hath no support by vanities, they seeke not their reputation among  418 runnagates, they conuerse not with Tauerne haunters and bibbers, they liue not with men of vild accompt, dissolute and vngratious, such kind of meanes (as insufficient to glorye) they deeme wretched and approbious. You therefore, if you will be such as you ought to  419 be, must also pursue the tract of these, the sweetnes and delicacie wherof (if but a little you will peirce into the sowre and harshe taste of the other) you shall quicklye conceaue, marke but the praise, benefites estimate and good report entertained with the one, and on the other  420 side, the discredit, shame, discommoditye and vile reconinge alwaies made of the other, and then iudge by your owne decernment how much and how greatly you are led awry, in thus carelesly roming vpon others inuincible. And concluding with your selfe,  421 the ill conceipt that all good men haue of such hatefull and disorderly kinde of liuing, retourne betimes,  422 ere too late, for want of good aduisement, you foolishly begin to cry out of your winning. Principijs obsta, sero medecina paratur: Cum mala per longas conualu ere moras. First stop the cause, to late doth phisicke come, When euils small, to great (by sufferance) ronne. 423 Credite me (whome euer you haue knowne to fauour you) the disgrace that quickly you shall sustaine, if betimes you relent not these euilles, will to a good minde become so vile and so odious, as not without great sorrow and griefe, may be deliuered away. I disguise not with you in that I saye, for you shall finde it and approoue it to be true. It is a shame for any man  424 in those yeares, wherein of all others his towardnesse shoulde chiefly be effected, to be accompted then bad, vild, leud, and ill demeaned, much more for a Gentleman, whose education was so good, whose infancie so well trained, whose adolescencie so formerlye with all  425 kinde of virtues indued, to become, now when moste discretion shoulde swaye in him, worse then before, more disordered then when he was to bee corrected, lesse commended in his owne gouernment, then in an others entertaignment. The loue that I beare vnto you, maketh me the more largely heereof to informe you, which for that I deeme, not of anye ill seed spronge out of your owne nature, to be growne vp into such carnels, I doe thereby  426 adiudge that with more facilitie they may be disseuered, the braunches I know are of others wearinge, which I neuer wishe to be so far foorth liked, as to become of your owne gathering. From the inconuenience whereof, I hetherto haue studied thus muche to disswade you as he that most of all desireth aboue any other to enioye you. The hast of the messenger, and  427 wearines of writing enforce me to leaue. God who is the conductor of all happye indeuours blesse you, and till I heare from your selfe againe, my selfe will expect the beste reformation that my good opinion may induce me, as yet to conceiue of you. Fare you well this of, &c. The places of this Epistle, are for the most part as the other, wherin the example for varietie of matter and order of handling is onely differing, the laying out of euery of these parts, do appeare in the margent, for which cause, I neede to dwell the lesse vpon distinguishment of their vses and properties. There is yet one Epistle more of this sute (and then forward vnto the others) which because the matter of the same entertaigneth more pointes then these already deliuered, I will set downe for example with the rest. disswaded from entring into an action in apparance very daungerous. I Haue good brother, receaued  428 your letters, dated the viii, day of this instat, which were with as great diligence as celeritie, conuaied to my hands, and by the fidelitie of the bearer haue vnderstoode to the vttermost what you willed, and both of that and your letter haue at large considered. It seemeth  429 therein vnto me, that whether thorough ignoraunce of your owne good, or inconsiderate rashnes of youth, or volutary intrusion of your self into your own harmes, I know not, but the action and course of your whole Letter, is alltogether to be misliked, and for the extremitie thereof to be by all reason vtterly condemned, as wherunto you ought not to condiscend, much  430 lesse to be seene in publike to be a fawtor of,  & which is more, the onely man thorough whose folly and immoderate rashnesse, the same is solie to be accomplished. O good God, what blindnes is it that leadeth you, what sencelesse furie that bewitcheth you, what matter  431 of euill that pursueth you, as by the intollerable force whereof, without anie fore-sight at all, either of  432 the goodnes or ilnes of the action, the lawles persecution thereof, the matter of your owne reputation and credite, the daunger of law wherein you shall be intruded, the difficulcy whereby it must be attained, the vnhonest solicitation of your friendes to so great a hazard, the discommodity that thereon is attendant, and perill euery way that in the execution thereof cannot be auoyded, you will notwithstanding all this, forget your selfe so much, as in the accomplishment of a purpose  433 so farre different from the nature (I will not say of a Gentleman) but of an honeste man, goe about to put in proofe what in the end must of necessity returne to your owne mischiefe. But you will say it is loue, and extreme liking that compelleth you to so forcible an action, as without  434 the obtaining whereof you are no bodye, you can not liue. Loue saye you? Alas what loue terme you this, that is laden with so manye disordered motions, call you this loue? Naye rather madnes, for loue is measured by no extremitie, but in the honest and virtuous  435 increase thereof, where not by a harbraine furie, but by a discret and moderate assention, men by degrees do climbe vnto that, the sweete and pleasaunt force wherof neuer participateth any occasio of such vnreasonable badnes. Why brother do you loue her whome you haue sued for, and because by desert you can not  436 attaine her, will you vndertake thereupon to bereaue her by force? How vnhonest I pray you is the purpose of so great a wronge? How vnfit to be put forwarde in the worst kind of men, how intollerable in a Gentleman? For if in the accompt of things vnhonest, any action whatsoeuer may appeare to be vile, what the this I pray you may be deemed more dishonest, more bad, or more vile? And if it be punished extremely by the law, the taking  437 away of a mas goods against his wil, what may he deserue that bereaueth the person of any one, being also a Gentlewoman, suche as to whom all humanitie forbiddeth to proffer wrong, and to the honorable entertainment of whom, is appropriate onely the nobilitie  438 of a Gentleman, naye in what sort maye such a one be censured in the reputation of all honeste men, that in sort so violent, goeth about to rauish her, not onely offring iniurie therin to her person, but also to her fame, reputation and ofspring. Thinke you that the intendment hereof can returne credite to your liuing, thinke you that by deliuerye of such fruites you may be reputed a Gentl.? No beleue me, it can not bee, but according to the vnworthinesse therof, it rather shal giue occasion to all that shal heare  439 or vnderstand of it, to accuse, blame, mislike, and vtterly to condemne you. And what if no maner of suppose at all were left, whereby to discourage and withdrawe you from the action, imagining that the purpose therof were in all sorts meet and honorable, and that to euery man that could win his liking, by what force soeuer, it were lawfull, without discredit or any censure at all of mislike for suche a one, to compasse it, doe you thinke it a matter sleight and easie for your selfe to performe it? No no sir, you recken to wide, you go beyond the mone, you are to much deceiued. Know you not the Gentlewoman is worthely discended, that she hath parentes, brethren, Vnkles, and friendes to keepe  440 her, to rescue her, to defend her? Why sir, is there no more to say but you will haue her? You must haue her? and by maine force you will win her? you deale with no children I can tell, nor weaklings as you accopt of, but men wise, valiant, well reputed, & of sound gouerment, who by so much the more iust and right, the occasion is of their defence, by so much the sooner will they, and are able to preuaile against you. I recke not that you haue courage sufficient, that you are hardye, bold, & aduenturous (the vse wherof being employed to good and laudable purposes, were I confesse much more effectuous) but herein how euer the case stadeth,  441 I see nothing so likely as an impossibility, in somuch as if you be delighted to become infamous, & in the memory of a shameles life to hazard your self to a shameful death, then may you enter into it, once this I know that her can you neuer find so slenderly accompanied, that with small force you can carrye her, but within a momet alwaies ther wil not be wanting a nomber that shall bicker for her, from whose in-sight you are altogether vnable, if her self consented thereunto, to conuey her. But granting vnto your wilfull imagination, asmuch  442 in all thinges as you can desire, suppose you might win her, conueye her, keepe her, and that the daunger of lawe limited at all no hazarde (the contrarye whereof you well know, beeing guerdoned with no worse then losse of life) doe but yet againe retourne to your selfe, you muste in the ende call to minde your byrth, your familye, your profession, your maner of liuinge: your Parents who were worshipfull, your stock highly reputed of, your profession Armes, your liuing a Gentleman, is it consonant or agreeing to all or any of these, to commit any outrage, yee such as to any were not so proper, as to a villaine, a wretch, a raskall, such a one as  443 neither by nature, education, or custome knoweth to doe otherwise. What would you exercise I pray you on her, if you had her? Once you confesse shee doth not loue you, then no question would shee ten times more hate you, your aunswere I know woulde bee either by intretie to perswade her, or by force to subdue her. The conclusion is friuolous, if beeing now her supposed well willer, you can by no meanes allure her, immagine  444 you then by prayers to conuince her, after you haue once shewed your selfe so extremely to hate her? And if force be it you pretende, it is repugnant to gentlenes, yet (be it you neglect what therin to be considered) assure your selfe her malice neuerthelesse towardes you will neuer be quenched. For that of our selues we can not freelye accept of, we neuer by compulsion can be procured to like of. With you now, the case is quite contrarye, for so iminent euerye waye are  445 the perils thereof vnto you, as if her friendes shoulde abstaine it, yet the lawes will punish it, and if no lawes were at all, yet God would reuenge it. If therefore you will hearken to me, you shall bee disswaded, from all such intendementes, wherein if my selfe shoulde haue becomme so gracelesse, as to haue set in foote with you, iustlye we might haue confessed eache of vs to haue beene drowned in all vnhappinesse. And now good brother, vse I pray you that means herin, that with greatest commendation may beseme you,  446 weigh with your selfe, that such distemperate motions are not to be followed, conceiue that Virtue whose seruant you became in your first creation, forbiddeth you to be led by such sensuall appetites, think that the honor of armes which you haue professed, extendeth not it selfe to the fraile and weake subduing of a womans condicion, who by reason of her sexe rather challengeth at your hads a defence, the any manlike enforcement, besides, much vnworthye should it be vnto your reputatio by violence to dishonor, whose estimate and accompt by reason of your liking, you ought to prefer with all honour. In fine frame your selfe to do that vncompelled, which by force you shall be constrained to wish once to haue performed, so shall you euer do that beseemeth you, and giue me cause, as my deare and louing brother euermore to accopt of you. Our former loue  & liking willeth me euermore to greet you, your sister and mine commendeth her hartelye vnto you. Fare ye well. B. this thirteenth of Nouember, &c. wherein is to be conceiued, that the writer was perswaded to ioyne in that action, which herein so greatly he disswadeth. Herein the places are more effectuall then in any the other examples, for that in deed the matter of this letter induceth the forme thereof with farre greater circumstances. In this, because the purpose concerneth an attempt to be taken in hand, is laid foorth Difficulcie, Perill and Impossibilitie, besides such other places as formerly in the other Epistles you finde also to be applied. And this generally must I note, vnto you that aswel in these as in many others of like kind, the matter disswaded is made somuch the more vehement by how much the circumstances thereof are truely to be dispraised, or absolutely to be condemned, notwithstanding it falleth not out in all Epistles of this title in such sort to be handled. For sometimes men are disswaded from a matter, in respect of the little necessitie thereof, & the great vnquiet thereby ensuing, though not in an other sort perchaunce to be misliked, the waight resting peraduenture farre beyonde their reache, and other suppositions, the nomber whereof I leaue in their selfe conceipts to be frequented: knowing the scope heereof to bee so large, and the occurrents so infinite, as it were vnpossible to set downe examples, conducing to the seuerall imaginations of the same. Much no question auaileth it for anye one that studieth well to write, to bee sufficientlye instructed in these two kindes of Swasorie and Disswasorie, to know the better vppon what groundes the force of each of them may be deliuered, so common are their places in diuers other Epistles to be induced as in Petitorie, Monitorie, Reprehensorie, Inuectiue and such others. Let it therefore firmely be aduised for either of these, that whatsoeuer we endeuour to perswade, all the commodities thereunto incident may firste be considered, then by circumstaunces the same are againe to be amplified, againe if therein be anye discommodities to be supposed, them must we diminishe, or as much as we can refel, which vnder Confirmation and Confutation are contained, and if anye other common reasons besides the meere matter of the thing may be imagined, they shall thereunto be annexed, as some peculiar virtue thereunto encouraging, liking and good opinion, benefite, honor, health comfort, pleasure, and a thousand others. In disswading likewise, that all the discommodities, matters offensiue, causes of detriment, insufficiencie, hazarde, or whatsoeuer before remembred, be herein collected, put forwarde and amplified, with like annexing of common reasons and inducementes, as in the other is aduised, and in the examples hereof, you see to be tendred. And to say sooth, such intermixing of these two so ordinarily happening in manye letters, as verye few matters do fall out in which some one part of them is not sometimes handled: I know not what one thinge almost maye bee so certaine and sound, as by cunning skill may not at the pleasure of the writer in some sort or other be depraued, or out of the consuming flames thereof againe to be commended. For such causes therefore it shall be good that the ordinarye places heereof, for the better perfection of the learner, bee very wel studied and often exercised, which either by imitation to handle an vnlike matter in a like sort of an example, or by often or continuall reading shall greatly bee furthered. And now will we see what in the other sorts of Epistles we haue to be performed, the next of which ensuing in order, and to be proposed in this Methode, is an Epistle Conciliatorie, whose vse is preferred in acquiring vnto our selues, the acquaintance of some one, whom especially we make choyce of, or insinuating our selues into their fauours, whom we desire most to esteeme of. These Epistles in their directions, doe oftentimes passe as well from men of good accompt to such as are something their inferiours, as interchaungeably betweene those, who are accompted equals, but seldome or neuer is frequented to such as are our betters. The occasion of this Epistle, standing in the firste degree, it is likely that he who is much our better either of his honor, worship, or gentlenes, will in plainest termes alwaies deale with his inferiours, whom in such sort he desireth to be known vnto, or otherwise himself would willingly repute of. The sentence of these Epistles are in the best sort to be adiudged, for that the purport of them includeth loue, liking, friendship, the scope whereof induceth matter heerin to be framed. Now touching the second degree, order therein requireth these brief considerations. First that pithily and plainly we set down the cause mouing vs to take knowledge of him we write to, or therevppon to mooue his acquaintaunce. caried, for that all men for the moste part are affected more or lesse, to the aduauncement of their owne worthynesse: yet shall the writer by all possible meanes indeuour to keepe that Decorum herein, that he glose not too palpablie, least by such meanes he doe incurre a notable suspition of flatterie. Next, if in our selues we doe conceaue or imagine some one or moe things, that are to such a one pleasing, or whereof we may coniecture the regarde to returne vnto him commodious, or to confirme towards vs a more speciall liking, that shall we modestly tender, and deuise without arogancie in some conuenient sort to be signified. These are the onely precepts in this kinde of writing to be solie considered, the obseruation whereof are in sort following by example to be deliuered. that is his inferiour. After my very hartye commendations vnto you. This bearer and my seruant whom I greatly credite, hath signified vnto me manye matters tending to your great commendation, the report wherof, I haue often sithence heard confirmed by others. And for asmuch as touching mine owne condicion, I haue alwaies bene a fauourer of Artes, and entierly accompted of the singularitie of anie one according to his worthinesse, I haue so muche the more greatlye desired your acquaintance, as one whome willingly I woulde doe good vnto. Promisinge that if at some conuenient tyme I maye enioye the pleasure of your industrie, and knowledge, together with some continuance of your good company. I shall not faile in as ample sort as I can to your full satisfaction and contentment to requite it. Meane while I woulde gladlye be informed by the returne of this messenger at what time I maye expect to see you, according to which I will appoint horses, and send some vp to accompanye you. And so for this present doe bid you hartely farewell. From my house of N. this twentieth of Aprill,  &c. Small distinction needeth in these kind of letters, for that the order of them is different you see from the first obseruations. Onely the parts mencioned in the aduertisments, inducing the forme thereof are heerein specified. The varietie of which is more districtly tied to the present humour of the writer, and the cause inducing the substance, then by any speciall direction. But now to the next. me good M. N. not only to admire you for the same, but amonge a great many others, that regarde and especially do accompt of you, hath induced me also heereby to pray your acquaintance. I confesse sir, sithence I first hearde of you, I grewe euen then very desirous to see and to know you, but beeing this other daye in companye of sir T.P. I there vnderstood how much for your singular virtue  & learning, both of the good Knight and Ladie, you were faithfully commended, and entierlie fauoured. This considerate opinion of theirs, hath in my speedie determination spurred mee forwarde, and for my first morninges exercise, caused me to salute you by these letters, the rather for that I haue sondrie times bin informed with what ioyful & friendly conceit, you doe entertaine the familiaritie of euerye gentleman. And albeit there is little desert in my selfe to acquire so muche at your handes, yet this one request vppon your fauour will I presume to make vnto you, that not onely I maye bee entertained with you as one whome you may please to like of, but suche, and in that degree as of whome you will so greatly reckon as to stand assured of. Little God knoweth resteth in me to pleasure you, (the worthinesse whereof, pleased his goodnesse, were so well aunswerable to your vertue) as effectuallie you might haue power in whatsoeuer to commaund. This one thing can I deliuer of my self, that since I had first capacitie to decerne of mens conditions. I haue al waies studied to honour the vertuous, and euermore with reuerence to entertaine their actions, a fauourer I haue still bene of the learned, and a diligent regarder of their greatest excellencies, suche as in minde more then in wealth would wishe to be reputed happie, and to my vttermost power gladly accomplish what might be deemed most worthie. Such a one if you vouchsafe to like of, I wholly yeeld my selfe vnto you, expecting nothing more then at your conuenient leisure I might finde occasion to see you. Whereunto referring the residue of all my chiefe desires, I doe for the present cease to detaine you. London this fourth of Iune &c. To these Epistles might be added two seuerall aunsweres: In both of which there is required a special and well demeaned modestie, in the one of humilitie to be according to his better, in the other of courtesie to gratifie his equall, eche of them conteyning, a submissiue execution of that, in either of their faculties and professions simply to bee attributed, the diuersities of both of them not impertinent to these our instructions, I haue in sorte following put downe to be red. the same as also by the messenger haue fullie conceiued of your fauour and louing intendment towardes me, for al which I can but render to the same my moste huble and dutifull thankes. Touching my selfe, I very gladly wishe that there were anie thing in me, whereof you might take pleasure, or my selfe be the better enhabled wherin to do you seruice: Such as it is I humbly reder vnto your best command, and do pray that in as good sorte as willingly I do tender it, you may please in like manner to accept and accompt of it. Your man can witnesse, that as yet I haue some earnest occasions for a while to deteine me, who otherwise would foorthwith be well contented to attend you. And were I not thereunto especially enioyned as well by the countenaunce and credite of him, to whose liking I haue for a while bestowed my selfe, the importunitie of your seruaunt might happily haue led me with him presently downe into the Countrey. It may please you Sir to pardon me for a while, one moneth shalbe the farthest, the terme of which beeing expired, I thenceforward doe remayne to the commaund of none so muche as your worshipp, to whose good acceptaunce I eftsoones doe recommend my self in all reuerent duetie. London this of  &c. Most worthie gentleman, I haue vnderstood by your gentle and friendly letters, not onely howe much I rest beholding to your owne selfe, and good opinion of me, but also to the curteous and gentle knight and my especiall good La .to eche of whome aboue all others I haue found my selfe indebted most deepely. Many wayes might I aduertise you how muche I haue in conceite to thank both them and you, whiche that my desires may appeare aunswerable to your wishes I doe leaue, till personallie in as present haste as conueniently may bee, I may finde oportunitie to see you. I am not sir altogether ignoraunt of the good partes whiche by some (vnto your selfe well knowne) hath beene aduertised heeretofore vnto me, and for whiche I doe moste willingly embrace you, and heartily wishe of all others to see you. Assuring you that you haue but preuented me in this one courtesie, whiche before my going out of towne, I was vehemently perswaded to haue tendered vnto you, wherein neuerthelesse I rest satisfied in that by one so well accomplished as your self, I haue heerein bene so farrefoorth conuinced. My businesse here with my L.resteth I hope vpon a present dispatch, and therefore doe I reckon by Gods grace within these very fewe dayes to visite you. Meane while confessing howe muche I stand charged vnto your selfe for this sole courtesie, I doe pray that vnto the worshipfull knight, and also to his good La. you will reporte my humble duetie. As you wished and required, I do hereby salute you, and so promise in such matters alwayes to accompt of you, viz, yours  &c. the others tendered courtesie, I think it meete to returne againe to the order of these former Epistles. The nature of whiche seemeth not to retayne anie suche force whereby an inferiour person may in the termes or order thereof, approche to require an inducement of loue or liking from one that is his better, for that it appeareth being handled in the same kind, it should rather be deemed Petitorie then otherwise, for somuche as it behooueth in such a cause, wherein the case so standeth, the termes to be farre more submissiue and humble, then in this Conciliatorie by the matter thereof may in any wise be permitted. deriued from the other) we are intended to proceede. The matter heereof importeth a reconciliation to those from whome we acknowledge in some sorte or other to haue bene disseuered, contrary to the bond of friendship or duetie that therein might happily haue bene required, whether by our owne default or by whose or what defect, as by the circumstance of the action may therin be required. In the framing of this Epistle we shall recorde with our selues, in what league, amitie, or duetie, wee before time stoode bound to him to whome wee studie to bee reconciled, thereupon shall we according to the district obseruation at that instant held of the same, study eyther to qualifie, adnichilate, or vtterly to extinguish the cause of falling of, the disseueraunce, or breach. Then shall we desire for the considerations thereunto inducing vs, to be retayned agayne in his woonted fauour or friendly acceptaunce. These as in the example following may in like order be suted. The regard of our auntient amitie  447 and long continued acquaintaunce, wherein so firmly and manie yeares we haue bin knit togethers, will not permit (my good D. that wee shoulde for one slender grudge, (rather by the malice and despite of others enuieng our olde friendship, then by any occasion of our selues, in ill time suggested betwene vs) we shuld in this sort be disseuered.  448 True it is, that before this time the like breach, or anie one thing neere vnto the same could neuer deuide vs,  449 but what (mischiefe) shall I nowe terme it or imagine to be the occasion, that in so vnlooked time, and vpon so vnexpected a chaunce, shoulde in this hatefull and vilde sorte, giue meane to vntie vs, betweene whome so great a league of loue, so long confirmed and approoued liking, so many protestations and obtestations, hathe long since passed, as by the force thereof might haue enioyned vs neuer to haue fallen to this variaunce. But what cannot enuie doe? what is it that cruell detestable and inueterate malice cannot performe? Credite me, my D. for my part I am sory that euer folly so much maistered vs, as to hearken in anie sorte to the stirrers vp of such and so cruell bitternes, And as my selfe was the first that by admittaunce and allowance thereof, gaue the foremost onset, by meanes of which grew this discontenting and vnkinde department betweene vs: so will I not be with the last that shall indeuour within our selues a nouell and more assured reconcilement to the intent the fruites of oure vnfayned liking approouing by such meanes the more forcible, may render vnto all the world a sufficient testimonie, howe hard and difficult a thing it is to parte those, whome (but onely deathe it selfe) no one thinge heerafter shal euer be able to driue in sunder. Be onely  450 contented my D. once againe, to reestablish that which beeing a little vntwisted can neuer wholly be broken. Thy knowne good will, and hearty zeale vnto me, assureth me not to distrust the same at thy handes, whiche thou shalt euer finde to bee graffed within mee. This euening by Gods grace I meane at our lodging to see thee, whether, and to thy selfe I do most heartely commend me, this  &c. Epistle, by reason ye argument therof tendeth to renue that, which formerly might by the other be before intreated for, carrieth the effects therof as well as it doth betwene equalls) so from an inferiour person to one who in reputation is somewhat more then his better. Upon presumption of whose fauour, or by negligence of hys own dealing, hauing thrown himself into som disgrace wt such a party, hee may by meanes heerein offered, reconcile himself in any sorte he list of humilitie. To ye furtherance whereof this example following may be considered. better. Pleaseth my honorable good L. It was giuen me to vnderstand about two dayes passed by M. R. that your L. shuld very hardly conceiue of me, in that vpon some vrgent occasion I delaieed to yeelde that testimony vnto his cause, whiche in equitie and reason I ought to doe: and the rather for that by your L. earnest entreatie and request I was eftsoones thereunto required. The griefe was not small I susteined thereby, in that hauing receiued so manie and sondrie benefites, by your honourable fauour accomplished towardes me, whereby diuers wayes I remaine in duty and honesty charged during my life vnto the same, that by one bad supposall, vntimely suggested vnto your L. hearing. I should stand on so great a hazard as the aduenture or losse of your good opinion, the recouery whereof (as I coniectured) shoulde resolutelye seeme, for that onelye cause to be opposed against me. Your L. doth I hope remember, that in my last speeches had with you about the same matter (albeit before that time I stoode on some termes, doubting the malicious dealinges of the aduerse party otherwise against me, in reuengment of my plain and honest testimony therin) yet at the last was it concluded that I shuld gather together al the notes ministring furtherance to the cause,  & therupo deliuer my true and certain remembrance on record, touching & concerning the same. What care I haue sithence vsed in the matter, and vpon intelligence had with M. R. how vehemently then in satisfaction of what might anye wayes content your L. and be furthering to his right. I still prosecuted the vttermost effectes thereof, I had rather himself shuld deliuer the I to become a reporter. In somuche as I well know (how euer any others haue miss-informed your L. against me, himselfe as a gentleman, will yet vpon his worde assure the truth and certaintie. I did I must confesse at the first vse some delays in the immediate dispatche of the thing, but how and in what maner and to what ende and purpose, let hym also relate. Your L. I hope will therefore doe me that right as not to be euill perswaded towardes me in a cause wherein I haue vppon your honorable assurance and commaund entered so farre foorth into, as therby I stand assured to haue purchased vnto my selfe matter inough of hatred, and by those whome (hauing refused by my silence to entertaine as my assured friendes) I haue by such meanes enhabled sufficiently to become my heauie and moste bitter ennemies. The hatred of whom cannot vnto me any waies become so iniurious as the ill conceite of your L. should redounde to be of all others most greeuous. For mine own part (so much doe I stand on the reuerend regarde and accompte I beare vnto your L. as were it not I rest perswaded that vpon the equall deliueraunce conceiued of my willing minde vnto your seruice, you would againe be reconciled in fauourable and good opinion towardes me. I should so farre forth be discontented, in my imaginations, as neuer coulde I be at attonement. with myne actions, wherin by the least sparke of negligence whatsoeuer, I might haue ouerslipped anie thing that shuld become displeasing, or otherwise offensiue to the same. Your L. wonted honour and bountie geueth me great expectation of the contrary, and mine innocencie and true report of maister R. doth also in some sort assure me. Wherupon remaining as he that alwaies thinketh his life no better spent, then for and in your L. vtmost seruice to be continued, I hubly surcease this day of  &c. The manner of these Epistles might in an other purpose then herein expressed, be also applied, as beeing Reconciliatorie, in the behalfe of some other to be written, as occasion may be offered, but forasmuche as they in that sorte beeing handled doe, for the moste parte, fall into the Swasorie or Disswasorie kinde, in the order of whiche, theyr arguments are chiefly to be continued. I deeme it besides necessitie, to write any example at all concerning them, for that when any suche shalbe brought in question, the substance and conueyance of the state and cause, may readily to the same be drawne out of the places sorted vnto eache of those kindes, as in the discourse before, is at large remembred. For proofe whereof, let it be considered, that if by an Epistle of thys title I should endenour to reconcile a man to his wife, or a woman to her husband, a seruaunt to his maister, or a maister to his seruaunt, the father and the childe, the friend to a friend, the neighbour to neighbour, or kinsman to kinred: Needes must I for the compassing thereof shew some reasons how and which waie to induce these, and therefro must I of necessitie ronne into diuers perswasions, in the qualitie wherof, by whatsoeuer action I goe about to transpose, the effectes must needes be cocluded. Suffiseth therfore yt for these epistles I haue deliuered sufficiently, and heerewith will wee wade vnto the next, which in order hereunto are Petitorie . And inasmuch  451 as these Epistles are so named, for the earnest  Petition or request in euery of them conteined, and that the varietie of things are such to be demaunded, and mens conditions so diuers, at whose hands or from whome the same are to be receaued, required or obtained, it falleth out by consequence that according thereunto, the manner of the Epistle must needes also be diuers and variable. For some thinges there are which fauourably and with great indifferencie, are oftentimes to bee required, and bestowed as councell, aide, patronage, good speeches, naturall care and regard & such other like. Some also and such semblable persons, as for whiche, or to whome, to aske or sue, a certaine kind of shame, is in a maner tied, viz, in crauing, borrowing, importuning, charging, or to vehement troubling. The stile and order & deliuerie appertaining to either of these is greatly different. Touching the generalitie of both, to either of them it is requisite that in the Exordium, an endeuor be vsed wherby to adhibite vnto vs the good will, fauor, or good liking of him to whom we write. Next that therein we proceede accordyng to our acquaintance with the party, his estate credit, or support whereby to pleasure vs. Thirdly that the cause we take vpon vs to preferre, be iust, lawfull, and honest. Fourthly that it be in his habilitie, or power, to councell, ayde, protect, preferre or relieue vs. Fifthly, the order or meanes whereby the same may be wrought and accomplished. Sixtly, our gratitude and remuneration, worthily tied to the thankeful acknowledgement or requitall of the same. In the first sorte of these, the cause standing fauourable, or indifferent, wee may the more bolder endeuour to produce or lay foorth the aptnesse or beseeming thereof. In the second: greater modestie, and a more shamefast deliueraunce is to be reteined, the preferring whereof would best be by Insinuation the better by couert meanes to wade into the depth of our Petition . In this place a more then ordinarie bashfulnesse to be admitted, which giueth no small furtherance to euery demand, as audacious and wanscot, impudency on the other side returneth the greatest impediment in any thing to be obteined. For no man willingly would do benefit to such a one, which in maner goeth about as of dutie and not of courtesie to exact the same, and rather as a commaunder then crauer, would impudently thrust him selfe to the obteining therof. Aud because the whol course heereof obserued by way of euery Petition, is by inference of many circumstances to bee altogether determined, the order as I haue related vnto you before, must be conueied by places Swasorie, resting very often in confirmation of ye honesty, goodnes, lawfulnes, & needfulnes of our petition. And if ye Exordium be happily framed of his person to who we direct our letters, it shal not be amisse that therein we briefly doe capitulate some part of his vertues, courtesies, humanity, bounty, readines to comfort, pleasure, or do relief vnto any, wherby we may priuatly draw his fauor & good acceptance vnto vs, besides if he haue made vs before time beholding vnto him, we shal gladly acknowledge ye same, and declare yt being already indebted, we study more therby to yoke our selues vnto him. If of our own persos, the shall we lay open, wt what great expectation & regard we do in our conceits entertain the desertes and worthines of such a one, modestly preferring what in fauour of him, and common & equal loue, hath passed betwene vs. If of the interchangeable loue, liking, and courtesie whilome resting betwene our predecessors or auncestors, then the weight & force therof we shall put forwardes accordingly. If of the the person of our aduersary against whom we demand any assistance, fauor, protection, or remedie, we may inferre (if any such be) ye common mislike of both of vs towards him, & how ill he hath deserued at eythers hands, and therupon require aid against him. If of ye thing or matter it self, the same be to be caried, we shall shewe the valew, godlines, goodnes or common benefite of the same, that the matter is vnto him easie, to vs of great importance, and if without arrogancie it may be done, we may enforce some occasios of benefit or other contentment thenceforth to happen vnto him. And if any discommoditie doe happily seeme to appeare in laying open the same, the likelihoode wherof may eyther alienate his mind, or withdrawe his assistaunce or other liking from vs, that shal we either studie to extinguish or otherwise, as much as we may to qualifie or auoyd: By such kinde of meanes, behoueth we prepare our selues to the deliuerie of our Petition, which beeing in as apt & plaine terms as may be laid open, we shal by such inforcements (as in moouing affections hereunto, may be deemed pertinent) quickly and with great facility procure to be effected. 452 the vniuersall aide and benefite of all men,  & for whiche to your great praise you haue generally so well deserued, and deseruedly are euery where reputed, hath moued me in the behalfe of this poore man to become a Peticioner vnto you. About two monthes since, hee had dealinges with a neighbour of  453 yours touching a farme whiche hee was for terme of yeares to take at his handes, and notwithstanding a promise and graunt thereof to this bearer made, in consideration whereof, hee payde him then in hand a good part of his mony) the iniurious cormorant glutting himselfe with extorting from the pouertie of this and many others, hath sithence that, not onely passed a demise as his act & deed in writing to an other, but goeth about to defraud the poore soule of his mony, the some whereof is the whole patrimonie, riches, and stocke of himselfe, his poore wife and familye. And forsomuche as without the countenance of some one fauoring the poormans right, he is like to be ouerborn with the weight of the other, and so consequently to be vndone. I haue thought good to make thus bolde  454 to request your lawfull fauour in his furtheraunce, that by your aucthoritie and meanes, some honest satisfaction and end may to his behoofe be performed, You shal  455 doe therein an acte most honest and laudable, dealyng for such a one, for the procuring of whose right, hys heartie prayers for your safetie shall witnesse well the  456 comforte you shall doe him therein. I am perswaded your speeche and aide may herein preuaile very much, as a thing which with great facilitie you may cause to bee dispatched. And for my selfe, as I shall at no tyme  457 rest vnmindefull of my request tendered vnto you herein, so shal I not faile in what I may to the vtmost of my power to satisfie you, by whatsoeuer possible requitall. And euen so with my heartie commendations, I doe bid you most heartily farewell; R. this twelfth of Aprill  &c. This Epistle notwithstanding the same is written in fauour of an other, yet is it Petitorie, and retaineth the partes thereof throughout, for in the first, being the Exordium, the matter of the same is drawne out of the person of him to whome it passeth, by preferring his care & willingnesse to do good. Then the Narration and Proposition setting foorth the occasion of the demaund. The Petition next, the Honesty and goodnesse therof, in respect the deed cannot be but praise worthie, that is occupied in relieuing the poore, and furtheraunce of the right. Then the Possibilitie and meane deliuered to compasse the same, the one liable to his authoritie, the other to his trauaile. Lastly a remuneration, by declaration of good acceptance & promise of requital. The like order hereof is generally to be entertained through out all the residue of these Epistles, whose obseruation in the other examples shall more particularly be effected. hys displeased father. 458 sorow and neuer ceasing care, if consuming griefes not of a diseased bodie, but of a pestered minde, might haue rendered sufficient and assured testimonie, whereby to perswade your lade eares surcharged by this time with the weight of my incessaunt and continuall cries: the intollerable woes wherein I liue, secluded from the right and name of a sonne, and barred quite from the sweete and gentle terme of a louing and kinde father, had ere this time geuen meane of recouerie to my daunted and dismayed spirites, and kindled in me some wan hope, one day to haue found an houre so happie, wherein by a right conceite conceiued of my vnkindly pleasures, or conuinced by the importunitie of those who haue pittied my euils, your naturall care might in some sorte or other haue beene renued, to the redresse of all my forewearied and heauie groning mischiefes. But infortunate as I am, that for all the humble suite so manie times presented in  459 these and such like blubbered lines, so hardened is the minde of him I write vnto, that whilome hauing bene a deere  & louing Parents I may not heerin dare to tender, or so much as once put forward vnto hym the appellation of a gratious and pitifull father. If it haue so  460 pleased vnto your grauitie, in such seuere maner still to deale with me, & that the hateful shew of my il deserts, is yet become of so loathed and detestable recordation, in this very season vnto you: then (as before time I eftsoones haue done) I doe cofesse my letters vntimely also at this instat to haue approched vnto you. But if the long deteined grace, by whose heauie wat (your son  461 might I say?) nay the forlorn and despised issue of your aged yeares (for so am I now forced to say) is perforce driuen almost into a desperate conceit & mislike of his liuing, may by the best spark of expectation, be annexed to the most vehement effectes, of his prostrate and meekest submission, then groueling vppon the lowest  462 ground, and humbling my highest imaginations to the deepest bottome, wherin your implacable displeasures haue hitherto beene couered, as meekely and with as penitent speches, as any grieued and passionate mind can vtter. I doe beseeche you sir, that at the last, you will receiue (not into your accustomed fauour) but to your common and ordinary liking, the most disgraced of all youre Children, and pardoning the disobedience wherein hee dared once so farre foorth to prouoke against hym, the weyght of your knowne anger, vouchsafe hee may once againe bee numbred amonge your famelie, though not partaking with your Children. This sole benefite and last request if my burthened soule may obtayne at your handes, happilye I may then liue, as comforted by the hope of that whereunto a buzied and careful endeuour may once peraduenture enhable mee, otherwise, dyeng in the ouerflowing matter of my desperate and continued griefes. I pray at Gods handes that I may obtaine that by mercie, whiche cruell destinie in my life time coulde neuer winne vnto me, by all possible intreatie. My submissiue duetie aunswerable to the regarded place of  463 your fatherly auctoritie, compelleth mee to attend with all humblenesse the resolution of your clemencie, In the hope wherof, resting my decaied and ouerwearied imaginations. I liue till the receite of your knowne liking doe assertaine, in what sorte may please you to repute me. The stile of this Epistle is vehement, because the passions of him from whence it came were vehement, and is deducted as you see from the nature of Reconciliatorie , which aswell for the submissiue and lowest termes it beareth, as also for the vrgent petition therein contayned, I haue rather chosen to place among the Petitorie . The part of Honest herein deliuered, is passed in woordes meekest and of great obedience, wherein he studieth by all possibilitie to mitigate towardes himselfe, the too muche seueritie of his father. The Exordium is carried by Insinuation, expressing the vehement effectes and surcharged conceites of a minde more than ordinarily greeued. The Possibilitie resteth in the father, which commonly by nature is with some more facilitie then estraunged difficultie, entreated towardes his sonne. The Meane to compasse it, is his fatherly instinct, whiche by charged aucthoritie affecteth nothing so much as obedience of his Children. Thus are the places required herein, in sorte as you see performed. And for because within any one title, there is no one thinge offoording matter more plentifull, or with vse more common frequented, then this Petitorie kinde, (Insomuche as whatsoeuer containeth any speciall or sole request in the substaunce thereof to bee accomplished, is hereunder concluded) I will sorte you downe so many examples of all sortes, as that there shall not faile heerein wherewith sufficiently to instruct whatsoeuer in the lyke occasion is or ought to be required. assistant vpon vrgent occasion. the forwardnes of your wonted courtesie and liking, euer bent towardes me. I haue dared (Sir) once againe vpon presumption of the like, hereby to entreat you, wherein you maye see in what degree of affection I do entertaine you, in that not contented, I haue already so many and so oftentimes vsed you. I doe by such meanes indeuour solie to make my selfe wholy and to none other somuch as beholding vnto you. My man hath returned me from London, how by more then common celeritie I haue in my sute beene preuented by my aduersarie,  465 whereby it is like, my cause standing vppon so great a hazarde, it will goe very hard with me. Now if your wonted councel, and friendly assistaunce be not speedely  466 aiding, both the hope of benefite, charge, and expence thereof will be lost vtterly. In regard whereof, these maye be in as earnest manner as is possible to entreat  467 you, that vpon the attendance of my man, I may (as wontedly) vse you. Your councell ioyned with a  468 little trauaile maye greatly profite me, and now more then at any time els exceedingly pleasure me. Wherein if it may please you to yoke me farther vnto you by the waight of your courtesie: I shall not onely endeuor by all possibilitie to requite it, but also your selfe shall  469 not faile at anye time to finde suche a one of me, as of whose trauaile, industrie, or what other abilitie to plesure you, you may accompt assuredly. I haue by certaine other letters moued my L. to haue fauourable consideration touching me, which as I am infourmed, his L. hath. What els to be performed herein, my man shall make knowne vnto you. And thus doubting as little of your friendship herein, as of mine  470 own thankfull disposition, prest alwaies to the vttermost to gratifie you. I do hartely bid you fare well D. this of,  &c. necessitie, vnder assuraunce of your forwardnesse to doe me good, to entreate your especiall ayde and furtheraunce in two thinges, the one whereof this bearer shall instruct you in, the other your selfe can best tell, for that I made you at my last speech acquainted with the same. Both of which consisting in your labour and deuise, I am of opinion that none then your selfe can fit the occasion better.  472 And truely such is the force of imprisonment, as contrarye to that you haue wontedlye knowne in me, my vnderstanding is quite decayed, and forworne with my libertye, and where the spirites are so destuned, it must needes follow, the memory can sounde nothing but discordes. 473 In fine, sir it is in you to do me good, and to make me by this onelie action for euer beholding vnto you, wherein if I may so far foorth presume of your fidelitie, assure your selfe, that if euer God giue me libertie,  474 A.C. to none so muche as to you shall be yoked in courtesie. Good M.D. the matter heereof requireth some hast, wherunto I most hartely entreat you. Fare yee well this of,  &c. Good M.C. needles were it you shoulde entreate mee to that, whereunto you haue found me alwayes most willing and suche whome with small perswasions you maye induce to a far greater matter, then what in your last request you haue so earnestly desired. The messenger I haue appointed tomorrow morning to retourne againe to my lodging, at which time I will not fayle to finishe, what in the best sort I can conceaue to be vnto your occasions most furthering. Hard will it be for me to accomplishe that, wherein your selfe maye bee found so vnperfect, for that the dullest conceipt forged from the moste distempered of your imaginations, can not but sound farre better tunes, then the ripest of my inuention is any wayes able to vtter. Neuerthelesse, suche as it is, or so muche as (by dislike of your owne) you finde meane to accompt of, that will I prepare to your view, and put forward to your good speed, thinking it better by deliuerye of a grosse deuise to satisfie the demaunde of a friend, then by concealing the simplicitie thereof to be censured by discourtesie. In conclusio it is (sir) lawful for you to vse the vttermost,  & fittest to our confirmed league of amitye, that (in whatsoeuer) you should approoue me, wherein I desire you conceaue no more, then such as I entende to become, and you shall assuredly find me viz. yours, &c. which is neither Exordium nor Narration, but foremost of all the peticion, and afterwardes the parts following, the like whereof you may perchance find hereafter. For that where practize and skill hath sufficiently enabled a man to write well, there is no necessitie that such should be tied to rule, who beeing of sufficient knowledge and capacitie, are able to decerne what is meetest, and accordinglye to direct the square of their owne doinges, sometimes one waye, sometimes an other, as in the intendment therof, may to the present occasion seeme conuenient and readiest. And as in this one letter, so may the learner light vpon many others, beeing different also from the obseruation herein deliuered, and sometimes abruptly entring into the matter without anye limitation at all, one other example whereof shall be next hereunto deliuered, the firste beginning of which, declareth the meane of accomplishment of the reqnest, before the petition declared, whereinto by imitation the vnskilfull may not rashlye enter, without good aduisement what in the performance therof may be chiefly considered. The Methode of which notwithstanding, is in this sort pursued. remembraunce of a thing before time promised. your pleasure be) you may perform what erst you haue promised, I therefore desire  476 you as hartily as I may, that your intent being to do me good, you will now execute the same. And albeit I dout not of your willingnes herin,  477 whose courtesie hath not beene straunge towardes me: yet rather inforced by mine own necessity, and continual remembrance of my vnprouided estate, I prepare these lines, solicitors of your expected promise, which bearing in their front a token of oportunitie, would praie you not to let slip occasion, but with asmuch speede as willingnes to accomplish  478 the same. Remembring how manie waies I am beholding vnto you, I remaine in accompt of your courtesies, rather studious to thinke on them, then anie waies able to requite them.  &c. Even as a bold begger, the more he is relieued, the more he still  479 preasseth forwarde vppon the bounty of those, whom he supposeth to fauour him: so fareth it with me, who hauing eftsones enioyed your trauaile to my no small benefit, am neuerthelesse so shamelesse as still to importune you in the same. I haue good M.G. I confesse,  480 by your good meanes receaued sondrie fauours 481 at the handes of my L. which I can not, nor euer shall be able to requite vnto you, the matter of my sute notwithstanding hetherto depending before his honour, I neither can or maye so farre foorth withdraw my selfe, but I must needes now and then solicite you, as the Gent. by whose onelye courtesie and perseueraunce in wonted care and good affection towardes  482 me I doe liue, and so liuing, continue my dayes and yeares with suche assured respecte, as hee that hath sworne and vowed in him selfe neuer to forget you. It doth sir so much stande me vppon the procuring of his L. letter in my behalfe, for the indifferent tryall  483 and hearing of my cause, as without (in speciall and earnest speaches the same bee directed for me to the Iustices and Commissioners). I am in great dispayre how the case will goe with me. It is you therefore  484 good M.G. that must helpe me heerein, and by your onelye meanes I muste bee warraunted in this action, the intendement whereof furthering so muche vnto right and cause of equitie as it doth, I hope his L. vpon your mocion will the easelier condiscend vnto.  485 This is it that I requyre at your handes, and to the speedy dispatch whereof I maye not cease to importune you. Whereon concluding for the present, I doe hartelye bid you farewell,  &c. Good M.D. I am more beholding  486 vnto you then I can well recount, for the great paines and louing indeuour, wherein you haue trauailed about my redemption as I may terme it, which although it hath wrought in effect my assuraunce, yet is there somwhat more to be added according to my friendes direction, as by this inclosed you may at large perceaue. Wherefore sir I beseech  487 you (as before) thinke it no paines to make a good ende of that which you haue so well begunne. My request is, that you will now vse this discretion  488 for me, wherewith so many times you haue stoode me in stead, I meane in conference with suche personnes, whose names herein shall be vnto you deliuered. Your dealing circumspectlye with the handled (as no doubt you can) shall greatlye auaile to my speedye dispatch. Monday is the day wherein I am like to win the goale, which without you I shal neuer attaine vnto: for which 489 your friendly action, both in this, & that already done, I vow to God while I shal liue, to be whole at your comaundement. I haue sent this bearer to attend you to those places, and therwith my most harty commendations vnto your self and your bedfellow, whom I pray  490 you to thank for her courtesie, and let her vnderstand, that if euer I shall haue libetty, I wil be more thankful, then either my wordes can import, or at this instant is in my power to manifest. Expecting neuerthelesse, as much by you to be satisfied, as if there were in me to bee hoped a greater recompence. I praye you sir acquaint  491 not this bearer with the cause, who thereunto is as yet a straunger, and so I meane shall continue, notwithstanding I doe now vse his trauaile for conuenient hast, for the performance of this occasion; in the consideration whereof, I praye you to measure me as your moste regarded friende, who in all actions whatsoeuer shall bee still bent to the becke of your assured liking, &c. Much more might be handled in this kind, the method whereof is one of the moste ordinarye of any sortes of Letters that are indited, for that the greatest nomber of directions are commonly concluded in this matter, the requestes whereof doe either specially concerne the wryter, or are otherwise to be respected in the behalfe of some other. The occasion of which hath caried herein the plentie of so many examples, that by manifesting the diuersities of their orders and vses, the learner might not want wherein to be directed, and choyce of varietie wherwith to be delighted. Now besides these hereby already deliuered, ther are letters also might besuted vnder this form, which from noble men or others, are many times written in fauour of sondry persons, containing requestes in their behalfes to be perfourmed, which notwithstanding the difference of estates, in that the same doe for the most part passe vnto their inferiours, yet seemeth the nature thereof to be Petitorie, but in a different order of these to be altogeather pursued. Insomuch as neither agreeth it, to vse lyke circumstaunces of humilitie and entreatie, nor of pleasures or courtesie, as in the other are required: but rather a necessarie supposall and assuraunce of their demaundes to be hearkned vnto, in respect that of their honours, reputations, or credites, it is intended they will require nothing, but what with reasonable tolleration may be liked of. But in truth Hold the vse of such kind of directions in choice of both, rather pertinent vnto the title Commendatorie, for that whatsoeuer is therein written, in fauour either of the person or of the cause, maye in respect of the honor or reputation from whom they come, be better deemed in sort of a courteous demaunde, to recommend the regard of the partie or thing spoken of, then by the submissiue title of a matter craued, or by any order of humilitie otherwise to be sought for, for these causes I haue thought meet therefore to adioyne immediatly herevnto, the same Epistles Commendatorie, being so nearelye 493 belongeth diligent animaduersion, that (for asmuch as in them the parts both Demonstratiue and Deliberatiue are vsed, as well in describing and perswading what in the person or action is either to be liked or commended) we continue not ouer much vppon either of the twaine, especially writing to such a one, who being so farre before vs, our selues may also seeme in some sort to depend vpon, but with such breuitie to carrie the force thereof, as it maye thoroughly appeare the waight of our speeches, rather to stand as a testimonie of that we know or conceiue, then a disputation of a matter or thing like to be. The places appertaining vnto the kindes heereof, are altogeather as in the Petitorie are already declared, chieflye when the same, intendeth to a cause by writing preferred to be fauoured. But if the Epistle do concerne the person of anye one to be respected, we muste beware that in the credible deliuerie of whatsoeuer occasion tendinge to his praise or matter of preferment, we doe the same either by warrant of our owne knowledge, or by such certaine report of others, whose assured opinion can not bee missed in concluding the action. And otherwise, if neither of these do in truth fall out to be certified, then shal we shew what informacion we haue besides our owne conceipt, or peraduenture no other assurance at all but our owne simple liking. Peticions also are frequented in requiring fauour to these causes, wherein standeth in hiest regard the state, countenaunce or authority of him, from whom the letter is framed, who accordingly therunto may desire, that the rather at his request, or vpon his sute, or for his sake, or in regard of his liking, the person maye be accompted of, or the action furthered. Besides it may be added to the increase of a more speedy perfourmance, the loue (if any be, or occasion thereunto sorting) we owe to him we commend, or in whose fauor we write, either solie for himself, or conuaied from his friendes, his parentes, the consideration of his charge of wife, children, or seruants, the wrong offered, benefit to be attained, or whatsoeuer other matter to be deemed requisite or conuenient. Now from whence or out of what instigations, the matter of such commendation is to be drawne, you haue in the generall chapters of this booke already at large. The circumstaunces of which, and whatsoeuer els hereby forewarned, shall in the ensuing examples be more at large deliuered. his inferiour, the condicions and behauiour of a Person. 494 time I haue bene acquainted,  & of his qualities and good behauiour haue had sounde and large experiment, hauing bene a good time a sutor  495 vnto me to mooue his preferment vnto your L. seruice. I haue now at the last codiscended vnto, aswel for that I know your L. to be now presentlye disfurnished of such a one, as also that there shall hardly be preferred vpon a soden any one so meet as him selfe to supplye that place. And thus much by your L. pardon and allowaunce dare I assure vnto you,  496 that if it may please you, in credite of my simple knowledge and opinion to employ him, you shall finde that besides he is by parentage discended from such, as of whom I know your L. will verye well accompt of, he is also learned, discreet, sober, wise and moderate in al his actions, of great secrecie and most assured trust, gouerned in al companies accordingly, finally a man so meet vnto your L. and for this present turne so apt  & necessary, as I can not easely imagine how you maye be serued better. Pleaseth your L. the rather for the great good will I beare him, and harty wel wishing I owe vnto 497 him, to accept, employe, and accompt of him, I nothing doubt but your L. hauing by such meanes giuen credite to my choice, shall finde him such, as for whose good seruice besids your honorable accompt towards him, you shall haue further occasion to thinke well  498 of me for him. Whereof nothing doubting vpon your admittaunce once passed, I do refer both him and my selfe in all humblenes to your best and most fauorable opinion, from my house in B. this of, &c. After my verye harty commendations vnto you. Sithence the receipt of your last letters and recommendacion of P. B. into my seruice, I haue had smal occasion either to write or sende vnto you till this present. And for so much as vpon your certaine notice deliuered vnto me in fauour of his preferment, I helde my selfe so well assured in all thinges of his behauionr, as I doubted not therupon to receiue him in place of greatest fidelitie, and with vndoubted affiaunce to reteine him: I haue thought good hereby to let you to vnderstand, what great pleasure I haue taken in his diligent attendaunce, assuringe you that for many vnexpected qualities, which I haue approued to be in him, I doe wonderfully well like of him, and that with so good affection, as I intende not to omit anye thing that may tend to his aduacement. In beholding him often times me thinkes he manye waies doth resemble his father, who in sounde trouth, I doe suppose might haue bene entertained with the best for his wel deseruing. This bearer shall informe you of some especiall causes, concerning my affaires in the country, who I do pray you to conferre with, and to afford your trauaile for his present dispatch, which I will not fayle hartily to requite vnto you. For your care had of my wants,  & diligent supply of such a one I do many times thank you, and haue promised in my selfe for the same to becomme a debtor vnto you. And euen so I do bid you hartily farewell. From the Court this of,  &c. 499 My very good L. I am informed by this Gentl. the bearer hereof, that by meanes of one of your Chaplins, a motion hath beene made of his preferment vnto your L. seruice. And for so  500 much as those his good frends are not now in towne, who in respect of their accompt with your L. might stande him in verye good steade: I vnderstanding his willing mind and great desire thereunto (for that I wish verye well vnto his aduancement) haue taken vpon me hereby to entreat (albeit I maye not presume so farre, as to prefer a man vnto your L.) that it may yet please you, vppon my speeches to haue the better liking of him.  501 Assuring your L. that both by the credit of my La. F. M. who vpon verye good conceipt towardes him wished his preferment, with her late deceased brother and last L. C. and also by the knowledge my selfe haue had of him, and others besides, whom your L. hath in speciall and choyce regarde, he is one so sufficient, and euerye way so well furnished to do seruice to any honourable personage, as by trial and proofe made of whose good parts and behauiour, your L. shall not reape occasion of ill conceipt, to whome soeuer haue vndertaken to preferre him vnto you. And if it shall notwithstanding seeme farther conuenient vnto your L. to make stay of  502 his acceptaunce, for some priuate causes hetherto vnsatisfied, I shall yet in his behalfe neuertheles become thus far a sutor vnto your L. that the rather at this my earnest peticion it maye please the same, to repute the knowledge heereby deliuered, in so good and assured accompt, as it maye becomme a speedier meane the better to induce your L. vnto his good liking. For the conceipt whereof I shall thinke my selfe, as in many other occasions besides, vnto your honourable opinion  503 most deeply beholden. In acknowledgment of which, and respect of my humble and dutifull regarde to the same, I do now and euermore remaine your L.  &c. foremost whereof with little alteration, may become a president for any recommendation, whether it be to fauour, friendship, choyce, or accompt, and not vnto seruice at all, for that herein is shewed, in what sort men for their virtues may be recommended. Now if there be any other particular occasion in the person, besides these inducing matter of good liking, the same in place and stead of the other, or togeather with the other may be then alleadged, and the course herein deliuered at all times indifferently to be obserued. And as these are from inferiour persons directed vnto their superiours: so will we sort out some others, that from noble men in like sort haue beene passed to their inferiours, examples wherof are in like maner hereunto annexed. one is recommended to an office. After my very hartye commendations  504 vnto you, where I am geuen to vnderstande that you are in election, and it is also very likely you shall be pricked by her maiestie, hie Sheriffe for this yeare, of the Counties of  505 Sussex and Surr. And that this Gent. the bearer hereof, is one whom for many respectes I doe greatly fauour, and for his learning, skill, and honest vsage, haue long time vsed and reputed of. I haue thought good by these my 506 letters (if it so happen you shall this yeare be named thereunto) to recommend his allowaunce also to bee admitted your vnder-sheriffe, putting vnto you suche good and reasonable securitie as appertaineth for discharge  507 of the said office. And hereby also most instantly to pray you, that the rather for my sake, and for the especiall choice  & reconing I haue euer made of him, you will now before hand make certaine acceptaunce of his skill, by refusall of whatsoeuer other that maye be recommended vnto you for the exercise of the same office, assuring you for that I haue well knowne and  508 approued to be in him, you shall be so well furnished, as you would wish. And besides in that you haue gratified me herein, I shall not faile in anye sort I maye to requite it. And euen so I byd you hartely farewel. Herein is the honour and nobilitie of the personage greatly to be respected, who by so much the more his estate, countenaunce, or authoritie requireth it, by so much the lesse may it be considered, that in the inditing of these Letters, he shoulde with ouer large intreatie be charged, but rather with fewer speaches and lesse circumstaunces to demaund what he purposeth. The conformitie whereof may be gathered out of the examples ensuing, according wherunto, he in whose fauour such kind of letters are to be directed, especially if the inuention being of his own procurement bee brought to bee signed) to take heede that the regarde of his honour and calling, in whose name the letter passeth, he not by too great humilitie of termes in any sort misprised. seruant. After my verye harty commendations vnto you. This  509 bearer hauing of long time continued in my seruice,  & therin at al times honestly, faithfully, and carefully behaued him selfe. I haue  510 thought good herby to recommend vnto your patronage. And for as much as  511 by reason of your office of Lord gouernour of V. in her maiesties realme of Irelande, I am informed there are manye offices and places of great commoditie remaining in your gift, vpon your followers to be bestowed, and that him selfe is also therewithall so greatlye  512 desirous in that kind of seruice to be employed. I doe most hartely praye you, that you will not onely for my sake be contented to receaue him into your seruice, but also in fauour thereof and my great good liking towardes him, you will in anye place of preferment about you, do him that benefit and furtheraunce, as to one whom you wish throughly well vnto, you woulde  513 willingly haue perfourmed. Herein if my request maye preuaile, and that I may hereafter vnderstand of your louing care and good endeuour towardes him, I shall find my selfe both greatly occasioned to thanke you, and in like maner, in whatsoeuer you shall haue meane  514 to vse me, be most willing to requite you. And thus nothing doubting of your forwardnes herein, I doe for the present bid you hartelye well to fare. At the Court this day of,  &c. furtheraunce of iustice. 515 After my harty commendations vnto your L. where I haue ben informed by this bearer, being a poore tenaunt of mine, of a certaine cause of his depending before you in her maiesties court of kinges benche, and that after manye thwartinges and euill practizes of his aduersarie, the matter is now driuen to an issue,  & triall readie to passe thereon, from the benefit whereof by corruption of some kinde of persons, he hath these three termes passed ben alreadie deteined, to his great hinderaunce, and almost vtter vndoing. I haue thought good vpon his humble sute to mooue your L. in his  516 behalfe, and to pray you that at my instance, you wil at some conuenient leasure examine the state of his matter, and being informed thereof at large, do him that  517 speedy fauour in iustice and right, as he may not anye longer time therein bee deferred, but that notwithstanding any cauill or obiection thereunto hindering, he may before this terme passed in any wise haue a triall. In accomplishment whereof besides that you shall greatly satisfie me in respect of the poore mans right, whereunto I wishe great regarde to be giuen, you may also performe a deed so charitable, as whereby you shal perpetually binde him his poor wife and children continuallie to pray for you. And albeit I nothing doubt heerein your great willingnes and voluntary disposition  518 to the same, yet that by reason of my request, the matter with more diligence may bee harkened vnto, I eftsoones pray, and therewith hartelye do bid your L. fare well this of  &c. sortes of letters Responsorie, in which is either flatly denied, absolutely allowed or doubtfully accepted: What by force of those Epistles are seuerallye commended. Of either of these sutes I haue thought good to to set downe some directions, the diuersities whereof, at the choyce of him that searcheth the same, may according to his present humor be either reiected or followed. directions may be recommended. Pleaseth your good L. I receiued your fauourable Letters  & commendation giuen in the behalfe of M, L. with whom hauing had conference at large, I doe finde nothing lesse, then what by your L. was of him deliuered, and in truth it doth not a little discontent me, that as wel in regard of your honorable  & earnest demaud made in his fauor, as also that by many great and vrgent respects, I stand so deepely charged as I doe vnto your L. I cannot neuerthelesse herein perfourme what I would. For that (besides it is yet doutful whether I shalbe to the same place appointed by her Maiestie or no) if I bee chosen Shiriffe, I haue two yeeres since giuen my worde and assured promise to my Lord of L. that I shall then accept of such a one to the exercise of the vnder Shiriffewicke, as shal by him vnto me be preferred, According vnto which standing nowe in election for this yeare as I doe, I am and euer sithence haue been yeerely sollicited to the selfe same purpose. Whereof I thought it my dutie to aduertise your L. by these, most humblie crauing pardon of the same, in that I may not as I woulde, herein satisfie your vrgent and vehement request. Being as greatlie discomfited in my thoughtes, that I cannot nowe performe what I woulde, as verie vnwillingly I am sequestred from the entertainement of so discreet and well gouerned a Gentleman, as by your L. hath bin so especiallie recommended. Wherof instantlie cyruing at your L. handes, your good allowance and liking, I do with all humilitie take my leaue This x. of Mouember.  &c. the matter required. My humble dutie remembred vnto your good. L. The Letters directed vnto me from the same, together with the gentleman in whose fauor they were assigned, I haue entertained with regard, and accounted of with speciall liking. And so much the more welcome were they, and by so much the greater do I repute my self honored, in that it pleased your L. to make so good reckoning of me, as to preferre such a one to so mean a place of seruice, as of whome you esteemed in so large and especiall account. Touching my selfe, your L. doubteth not I hope, but that of the least of yours I woulde haue that especiall choise, that thereunto maye bee deemed incidente or any waies required, the effectes whereof you shal haue aproued in this on, that for  & in the zeal I beare vnto your H. I will both repute of, and fauour him, besides what other aduauncement or preferment his owne deserts, or my aid may presently bring vnto him, he shall at all times hereafter become asserteined of, and in purpose most assured at my handes to enioie it. Praying your L. in all other thinges as farrefoorth to stand my gracious and fauourable good L. as herein I shall not faile to accomplish, what to the vttermost may be adiudged meetest  & conuenient. And herewith beseeching the Almightie to haue your L. in his eternall protection, I doe in all humblenes take my leaue from, R. the seuenth of August,  &c. accepted of, what to the same was most recommended. My Singuler and especiall good L. I haue vnderstoode by your late letters, of a certaine fained and vntrue suggestion, deliuered by one of your L. tenaunts, against the proceedings to him tendered and suppozed to bee in this court, according wherevnto (albeit I was before time, not altogether vnacquainted with the clamarous condicion of the partie) yet did I neuerthelesse, as by your L. was enioyned, examine at lardge the circumstances of the cause, and for the better satisfaction of your L. haue determined herewith to set downe the trueth  & certainty of the same. This R. L. whom your L. termeth to be a very poore man, is not (as in simple shew he maketh himself apparantly to be) but is rather such a one, as from whom (being narrowely sifted) your L. might sooner draw a hundred pound of his money, then half an inche bredth of his honestie. The argument wherof in nothing so much appeareth as in this one action, wherein against a poore man in deed, he hath verie iniuriously behaued himselfe, and hauing extorded from him this bonde nowe in sute (vppon some conclusion, though no good consideration at all) of the somme of one hundreth pounde, goeth about vpon a nice quillet in the condicion, to prosecute the forfeyture of the same, which in deede, by the district wordes of the writing, seemeth vtterly to be forfeyted. For reliefe wherof, his aduersarie complayned in the Chauncerie, by reason of the prosecution of which Bil, and notice perticularlie thereof giuen to my L. Chauncellor, the saide R. H. hauing diuers times agreed to comprimit the matter, and yet gredie as it seemeth to obtaine the forfeiture, still crieth on for triall, whilest the matter is stil in debating, for which cause the same hitherto hath onlie, and not otherwise been delayed. And forasmuch as sithence your L. Letters receiued, my selfe verie earnestlie haue traueiled to make some conscionable and quiet end between him and his aduersarie, yet will the same in no wise on his part be assented vnto, by occasion whereof the extremitie of the law being verie like to proceede, he is the next Terme without further delaie to obtaine a iudgement, and so the poore man on the otherside, to be vtterlie iniured: I thought it not amisse in aduertising the substaunce heereof vnto your good L. to pray the same by your honorable speches in credite of what here deliuered, to procure the saide R. H, to assent to some reasonable order. So doing, what in conscience the poore man is then liable to pay, in respect of the others charges, and purchase of his own negligeces. I hold not to extream to be out of the said bond deducted, bicause in law he was something charged, though in equitie otherwise he ought to haue bin cleerelie acquited. Thus in discharge of my conscience herein, hauing so much deliuered vnto your good L. I doe recommend the honor and estate of the same to the protection of the Almightie. London, this xiii, of May, &c. Commendatorie kind, somwhat different from the order of the rest, being such, wherein the partie directing the same, being somewhat scant in deliuerie of ouerlarge and too credible speeches, thought good to mittigate the force of the same by the very partes of extremity it selfe, wherein of a merrie conceite or some other pleasaunt humor, he appeareth very vnwilling to flatter, in reciting the example whereof, because with many tedious preceptes I haue now a good while wearied the reader. I may peraduenture occasion some matter of recreation, whiche by the single shewe therein gathered, appeareth in sort following to haue bene performed. vnprofitable seruaunt. Sir I do send vnto your view the bearer heereof (a man shaped as you see, and as bold in conditio as he appeareth in shew) whome by all the superfluities of sommer ale, that hathe wrought in his giddie braine, I haue ben requested to commend vnto you. And in asmuch as in putting forward so vnworthy a worthy, in substance of so incredible allowance, it something behoueth I hide not the single giftes whiche by great search in many a good Hostrie, Tauerne, and Alehouse, he hath by long trauell and drowsie experience ere this time gained, to his insupportable credence. I shall not spare in some sorte to signifie vnto you, what in regard of all these I am led to coniecture. Trueth is Sir that he is very well studied in the misterie of maltwormes, and for his peculiar skill in decerning the nappie taste by the nutbrowne collour of seller ale in a frostie morning, he is become a sworne brother of the ragmans number, and thereby standeth enioyned neuer to weare furres or other linning in the coldest winter, but onely the warmth of the good ale whiche inwardly must harten him: besides Sir, if you haue occasion to credite him with a small parcell of money in dispatche of a iourny, doe but say the word, that it shal once lie in his charge, and you may stand assured, that it shalbe laid vp so safe, as any liquor in the worlde can safeconduct it from his bellie. Take no care for your kitchen, buttrie, or larder, for once a day he loues to see all cleane before him, Little apparell will serue him, for his liueries ensue weekely, out of the brewers meshfat. His lodging he recks not, the chimny flore, and billets endes serue for fetherbed and coueringes. When you haue moste neede of him, you shall alwaies be sure to goe without him: if you delight in a pigs-nie, you may by receiuing of him, become sure of a hogshead. Great store of small liking you happely may haue to him, we know not what wonders the worlde may rend out, for nothing is impossible where al thinges may be compassed. It may please you for recreations sake to looke vpon him so you bee not in case to surfet, looke what ill liking you conceiue, report backe again I pray you in the inner facing of his chimney casket, Omnia sua secum portat he is somewhat a foolosopher, for he carries his possessions about him, for terram dedit filijs hominum , he must needes then haue a large dwelling. I pray sir, giue him good words how ill fauoredly soeuer you fauour his acquaintance. For my part I request no remuneration for the preferment, I haue tendered towardes him. Thus much would I haue done  & more long since to be rid of him. His old master being dead it is necessary some place to be pestered with him, hee makes great choyse of your house keeping, if you can like to frame with him. Much more might be deliuered in the condemnation of his worthinesse, but that I leaue to rehearse it, but now Sir, for your own appetite I leaue to your contentment: Blame not mee, but him that ledd me, and so foorth to an end. Commend mee, but not condemne mee, for I shall once doe you a better turne, this is but the first, the next may be worse (better) I would say. And so fare yee well,  &c. as hauing thereof spoken alreadie sufficientlie, and giue myselfe to the deliuerie of the next, which are Consolatorie, so tearmed in respect, that in them is contained manie occasions of comfort, bestowed commonlie on such as are greeued, according to the weight or qualitie of the matter wherewith they are perplexed. And for that the life of man is circumuented with so manie, and so vnlooked causes of sorrow and griefe, as it manie waies needeth to haue the remedie of comforts to bee applied vnto it, yet not the equalitie of al sorts of minds such, as in one and the selfe same degree can accept and beare it: It shall therfore be meet and conuenient, that in deuising to yeeld this sweet and gentle remedie to anie troubled conceite, we doe so moderate the matter, as that in the Discouerie thereof, we rather strike not to a farre greater impatience or extremitie of vnmeasurable sorrow than before, vpo vntimelie thrusting forward, or ignorat pursuit of the same, seeing that the mindes of some, are of so hie and imcomprehensible stoutnesse, as they shonne in themselues, and account it a slauerie to be orewhelmd with woes. Others againe so fise and abundant in teares, as the least shew of repetition in them, induceth matter enough of continuall mourning, for which cause, we will sort these matters of comfort into three seuerall orders. The first wherof shall be at choyce, playnely and simplye as occasion serueth to be deliuered, in the argument whereof, we may by generalitie perswade, that beeing mortall and fraile as wee are, there is no cause for vs in heauie sort to greeue, seing vnto a wise man no one thing can returne cause of disquiet, but the shrowde of filthinesse, and darkened shame, neither can he be hurt of anye one without him-selfe. These (the more sensible they are with whome wee deale and of greater capacity) the more vehemently may we inforce by all forces of forcible examples and assured promises. The second of these must by insinuation bee entered into, as suppozing a personage of a hie and statelie minde, the weightines of whose griefe suppressed by a kinde of vnconquered fortitude, we would go about to comfort. We may not with these deale, as in case of common sorrow of the others, bnt rather insinuating a deniall, that respecting the inuincible valure we knowe to be resting in their mindes, shonning to bee tainted with the least touche of sweltring griefe, wee doe offer our speeches or letters to comfort them, whose heartes we knowe cannot yeelde to any force thereof at all: but that, considering the great validity of their wisedome, a minde in them so vnconquered by any stormes of fortune, to be remaining, (notwitstanding wee see daily in others before our eies, the contrarie and imminent cause therunto, must of force confesse to be inducing) they neuerthelesse, by a most hie and stately instincte, by great skil and approoued experiencee graffed within them, are and must be enabled stoutly to bear, what others, as weakelinges doe lie groueling vnder, by reason whereof, we find greter cause to reioyce in the worthines of so goodly a minde, then occasion and waies to go about to relieue their sorrowes. The thirde and last likewise, must in an other sort be conuaied, as finding the passionate and perplexed conceipts of some, yet fresh bleeding vpon the heauie wound of their sorrowes, we may not abruptly enter with them, into the iust occasion they haue so to bee distempered, but rather for the lenefiyng of their grieues (for in sorrow also to be accompanied breedeth often some cofort) to seeme to take vpon vs one part of their euils, by declaration how greeuous for some especiall causes the same becometh vnto vs, insomuch as by the handling hereof, we may more fully intend in all our speeches to giue heed to our own woes, then to goe about to deal at all with the others sorrowes. For commonly it is giuen vs to mislike such as dissent from our affections, and loue them againe, who make them selues partakers of our euils. It auaileth also very greatly to extenuate or lesse as 520 much as we may the cause of griefe, either by the incertaintie of thinges casuall, being in some respects subiect to frailtie, or by the hope of short continuaunce, or by the necessitie of the action which may not be with-stood, or by some comfort or expectation left to mitigate the same. The reputation also of wisedome, grauitie, permutation of times and seasons, the dimunition of the occasion beeing nothing so great or vrgent as we deeme it, the indurance of the thing to be a meane vnto virtue, and (among all other causes) principallye to inculcate as much as we 521 maye, the common lot and condicion of all men, subiected vniuersally to mishap, to sorrow, griefe, sicknes, disquiet, iniuries, wronges, oppressions, and all kind of euilles, the generall recordation wherof aboue any other thing whatsoeuer, swayeth ouer the passions of the mind, so forciblye by deepe regard of the vniuersallitie of the same, as that it soonest of all others beareth downe, the weight of al kind of sorrowes and ill conceauinges whatsoeuer. Herein the quicke sentences and pithie sayings of Philosophers, may also be a great spurring, and finally al possible arguments that may be, whereby men are anye wayes perswaded or led to forget their euils. In this place it is principally to be obserued that in ministring comfortable speaches to the redresse of anye mishaps, we doe not by preferring of toyes and sporting deuises, seeke for to relieue them, for that albeit in times of pleasure the humour of the partie might in some sort be therewith greatly delighted, yet in causes of such extremitie all persons for the most part very hatefully do endure the putting forwardes thereof as too much impertinent to the heauines wherewith by sorrowfull remembraunces, their mindes are commonlye amated. But if the cause be light, then may it not be much amisse to vse some pleasaunt deliuerance to such a one especially whose appetite standeth in or towards the same, but it also in such louing, sweet and gentle sort to be done, as that true comforts may seeme to be mingled with those conceipted pleasures. Neither may we in any case seeke in vaunting sort to thrust into their priuate view, the present tranquillitie and happines wherin our selues repose, the obiection whereof were too rusticall. For that as societie in miserie it selfe, lenefieth the force of the greatest grieues, so the opposition of an others pleasure and freedome, is a corrisiue or sting to the want of any one that is sequestred from the same. All these obseruations in causes Consolatorie are greatly to be regarded, whose vses being to be employed according to their seuerall suppositions, I leaue to the discretion of the writer, in what sorte he thinketh meet to haue their effiicacies performed. is comforted of the death of her sonne. messenger of myne owne infortunitie vnto you,  & that in the fore-fronte of my 522 letter is planted such extreme grief, as I cannot but extreemly bewayle, so often as I thinke of it. Neuerthelesse, knowinge vnder what motions we liue, and that aboue our reach ruleth one, vnder whose becke the mightiest do stoop, and the greatest are made subiect. I must as my selfe, so lykewise perswade you to tollerate all suche chaunces whatsoeuer, as falling from such absolute direction, to alter any one iote thereof is impossible, and to resiste the same, were to be deemed fruitles, and altogether impregnable. The care of my selfe (albeit many doe  523 knowe howe much I tendred that I sighe for) is not so much, seing by reason I am led to be assured of the necessitie of our decaye, as the motherly piety I haue alwayes perswaded my selfe to be in you, and that I now alreadie doe feare, least forgetting the direct square of our certeine liuing, you will runne into such vntimely sorrowes, as with manifold teares will hardly be washed, and with innumerable sighes, will scarcely be wyped away. But what shall I rehearse vnto you a thinge so suddeine and vnlooked for, as I protest by the heauenly maker and ruler of all thinges, at the receipte of your last letters I neuer mistrusted, or once looked for too haue happened? your teares I see, euen nowe awayte what I wyll saye, and loe, your immaginations doe alreadye deeme the matter I muste vtter. At leastwyse if I woulde seeme further to dissemble the occasion of my griefe, and by hiding the summe of all that may breed discontentment, to conceale what now I am inforced to vnfold vnto you, the discharged messenger returned vncompleat, would bewray the effects thereof before you. It is then your  524 sonne good M. P. whose want I am forced to tollerate, and whose presence you must now hencefoorth determine vtterlye to forbeare. Your last presage in  525 commaunding him to bee seene liuinge or dead, hath now retourned his liuinge to bee discharged, and his earthlye coarse vnlooked for, to bee couered with cinders. Had I thought it then (as by the almighty I least mistrusted it) and had you prepared to haue receaued him, as then before was required, you could not more sooner haue assured me his retourning, then I am able now to perfourme him, at your present sending. He is commaunded to an other, that before did expecte  526 him, he is swallowed in the gulfe, that from the foremost howre of his byrth did hetherto await him. Now if you will saie he was younge and might haue liued, examples doe shew that younger then he haue died. If you will saye you loued him greatly. God by your patience shall accept him the more worthely. If you will saye you are sorie for it, in that he was virtuous: consider the world wherein he liued, that might haue made him more vicious. Finally to aunswere euerye  527 obiection that by you may be affirmed, nothing herein can more fitlye be approoued, then that in our life time we see daylye before our eyes to bee happened. Know yee not, that all thinges doe by little and little grow vnto ripenes and forthwith by degrees they fall vnto rottennes. Hath not God and nature vnto euerie thing after their greatest perfection, included such certaine limits, that by and by they seeme adapted to  528 their latest confusion? Is there anye thing on earth so assured, that by vnstayed incertaintie is not continually guided? Among all fruites and blossomes on the grounde, are there not some that are sooner then others, euen on their tenderest braunches as it were already ripened, and others againe that by long lyinge are made rotten and mellowed? All flowers spring  529 not at one instaunt, nor all blossomes with one sole blast are scattered. To man also is appointed his certaine boundes, vnto which to be attained, and beyond the which not to be exceeded, is alreadye limited. Your sonne as timely fruict, so timely ripened,  530 and as fitte for his season was as timely gathered. It was necessarye by nature he shoulde be perfected, and the perfection attayned, by nature also he was consequentlye to be depryued. Onely that his sicknesse was naturall, and that in the continuaunce thereof he wanted no attendaunce, the credite of others as well as my selfe can testifie. If physique could haue saued him, if syrropes, hot potions, or other necessaries woulde haue cured him, if teares and prayers might haue kept him, you had yet hetherto in safetye receaued him. He is deade, he is gone, and we muste after him. Of his firste sickenesse he was whole and perfectlye recouered, afterwardes from the Iaundis though somewhat weakened, yet lastly deliuered. But the inwarde moath that consumed him, woulde not suffer him to liue, which with suche extreame gripes assaulted him, that beeing not able longer to continue at the pleasure of God hee dyed. It is your part  531 therefore to be now recomforted, and therein with patience to referre your selfe to Gods determinate pleasure and iudgement, to which intent I haue taken in hand this midnightes labour, after the receipt of your letters, which were to bee retourned the next morning earlie, by reason whereof I can no waies satisfie what you write for, neuerthelesse resting hereafter to my vtmost power to pleasure you, and recommending my selfe also to your woonted courtesie, I ende this fourteenth of Ianuary, your carefull friend,  &c. Consolatorie Epistle necessarilye belonging, the Exordium of which is of the conceipted greife, incident to the vnlooked shew of the action. For the extenuation or lessening whereof, are insinuated immediatlye after, the ordinaunce and decree of the almighty God, the instabilitie of worldly chaunces in them selues neuer permanent, the necessitye of euill annexed vnto our naturall condicion, euerye of which inducing (by circumstaunces) a lesse matter of griefe in opening or deliuerie of the Narration. or straunge, but such as by continuall vre we haue dayly before our eyes, that the ordinary vse of all liuing thinges are subiect to like decaie, that the case being so common ought indifferentlye to bee borne, that the thing is naturall, and therefore not to be impugned, by all which meanes are drawne the rather to haue the partie comforted. From hence will we passe to the second example, and consider therein what maye bee accomplished. of hard extremitie. 532 Seeing the instabilitie of worldlye chaunces is such, as permitteth no one thing liuing to remaine stedfast, or in assured stay or certayne condicion at all times to induce and continue: no maruaile then (good Sir) if your selfe being a mortal man, framed of the same earthly substaunce and qualitie, incident to terrene frailtie, and mundane imbecilitie, do as other creatures a like participate the sodaine euils, and dayly alterations therevnto annexed and belonging: a proofe whereof, resteth chiefly in your present state and being then which no one thinge maye induce a more serious aduertisement of the vile accompt and wretched contempt appropriate  533 vnto our liuing. And albeit diuers are the calamities wherewith not onely your selfe, but sondry others your louing friendes carefull of your present mishap, and greeued to see the vncouth and bitter chaunge whereinto you are happened, are continually  534 affected, insomuch as there is not the stoniest and flintiest minde of all that euer haue knowne you, (your desperate vowed ennemies onelye excepted) but doe in some sort or other, bewaile, and as it were greeue to see the vnacquainted yoke thereof, with such extremitie to be cast vpon you: I can not yet but greatly commend the inuincible Fortitude of your high and noble minde, who by how much the more, the vehemencye of these sorrowes are to you vnknowne, and therefore the more vnused, do notwithstanding not onely by so much the lesse permit, the mightye power of them to rule or beare swaie ouer you: but neglectinge or (which is greater) despisinge the sharpe prickinge stinge thereof, who by the deepe pearcing force of the same, is woonted to gall the remembraunce of manye others, do also (as it were by a forcelesse contempt of such validities) not onely not giue anie token or signe at all in their vtmost practises, but seeme rather to triumphe ouer the strength that thereby they hadde rought, and by an aduised, sage, and woonderful modestie and discretion, plainly to extinguish and put from you the furie of the same. Greatly I must confesse, haue  535 you heereby deserued, and muche more euill, by the wise and moderate entertainment of these troubles, hath to your aduersaries bin tendred, who in nothyng so much doe rest vnsatisfied, as that in subduing your body, they cannot also yoke and bring vnder by what soeuer extremitie the courage, and stately progression of your high and vnconquered minde. Wherein there is left in my opinion great cause of comforte euen in the verie greatest of your miserie vnto you, that in the constant indurance therof, you haue power to punishe them, that would disturb you,  & that in the perplexed imaginations of their own wicked & malicious enuie. Neither may this that you sustaine bee rightly termed miserie, or such a one as your self seeme to be accompted  536 miserable, whose minde in the verie captiuitie inflicted vpon this your bodie is thus freed, and accompanied with so ample and sweetned libertie. For these kinde of troubles as they are worldly, so haue they power also vpon the worldly parts of a man, and therin are cohibitions of suche earthly delight, as sauoring more vnto the satisfaction of a sensuall appetite, then conducing to the excellencie of the inward minde, do breede that ordinary restraint wherewith men mortally conceipted, are for the moste troubled. But to the sweete imaginations of a pure and innocent minde, what is left wherwith to be discontented, but onely to haue committed any thing vile, wretched, or otherwise ill beseeming the Vertue and excellencie wherewith the inward partes thereof are, or ought to be indued.  537 Howe manie waies then are left vnto you to reioyce, vnto whose eies the continuall thirst of hie and sacred Vertue hath long since laid open the momentarie pleasures of this world, the libertie whereof is vnto a worthie 538 conceite a meere seruage, in whose fickle  & transitorie affections reposeth so slender assurance, & whose efficacies contemplate no other then vaine and foolish obiectes: seeing that you haue thereby so well perceaued how much the instinct of a braue and delicate mind climeth farr aboue the reach of the bodie, with a  539 pleasant and vncontrolled libertie. These things (impugning I must needes say a corporal appetite) permit you not For suche losse of riches, possessions, children or friendes to become pasionate, or ouercome with extreame griefe, albeit participating as wee doe wyth suche naturall causes, I doubt not but therewith you are sometimes touched, though at no time conuinced. For whiche cause as often as you happen to fall into the remembrance of the same, suppose with your selfe that in time the bitter sting may yet be repulced, and that the lott that is fallen vnto you heerein, is no other but the common reward and hatefull disquiet of the worlde, wherein the moste noble and worthye mindes are the most vehemently assaulted, and wyth deepest extremitie by suche kinde of meanes pursued.  540 The recordation whereof, may returne vnto you one principall and great occasion of comforte, in that by distinction of your worthinesse, though you be partaker of common trouble, yet are you sequestred from the entertainment of a common opinion. It doth not  541 a little reioyce me to see that with suche impregnable stoutnesse, you doe so farre foorth endeuour to resist your appetites, wherein (besides the expectation of that whiche is incident also to these alterations, a change I mean, and renouation of wonted pleasures) you shal in the meane tyme geue greater glory to your actions, in not appearing for anie worldly estate, riches, or contentment to be surprised in your imaginations. Praying the comfort of al comfortes to bestow  542 vpon you the dew of his heauenly grace, in assistaunce of your extremities, I take my leaue this of  &c. comforted of the death of her husband slayn in the warres. Albeit my selfe (hauing receiued the sorrowfull newes of the vntimely  543 death of my deerest kinsman, and your deceased louing husband) was in the first hearing therof so greatly troubled with the heauie newes, as by reason of the great griefe by me conceiued in the same, my selfe happily might seeme to neede that comforte, whiche nowe I goe about to bestowe vppon others: Yet weighing in my mind the state wherein you stand, and beeing also informed with what great extremitie you haue entertained the newes of his losse, I cannot but in respect of the great loue I ought to him, and remembraunce of the like care, wherewith he principallie fauoured you, enforce my pen hereby to yeeld vnto you those comfortable speeches by the veritie whereof my selfe in so great a storme of griefe coulde hetherto  544 as yet be verie hardly satisfied. It was deliuered vnto me by my brother F.B. that being nowe a moneth or somewhat more passed, since by letters out of H. the maner of his death was vnto you reported, you immediately vppon the reading of the letters grewe into so great aboundance of teares and to so wonderful impatience, as hauing euer sithence continued the same, you wil in no sort therof be recomforted. Assuredly my good coosin, I must needes conclude with your owne speeches, and the weight of your interchaungeable likings,  545 that there is great cause left vnto you to become sorrowfull, as hauing lost the chief and principall iewell of all your worldly loue and liking, the fauored companion of all your pleasaunt and youthfull yeares, the entire comfort and solace of your present happinesse, and suche a one, who aboue all worldes, or any earthly estimation at all, accompted, honoured, and entirelie more then anie others receiued and loued you: but that you haue so great and vrgent cause of extremity to continue, with so hard impatience as you do, it befitteth not, it is vnnecessarie, yea it is in my iudgement of al others the most insufferable. For whe it is not denied vnto you, that you haue cause to mourn, it is not  546 fittest vnto the matter of your loue, to weep ouer him and to bewaile him, it is then thereby intended that there must be a meane therein, that the force thereof must bee limitted, that the apparaunce beare shewe of discretion. Doe we not all know I pray you, and are witnesses, that he was a mortall man, as our selues hee was borne vnder the same condition, that hee must once die, that he had his time set, beyond whiche hee might not passe, and that God who gaue him life thus long to liue with you, hath now called him again, from this earth to leaue you? Are we ignoraunt, that nature compelleth the wife for her husband, the husband for his wife, parentes for their children, and kindered for their kinsfolke, to weepe and lament? but followeth it not also therewith, that the losse and want of them being layd downe by an immooueable necessity; we can by no meanes afterwardes be in hope to reclaime them? what great folly do we then commit in thus serching after the ghosts of our deceased frends? or what other thing do we therein performe, but yeeld a plaine demonstration, that our teares are to none other end, but to bewayl them, because they were mortal? whom death could neuer haue shunned, without they had bin  547 immortall. Are we not eftsoones put in minde by the common casualtie of al thinges, that there is nothing stable, that daily and hourely kingdomes decaye, prouinces are shaken, countries destroyed, cities burned, townes wasted, people consumed, and that it remayneth a thing so ordinarie with vs, dayly to be conuersant in these euils) the losse of al, or eyther of which (if they may be accounted euils) why then doe we giue our selues by vnmeasurable griefe, to a perpetuall continuaunce and renouation of those euils. But you will hereunto alleage, that it is loue that inforceth you vnto the same, and that such is the continual remembrance you haue, as you cannot forget him. Alas, how fruitles is this loue, and zealous remembraunce in the  548 deliueraunce thereof? howe far sequestred is the vehemencie of the same, from the serched recompence? why learne wee not rather of the wisest and worthiest, how to mitigate the impatience of our owne imperfections? In whose precepts, examples and councels, if  549 the immoderate vse or enterteygnement of any thing bee forbidden, shall we not then in this, aboue all others bee chiefly reprehended, when wee enforce our selues by continuall meditation of our losses to shead so many teares to no purpose? what if your husband had not now died, at this instant, he must you knowe haue died, he coulde not alwaies haue liued, yea but he died you saye vntimely, what call you vntimely I pray you? If in respecte of the force preuayling vppon him, wherby he was slaine, you name it vntimely, then doe I graunt vnto it. But if in regarde of the time of his life you affirme  550 it, I denie that the same may then bee saide vntimely. For why? hath not the eternall creator of all thinges ordered by his deuine wisedome each matter to passe his course in sort to himselfe best beseeming and most pleasing? howe can you then say that to bee vntimelie which by his heauenly moderation was so appointed? assure your selfe if hee had then beene at home wyth you, he had also died, you could not haue preuented it his houre was come, so was it determined, which way could she shunne it. What then greeueth you in this action? is it that he was slaine? Consider with your selfe it was in his princes seruice, his death was thereby the more honourable,  551 for in so dieng, he died as a man, as a souldier, as a gentleman. Yea but you shall neuer you say see him more: true indeede, but what of that? is this deathe now greater then his absence before? yes forsoothe it is in deede, and why? because you hope then to see  552 him againe, which by this meanes is taken away, verie well. You did then while he was liuing recomfort your selfe with hope, content your selfe now with necessitie because it must needes be so, and you can no waies amend it. Is not this an ende sufficient to determine all sorrowes? If you weepe, lament, crie out, and become grieued, requisite were it the same shoulde returne to some end, that all your care, sorrow, griefe, lamentation, or what els should not appeare fruitelesse, that the intendment  & determination therof shuld be to some special purpose, See you then, herein is no supplie, the effectes are bereft, the end taken away. Bee not the so fond as to bedew that with your teares wherunto belongeth neither redresse, nor meane of recouery. Who is hee that woulde bee so mad, as crie out vnto him of whome he might bee assured neuer to obtaine remedie? By cunning art beastes wee see thoughe they be most fierce are tamed, a meane is found wherewith  553 to breake the marble, the Adament how hard soeuer it be, may by deuises bee mollified: Onely deathe is of such force as no waies can be conuinced. At the leastwise if neyther of these argumentes  554 might moue you to suppresse your exceeding sorrows you must finally consider that wee are Christians, and by the benefite of this corporall death, doe make exchaunge of an vncorruppted life, that the withdrawing vs from this vile earthlie bodie of clay and filth, is a commutation to a sacred, and heauenly progression, and that we haue nothing lefte vnto vs, in all the trauailes, cares, disquiets, and heauie turmoiles of this wearisome liuing whereof to reioice vs, but the expectation wee haue of happinesse and euer flourishing gladnes. Suppose the ghost of your husband were here present to see you, in all this extremitie, what thinke you, would he say? how much disordered imagine you would he thinke you to be in your affections. And were it not that so many costes hadde seuered him both by land and seas, peraduenture wearied with your bitter outcries, in the conceited image, & shape of death, you might in apparance heere him, in these like speeches accusing & rebuking such your distemperate  555 actions. And with breathing spirit to cry out unto your saying. What is it you go about? what meane you by teares to serche out for a thing so irrecuperable? why torment you your youthfull yeares, with such vnprofitable, or rather as I may cal it, desperate kind of mourninges? why with such vniust complaintes accuse you fortune, and so often do appeale death and destinie of  556 so haynous trespace? Is it for that you enuie my happy state, so soone transported from this vntoward soyle, to a more prosperous felicity. Thus credite me, and in this sort (wer it possible he could speak vnto you) would he accuse you, in which consideration, were there not iust cause think you (of such intemperance) why you should be greatly ashamed? Beleeue me good cosin, there is neither profite or liking at all, of this bitter continuaunce  557 reaped, you haue alreadie waded sufficiently in your teares, you haue mourned for him in ernest loue as beseemed a wife, it is nowe hie time you be after all this comforted. Thinke that the greatest storme is by  558 necessitie at length ouerblowen, superfluity of coales encreaseth rather heate then flame, the ardencie of affection, with vehemencie sufficient maye be expressed, though not by extremitie inforced. What should I say vnto you? you may not as other foolish creatures, that are neither gouerned by wit, nor ordered by discretion, make your selfe a spectacle to the world, but rather with such temperature (for euen in this extremitie of  559 sorrow, is also planted a rare paterne of modestie) seek in such maner to demean your selfe, as the lookers on may rather pittie you, by insight of your great discretion, then in this sort to torment your selfe by a needles supposition. Much more haue I considered with my  560 selfe, whereby to satisfie my grieued immaginations, wherewith being recomforted, and repozed in my secret thoughtes. I haue deemed it necessarie hereby to imparte the same vnto you; beseeching, that aswell in regard of your selfe as the little pleasure your frendes haue, to behold you in this strange kind of perplexity, you will enioy the fruites thereof with suche sufficient contentment and satisfaction as very hartily I do wish vnto you. And euen so tendring my selfe in al thinges to your courteous and gentle vsage, I doe heartily bid you farewell, S. this of  &c. Long haue I continued the argument of these examples, the more plentifully therein to shewe forth what varietie of matter may be induced, wherewith to procure occasions of comfort. The chiefest whereof are by extenuation or lessening the force of whatsoeuer accident, seming to aggrauate the weight of such sorrow or conceiued matter of griefe. Uery forcible no doubt is this kinde of reasoning, wherin al the places of discomfort beeing collected seuerally and deuided, eche of them by it selfe is therby either qualified, disanulled, or vtterly confuted. By whiche meanes the matter that before seemed to beare a shewe so odious, terrible and grieuous, seemeth very oftentimes, to bee afterwardes of none or verye slender moment or accompt at all. In semblable maner, by exaggeration or enforcing a matter to extremities, what thynge may be of so slender conceipt, that thereby may not be raysed to an ouglie substaunce, so woonderfully swaieth the vse of these twaine in the generalitie almoste of all kinde of writinges. Whereof because I haue so muche already comprehended in the titles Hortatorie, and Swasorie, and their seuerall places therein also put forwards at large. I meane not now to vse any more speeches. intended that ouer and besides the places heereby opposed, the forces are also deliuered in causes of bannishment, in losse of children, parents, goods or frends, in times of imprisonment, slander, persecution, sicknesse, in miserable olde age, plagued by disobedience in all successe of marriages, in pouertie, and finally in whatsoeuer griefe of mine trouble or aduersitie. In eche of all which is vsed a great efficacie of perswasion for the mittigation of all these, as by laying the troubles and vncertayn state of the world, with innumerable euilles annexed to the turninge wheele thereof, that the mischiefe cast vpon our neckes is not to vs alone, but common to all, who though not wyth the selfe same, yet in some sorte or other are alike disquieted, that the best way to expell the griefe thereof, is by meditation of our estates, the condition wherin wee liue, the ineuitable force of that which is befallen vs, whiche because we are worldlinges must needes in like sorte decide vs, how neere thereby we may be drawn in contempt of earthly vanities, the inticing baites, whereof are enuenomed with so many and sharp poysons, that troubles are sent vnto vs from God, to call vs thereby home vnto him, that they are the scourges of oure disobedience, that by such meanes we are discerned to be his children, that by patient sufferaunce, and entertainment of our harmes, we doe neerest approche vnto him, whiche beeing in humayne shape on earth, conuersing with men, was persecuted, slandered tooke vpon him the most despised estate of pouertie, and by cruell deathe was constrained, that they who are cloyed with most aboundance, haue therefore the greater charge layd vpon their neckes, and that no one then they are neerest to destruction, the height of whose estate, often times occasioneth theyr vntimely deathes, finallye that it were bootelesse to striue against their forces, in yt wetherby seeme ignoraunt of Gods pleasure and ordinaunce, who working all things vnto the best, knoweth perchance that punishment to be most fittest for vs, wherewith if we were not entangled, we might happily forget him, and become carelesse regarders of hys hie and mightie excellentie. So and in such maner may we wade in these actions whereof hauing now deliuered sufficient, we wil ad hereunto one example more, and therwith of this title conclude. olde wife. The posting newes hetherward of the late decease of my good olde misteris your wife, hathe made me in the verye going away of mine ague fit, to straine my selfe to greet you by these letters. In the inditing wherof I manye times prayed in my thoughts that I wer as readelie deliuered of this my tercian feuer, as your selfe are in mine opinion deliuered  & by suche meanes rid of a hatefull and very foule encombrance. I doubt not sir, but you doe nowe take the matter heauilie, beeyng thereby dispossessed as you are of such an intollerable delight, as wherewith you were continually cloyed by the nightlie embracementes of so vnweldie a carcase. I haue I must confesse very seldome knowne you for anie thinge to mourne, neuerthelesse if by suche means you be happily constrained to change countenaunce, I haue prepared a golden boxe wherein I meane to consecrate all the teares you shedde for that accident, to Berecynthia , the beldome of the Gods as a relique of your great kindship and courtesie. Beleeue me T. I am sorie that mine ague had not lefte me, and that I were not nowe in L. with thee, were it but to viewe thy lookes and manlike behauiour, after so hard a bickering and incounter, as wherein thou was bereft a heart of golde so daintie as I promise thee to somme graue sober fellowe, might haue become prettie concipted, and a verye sweete pigges nie. Well T. if thou must needes loose her, ferendum est quod mutari non possit , be not sad I pray thee, wele finde out a better matche wherewith to delight thee. Thou must consider that it is requisite that all things should be done with indifferencie, shee hath left a thousande pound in goodes and a C. marke a yeare vnto thee, let that content thee, what though she was not maried a moneth to thee, thou must be a patiet man, her long continuaunce with so muche wealth might peraduenture haue glutted thee. The Gods haue become more fauourable to thy yong yeares, then thy self doest consider of: Shee might I know haue liued longer time for age, (for fowre skore yeares olde I graunt is nothing) the woman also in verie good plight too, by Saint Margerie: but what of that? wee must as I said before, beare with necessitie. I pray God thou beest not ouercome with sorrowe, but thou maiest take it quietly. There be men in the world that are so carelesse of their fortune, and so verie fooles in their wishing, as they coulde content themselues greatly to be in the lyke predicament with thee, but thou I assure my selfe art of a cleane contrarie opinion, sweare no more good T. I am perswaded alone that it vtterly discontenteth thee. But hearest thou? playe not the madde man for all that, I will rather comfort thee my selfe, then that thou shouldest die for sorrow. One thing greatly misliketh me, I heard saye thou tookest an othe vpon her death bed neuer to marry again? see how loue may leade men? good GOD it is straunge? I promise thee I could hardly be perswaded thou diddest so, without I shoulde heare the sweare it. Be not so sottishe good boy, remember thy selfe, and thinke on the Philosophers wordes: Non nobis solum nati sumus . thou maiest haue a wife man, and become the father of nintie nine children perchaunce ere thou die. Forsweare thou nothing good T. but building of monasteries and entring into religion, for these my selfe dare vndertake thou neuer wilt, nor mentest to do. I would faine talk longer with thee, but I am wearie,  & therfore intend to leaue the expectation of the rest, till I fortune to see thee. Fare (as otherwise thou canst not chuse) wel, hauing neither olde wife nor feuer, wherewith to encomber thee. At S. this of &c. What aunswere now may be returned to all or any of these letters, is to be expected according to the griefe or present condition of the party. The efficacie of the one whereof may be such, as endureth small arguing, and the inclination of the other so plausible, as beareth with whatsoeuer may sound vnto them comforting. But for because the labor were endles to measure by writing, the affections of eche one in particuler, I will onelye sett downe for this one fourme, the generalitie which may be inferred to the circumstances of anie other. A letter Responsorie therfore, vnto anie of these Epistles, shoulde in the generall parts thereof, conteine (as seemeth me) a Remuneration or friendly acceptance of their good wills, that so haue bene employed in comforting, and (if the partie so thinke meete, or the occasion so standeth) to commend the wisedome, learning, fauour, care or liking, of him that so writeth, and therein also the good effectes, the same haue wrought, if some thinges (that may be alleadged) did not impugne it, shewing his councell is farre lesse vehement then our euill, and therefore swaieth not in respect therof, in our mindes, so much as might haue done with manie others. In conclusion, that we acknowledge neuertheles his great discretion therein, and deserued accompt of hys trauell. Eche of which places, howe they are to be distributed appeareth in the example following. discreetly, and effectually you haue endeuored to minister sundry comfortes, to my pestered and diseased minde, in all which I confesse you haue dealt with me as appertayneth vnto a faithfull, courteous, and moste regarded brother, whereunto as much as possibly may be expected, I yeeld my self vnto you for the same most bounden and assured. Neyther will I wrong you so much as to denie, that in perusing the contentes thereof, I was not sometimes by the force of your argumentes a little withdrawn from the deepe consideration, and hard suppose of my present euils, but entring againe into mine owne estate, and finding howe mightily the shewe of my forwarde mishaps swaieth ouer my maistered spirits; I do imagin the greatnesse of my losse to bee so muche, as in comparison wherof, whatsoeuer you haue deliuered either in the mitigation of qualefieng of my harmes, seemeth farre lesse in quanititie, than the smallest that may bee conceiued of all mine euils. Follie were it for mee to thinke or you to beleeue, that the pensiue imagination of a thing so neere, as whereupon concerned earst, the some of all my ioyes, pleasures, and happinesse, coulde with the vehemencie of a fewe speeches (more of zeale then equitie deliuered) be sodenly remooued. But (as hath the adage) Omnes quum valemus recta consilia egrotis damus , For councell is plentifull in euerye one, whose conceites by freedome are exempted from anie passion at all. Take it not so good brother, that I think you not, for me, as wel as my selfe, to be a partaker of my griefe, for I knowe it well you are, but yet the one proceedeth of charinesse, the other of extremitie, you in pitie of my sorrows, and I in the verye touche of mine euils, What Time may do I cannot tell, to weare away, what presently I feele to be forcible vpon me, yet feare I the worst, but will giue my selfe notwithstanding as muche as in me lieth, to the practize of your councels. How euer the case standeth, I must acknowledge, that verie weightily you haue dealt concerning me, and for the same will neuer cease to thank you Fare ye wel, this of  &c. of the same title to the next thereof (which 561 admonition, or forewarning, of what we meane to giue in charge to our friendes or followers, the one parte whereof consisteth in skilfull explaining the offence of a thing faultie, which standeth vpon to bee reformed, the other, in laying forth to the vnexperienced, such matters as he knoweth not, in sort as if therwith he were thoroughly acquainted. And in somuch as there be few men yt gladlie like to be supposed ouermuch faultie, or loue much to be rebuked for the greatnes of their errors, the order therefore of these Epistles, in setting forth what may be counted offensiue, shal not accuse but admonish, from the greatnes or smalenes of the same, qualifieng the bitternesse of reprehension wt a certain maner of praise, how euer desert do affoord to the furtherance therof, For in a gentle condition, or mind not altogether beat vnto euill, to suppose that the greatest part is to the better enclined, & it also in same ample sort to commend, breedeth no small encouragmet do well, he to whome the admonition passeth weighing with himselfe, that hys behauiour is not so farre ouergrowne, but that presumptions of his Vertues do yet sway in mens opinions, or at the least wise imagining that men are ignoraunt altogether of that, whereof they seeme to take no notice at all, he will studie the rather to hearken to suche holesome directions, and accordingly to reforme his maners thereunto betimes. And verily (as you haue before in the examples Disswasorie ) so in this also it would not be amisse where we see an offence but new beginning, to induce many good conditions of the partie to be opposed against the same, and to lay before him, how ill sounding it woulde be to the due commendation of the other, to bee touched therewith. Or otherwise where wee see an inclinacion (though no matter in action) too euill, to say, that not for that we see him spotted with such offences, we doe warne him from their forces, but to the intent hee may thereby the better be instructed, in the vilenesse and discommended partes of the same, or that, because we are for the most part led away and easily sliding into euill, we set before his eies therin, the hazard and inconuenience therof. Now if the matter be so farre forward, as we finde it a plaine and open imperfection in him to whom we write, let vs then consider the weight or inualiditie of the action, which beeing too monstrous or notorious, it then needeth not admonition but sharp reprehension; and is therby secluded from the partes thereof, but beeing intollerable in his age or estate, in whome the same is found, then shal we not aggrauate, but extenuate the apparance thereof, shewing that it is a thing common for men to fal, chiefly yong men, who by the furious sting of their youth, and want they haue of aged experience, are hastily led therunto, but yet therewithall how many waies necessarie it is, that hee be withdrawne from the same, least happily the long entertainement giuen to a fault, make it seeme a great offence, and consequently he be thereby led into far more daungerous euils. Hereupon may we manifest vnto him our loue and tender care we haue ouer him, compelling vs for such cause to forewarn him, declaring that our selues falling into the like errors, would be glad at hys handes to finde the like, if the skill and experience of the partie might haue so muche performed. An other kinde of admonishment there is also, when men deale with those who are highly before them in accompt, vnto whome either imminent daunger, or occasion of great hate or mislike pursuing the same, forbiddeth in expresse maner to be admonished, insomuch as their estate (being peraduenture loftie, and of power to commaund or sway ouer vs) will not admit by writing to entermeddle with their actions, and yet happily by reason of some hard dealinges, offred vnto vs or our friends, might seem much to preuail in one sorte or other to giue them notice of it, whereby to auoyd if it be possible, the expected vehemencie and intollerable support of the same. With such men to deale, behoueth if at least wise we be greatly compelled thereunto, to make a recital of many vertues, such as might be commendable and bewtifieng vnto so great estate and aucthoritie, and therewithall setting foorth the worthinesse to the vttermost of what we wishe to be in him planted, we shall falsly affirm also those Vertues to be insinuate in his person, and how much they are greatly furthering to his name and reputation, by occasion of which, wee may in the contrarie haue meane to lay open all those vices, the insupportable burden, vildenesse & execrable hatefulnesse (or what badd purpose soeuer is in them els included) how much they impugne, the state, rule, or authoritie of anie one, what blemish they cast vppon him in whome they are frequented, how they destroy the good partes for which men mightie and gratious haue desired to be commended, the conceite whereof, may be, with such facilitie and excellencie induced, as that he to whome we write, shall by great insight thereby receaue a speciall view of his owne faultines, yea and by the couertnes of the same, shall also participate within his owne imaginations, the particular loue and hate generally employed to either of both, wherein what other thing shall we go about in silence to admonishe, but what in ech of these ought to be refused or folowed which maner of writing perfourmed to such ende and example, without shame and blushing at all, each one may lawfully vse, otherwise palpably to affirme those virtues and prayses to be in a man, in whose actions becomming most notorious in all kind of apparaunce, no one thinge is to bee found so plentifull as very wickednes it selfe, this were a flattery most detestable and of all others most filthy, to be in any wryter receaued. And touching the causes wherein principally these Monitorie Epistles are applyed, their diuersities are to these effects or the like for the most part intended. As for example, a man fierce or cruell in his gouernment, be he Parent, M. or other may in his kinde be admonished by the inconueniences of the same, to become more meeke, more courteous, or more louing. A person giuen to ouer much tatling, by shewing the discommoditie of inter-medling, how manye (hauing beene intercepted where they meant no harm) & haue by such meanes perished, how it breedeth brables, dissention, and continuall hatred, may in this sort be forewarned of the proceeding euill thereof. One too much giuen to his continuall study by the hinderaunces of health thereby happening, may be admonished not to bind him selfe so districtly to the vse thereof, as thereby to neglect his common and sweet societie. Likewise all things wherin is too much of any thing may in this sort, by their inconueniences be forewarned: all maner of matters hindering to quiet, ciuilitie, modestye, honest name or fame, learning, skill, friendship, loue, or what other sparke or kind of virtue, by the facilitie of this argument may be admonished. Finally, meanes, aides and helpes to anye of these, orders of gouernment, and absolutlie, all maner of thinges (anye wayes furthering as well as hindering) to virtue, may heerein be preferred, or induced, not by precepts, but by contrarietie, as by doing of good, to auoyde euill, or by abolishing the euill, to gaine that is good. These are the limittes, and this must be the end of this Monitorie kind, whereof that in their seuerall partes they maye the better be explaned, let vs now produce examples to be sorted to some of their purposes. euill being such, and the maleuolent disposition of the frowning heauens to some kind of people so great, as hauing once throughly planted the fatall sting thereof, in the inward conceipt of those that with tooth and nayle, couet to participate the barreine and accursed fruites of the same: it seemeth they be created to none other ende, but onely by daring to perpetrate whatsoeuer matter of villanie, to purchase to them selues by determination of a shamelesse and wicked lyfe, the limitted rewarde of an vnprouided shamelesse and ignominious death. The inchaunted course wherof, perceauing in these daungerous tymes how muche it hath bewitched the estate and course of the whole worlde, and considering therewithall, that by reason of your fathers late decease, you beeing a greene youth, voyde of experience, bent to the triall of al companies, richly possessed and wealthily endued, are now left into your own hands, and thereby deliuered from the plawsible and quiet moderation of a faithfull and louing guide, into the endlesse reache of a youthfull, carelesse, and vncontrolled libertie, hath moued me in respect of the care that euer I erst had of you, being yet but a childe, and in assured testimonie of the memorie I haue euer protested to the ghost of your louing parente, to admonish you of some fewe thinges, touching the order and conuersation of your liuing, beeing a course so important, as in the admittance  & exercise wherof, can not but consist the scope and after fruition of all your happinesse, benefite, and lawdable continuaunce. And first of all will I call vnto your remembraunce,  563 that being the sonn of so vertuous a father as you are, howe greatly it importeth vnto your estate to be well gouerned, that as well the precedent vertues as auntient possessions of your antecessor, may in your person be euermore shining and resiant, that of your deceased Parent (as wel as in corporall shape and fauour) you beare the true image and shew of his worthinesse, that you stand not more in your actions vpon the glorious title or name of a gentleman, then of the verie true and extreme conditions and behauiours that rightly do produce and make a gentleman. And albeit I finde no great apparant cause (your youthfull head)  564 and vnstaied state of headstrong libertie onelye excepted) that may induce any argument or supposall to the contrary, but that you are or may be suche and of so worthy and great regard, as touching your life and other conuersation, deepely inough may bee adiudged to conceiue of all or any parte of these: yet knowing how many and how sondry are the euils wherwith our mortall state is endaungered, how diuers are the motions to wickednes, and how many waies are we readye to fall into the crooked pathes of the same. I could not but warne you, that comming euen now into the middest of the world as you do, you shall finde sondry baites and alurements drawing you into the worste & most vilest parts thereof, that vnlesse you were directly gouerned with the right rule and square of an honest and sober life, twentie to one you not onelye fall very deeply into the inconueniences therof, but (without great and vnexpected chaunce occasioning the contrarye) are like to be drowned and ouerwhelmed for euer. You must call to mind, that liuing in a place so ordinarilye  565 frequented as is that Citie wherein you are, and being in felowship with so many and diuers sorts of men as you now be, conuersing also with the innumerable multitudes of persons, of all estates, condicions and faculties, as you there doe, it is no difficult thing for a young youth of your birth and qualitie to be led into lewdnes, of a wanton to become dissolute, of a spender to be made a consumer, nor of a towardly Gentleman, to be framed to an vntowarde companion. Much (credit me) may the euill example of some lewdly giuen, conduce heereunto, making you to beleeue, that to become a roister is credite, to be a swearer valiaunt, to shew your selfe a waster liberall, that to become a drunkard is felowship, to maintaine rakhels is bountie, to be fantasticall is youthfull, and to be an vnthrift is to be counted gentle: but beeing ruled by me, you shall giue heede to neither of all these, beeing such and none other in deede as solie will breed your destruction, but contraiwise in gaining of credit you shall become modest and discreetly behaued, in being noted to be valiaunt, you shalbe a supporter of honor, shewing yourselfe liberall, it shall be in rewarding the good, in maintaining of felowship you shall vse sobrietie, in being bountifull you shall remunerate seruices, in manifestation of your youth, you shall entertaigne honest pleasures, and in being counted gentle, approue therewithall frugall. 566 The Asse goeth out in the morning to carry burthens, and in the euening receiueth his prouendar for aduauntage. The Oxe grazeth all daye in the pasture, and at night is carried into the butchers stall, their rewarde is their feeding, and the contentment they require is onely to fill their bellies, behooueth that men also who from beastes are sequestred by many degrees of reason, should of their continuance and final determination liue a like careles? No verilye, it is too much  567 vnseemly. Such illusions as these are not fit for a man, who by the nobilitie of his creation was ordained to sway ouer, and not to become subiect to such vilities. You therefore being now at your owne choice and liberty, must beware and giue great and diligent aduertisement to all your wayes, you must eschew and auoid not onely the very euils them selues, but also all occasions inducing or partaking with those euils, you must imagine, that to bee in all thinges temperate and discreet, argueth solie your reputation, shunne vice as you would do a serpent, flie wicked company as a pestilent infection, doe alwaies thinges worthy your selfe, affect not so much the vaineglorious title of praise, as desire how and in what sort to deserue and winne praise, Esteeme nothing so precious as time, abandon slouth, and in all thy societie (as neare as thou canst) accompany with the best. Consider that such as is the tree such is the fruit. Who toucheth pitch must needes be defiled. With the good thou shalt be made good, and with the euill tthou shalt be peruerted . Thinke none so great an enemy as he that misledeth thee. Misdeem no man willingly,  & giue occasion  568 to all men to iudge of thee indifferently. These counselles (forewarninges of thy ruine or happines) if aduisedly thou wilt heaken vnto, and faithfully lay vp among thy chiefest secreates, it shall no waies repent thee to haue beene a man, nor discontent me in this sort so much to haue councelled thee, that pursuinge the effects hereof, thou shalt becomme such as I wishe thee, and thy careful father if he had liued would haue beene glad to haue seene thee. The almighty giuer & moderator of all our actions, blesse and keepe thee. Farewell from my house at D. this of, &c. life. Albeit good brother I know the matter of my writinge will become offensiue ynto you, and  569 that I am not ignoraunt what heauye aduersaries you haue, that dayly do go about to suppresse the sounde and faithfull aduise of those, who without flattery do wish hartely wel vnto you, and studiouslye are busied at all times for and towardes you. Such neuertheles is the loue and dutie that I owe you, as seeing you in so great an errour as you are ouerwhelmed in, I can not in respect of our brotherly affection, but I must needes warn you of it, whereof if you become not repentaunt and a renouncer betimes, I doubt, not onely the world will cry out against you, but God also in high displeasure will bee angry with you. Truelye for mine owne part I am  570 ashamed, and also it greatlye greeueth mee euerye where to heare of the extreme couetousnes and hard dealinges by you vsed towardes your poore tenants, and other the inhabitaunts about you, who notwithstanding that God hath aboundantly blessed you with riches more then sufficient, you be yet so miserablye bent vpon the worlde, as you care not by what district and seuere handling you do attaine vnto your wealth, onely so you haue it or can come by it, you holde no  571 conscience or question at all of the winning it. Alas what cries doe you procure against you of the poore and wretched people, who beeing plagued with the hard yoke you laye vppon them, are not able of them selues to redresse it, but onely do praye to God that he will for them reuenge it. The matter credit me is too hatefull, and so great is the oppression and wronge  572 therby offred, as it cannot continue. Might my words become of waight vnto you, I would wish you to leaue it, and if not for my sake, or in regarde of your owne credit thereby so greatly blemished and impaired, and your good name and fame vtterly by such meanes obscured and defaced, yet for Gods sake, who commaundeth charitie and right to all men, who willeth that we do to euery one as we woulde be done vnto, who forbiddeth by such execrable lucre to heap to our selues so vniust and filthie gaine, you will refraine it, reforme it, amende it. In truth you doe not know, how much euil therby you procure vnto your selfe, the blind desire you haue to heape vp riches wil not permit you to see, what ranckor, mischiefe, impietie, terrour and dreade, you crowd so neare togethers, the little care you haue of the world to come, so quencheth your affections, as you haue not power to beholde the enormity wherein you are so vehemently transported. For shame abstaine and become not the common obloquie of all men, be not you the man alone whom so many shall curse, and all men for the most part cry vengeaunce of. Otherwise if by no admonition you will relent, assure your selfe, God who is the righter of all wronges will in most seueere maner compell you vnto it, and in the ende by great rigour punnishe you for it. It little liketh me that herein, so iust cause remaineth, as whereby I am forced in this sort to argue with you, in which 573 action the nature of a brother maye giue you to vnderstand in what sort I admonish you, and with what louing care I retaine you, the consideration of which, hath mooued me (as my selfe woulde wishe in the like of whatsoeuer I shoulde haue erred, to be dealt withall by you) to accompt the sweet rebukes of a friend to be farre more profitable, then the dissembling glozes of a cruell and bitter enemie, to which ende whatsoeuer I haue saide maye in like maner be conceiued by you. Farewell L. this of,  &c. of his sonne. Though it seeme an approued follye to caste pearles before  574 swine, or to offer a golden saddle to an Asses backe: yet (not that I thinke either the Sowe worthy of the pearles, or the Asse fit for the saddle). I haue written vnto you, the one reason to manifest vnto you, the vile and bad parts of your sonne whereof you will take no notice, and of which this letter heerein closed shall beare sufficient testimony, the other for charities sake, to admonish you which are his father, to his benefit  & timely looking to, to winde him from that, which by small sufferance may breed your woes and his irrecuperable destruction. I haue vnderstoode that hauing beene found heretofore in the like pilfering with two  575 M. that he serued, and the secreat information thereof being brought to your eares, you misliked his courtesie that tolde you, iustefied the matter to be false that was deliuered you, and not so much as examining the action at all (which a good father would haue done by all maner of industry) you allowed your sonne for honest, and affirmed that it was vnpossible he shoulde enter into any such theiuerie. If I see the childe of such a  576 father come to an euill ende I will not maruaile at all, seeing that besides the ordinary inclinations alreadye graffed in his yong yeares, his parentes are content by winking at it, to giue him furtheraunce, and in maner to affirme that it shall so be, insomuch as thereby seemeth, the sonne hath sworne he will neuer liue honestlye, and the father hath promised that he will set him forward to Tiburne for his vilany. Is it reason that men (of zeal and conscience) should go about to pitty their misfortunes, who haue protested neuer by compassio to preuent in themselues, the iust and appropriate reward 577 of their own euils? What shal I say to the vnhappy father of such a sonne, or rather vnhappy childe of such a father, whether shal I forwarne him or thee, the one purposing, the other animating, to what vnto ech of you in the end must become a particular desolatio? Truly these things wil not continue, they cannot long hold. Wel (not in respect that either of you haue deserued so much at my hands) but for pitties sake, I am cotent to beare with your infirmities, and (so you wil not vrge me to your owne harmes) by your courteous,  578 though not so much as honest vsage (for honestly willeth I should haue mine own againe, or reasonable recompence) wil part with my losses: but yet therwithall warne you (to which ende I haue written this letter) that you preuent your mischeiues betimes, you do cosider  579 the successe of your own harmes, so long the pot goeth to the riuer, that at last it commeth broken home , euerye man will not deale with you as I doe. It can not chuse but you must needes know, nay rather be a partaker of  580 your sons euils, how euer you disseble with the world,  & face out the matter before people. Take heed I saye. God when he striketh smiteth home , you will els repent it,  581 for it will none otherwise be. Because I haue yet some hope, that by driuing into your conceipt the enormity hereof, and discouering the packe which you said was lockt vp fro your seeing, I haue hoped that at the least wise for the feare of God  & to saue him from the gallowes you wil endeuor to chastise him. I haue sent this bearer, who can inform you of the truth, time & place of that which you go about to shrowd vp so couertly, and if afterwards you will not bridle him, I protest his shameles forhead must be corrected by iustice, and the lawes must further passe vpon him. Surely, not for enuy of the person, but for the shameles brow he beareth, as one that had don none offence, to prouoke me by euil vsage to blaze his faults, that otherwise by good coucel would haue couered the I think it a deed meritorious to haue him punished, If you haue a desire as a father  582 to cherish him, haue regard as a friend betimes to correct him, otherwise you shal soner see him come to shame then any waies climb vnto credit. But for ought I can heare both father and mother are so addicted to the bolstring of his doings, as that it semeth they haue already vowed their infamy to the worlde, and his lyfe to the gallowes. Good councel may do much,  & thogh in tast I seeme a bitter enemy, the proof in trial shal be better then a fawning friend. Diuers other patternes of sondrye occasions concluded vnder this title, might besides these be here put downe, whereof because I haue so largelye spoken in the discourse before these Epistles, and that as well this Monitorie as all other letters passing vnder the Deliberatiue kind, do consist chiefly in aduising or disswading, whereby the Theame belonging to euerye of them is inlarged, I thinke the examples alreadye proponed to be sufficient. And now the last of all these deuisions yet vnspoken of, is Amatorie , whereof because the humors of all sortes, therewith being possessed are so infinite, and so great an vncertaintie, as perchaunce euen in the very writing of his letter, the louer him selfe is sometimes scarce certaine of his owne conceipts, the lesse must of necessity be the precepts of the same directions, for that in some of them we require and entreat, in other some expostulate the matters and occasions falling in the neck therof, other times complaine, an other while fawne and speake fayre, then purge or cleare the accusations supposed against vs. Finally innumerable are the supposes wherewith the raynes of loue are conducted. For which cause leauing the curious regarder of these, to the ordering of his owne imaginations vpon what conceipt so euer the same shal be grounded, I will also amongst the rest present vnto the readers choice some small nomber of these, in pursuing whereof, the seuerall occasions beeing annexed, maye giue the more perfect measure vnto the conueiance of their particular meaninges. You shall therefore vnderstand for the first of these examples, that the writer thereof louing a Gentlewoman, whose inward virtues surmounted far the parts of her outward fauour, and hauing sondry times receaued at her hands both allowaunce and libertye to declare his mind, whereunto she neuertheles gaue a modest  & courteous refusal, he thereupon deuised to conuay the residue of his imaginations, into the melancholy form of this letter following. Madonna, when I doe consider with my selfe the sondry casualties and manifolde inconueniences, wherwith mortal men are daily afflicted, I do suppose that in the chariot of this wearisome life there is more occasion left to beholde our ineuitable miseries, then mean sufficient to be founde, how and in what sort to preuent their euilles. The naked ensamples of others yeelding heereunto but a bare addition, might peraduenture seeme of small moment for the confirmation hereof, if happelye our selues by crooked mischaunces did not also in some sort, participate the common occasion thereunto most chiefly ministred. But leauing this generalitie to be applied in the vtmost boundes of my selfe, it may fall out that with your fauour and courteous remebrance of my passed speeches, hauing heard also, and heerein pondered the iuste accusation of my owne infortunitie, you will rather pittie the litle pleasure that I haue in my bountifull penurie, then thinke that vnaduised I am led to exclaime vpon the sodaine chance of my late iniuries. To decipher you as a friend I can not. To make you the choyce occasion of my euill I may not. To leaue you as a straunger I dare not. And to giue you ouer with silence I must not. To wade in all these extreamities were insufficient to anye one mans possibilitie, but to be touched with the least of the breedeth an vnacquainted mysery. If I herein speak yet blame me not. If I require aide, condemn me not. If too liberally I do proffer, impugne me not. And if I stay on hazard, enuy me not. Thinke good La.that if I am attached with liking, the choyce was my louing, if I prostrate my liberty, the cause is your excellency, if I pine in extremitie, your loue yeeldes a remedye. So it might stand with your modesty, I could inferre herein many occasions to your reading why and wherefore I loue you: and might I not speake the same presumptuously I could shew you also why and how you could and might vouchsafe to requite me. What necessitie I haue to vrge me I leaue to knowne experience, how farre I am induced by mine owne intended loyaltye I commend to silence. Onely if my deserts by your fauour may seeme sufficient, I pray that you will vouchsafe such remedy, as in triall may be founde expedient. I woulde be loath to seeme importunate in cause of demanding, least I might seeme vnfortunate that haue bowed my selfe to your commaunding. If I might not be deemed partiall, I woulde affirme that as I neuer founde you vncourteous, so in anye respect you ought not, nor in equitie may becomme iniurious, vnlesse in transgressing the boundes of loue, you wilfully do inferre more cruelty, then at an other time maye be wyped away with protested piety. Because my letters shal not be tedious, I will ende my complaint with this one peticion, that if in the greatest of mine affection, I may deserue any little remembraunce at your handes, you will reward with good countenaunce my protested  & inuiolable seruices, in the depth wherof accompanied with hope and expectation of your assured courtesies, and vowing the residue of my liuinge to the contemplation of your surpassing excellencies, I seale vp the foldes heereof with the impression of innumerable sighes, and bequeath them as hastely as they maye, to the touch of your delicate handes. Beeing as you know. More fauoured then fortunate B. E. Immediately after the writing hereof, hauing conuayed the same to her reading, shee seemed afterwardes to entertaine his seruices, both with better liking and greater fauors, standing neuertheles on this resolution, that for any further proceeding, saue onely the conceipt of that present courtesie, she would not in any wise agree vnto him, by reason whereof resolued in the increase of his wonted seruices, and put forward thereunto by the vehemency of his affections, who coulde not chuse but loue, where himselfe could obtaine little more then ordinary liking, and was some thing besides hope by manye circumstances opposed to his imaginations (as louers for the moste part grow verye suspicious) to compasse anye further proceedinges, Loue hauing made him more melancholy then before, he got him selfe to the moste secreat part of all his lodging, and ther entertaigning the forcible parts of all his former passions, his pen bewrayed in writing, what humours then attached him, which was deliuerd in order ensuing. executing my euils: I could (good' mistres) with lesse burden beare that which with patience I am inforced to suffer, and peraduenture assure my selfe of that whereof hetherto, with doubtfull suspece I am scarce able to attend the end. But whether it be mine owne follye that wilfullye intrudeth me into vnknowne perilles, or that the Powers haue decreed in prime of my pleasures to martyr me with punnishementes, or hardly the destinies at my birth haue foresworn my happines, I know not: but this my vntimely patterne is able to approoue, that in all the iolitie I euer yet possessed, I haue in the end found my selfe mastred with a farre greater torment. O that we could as warely preuent the sequele of our euils, as we are ready in the front to obiect our selues into headlong mischiefes, or els at the least wise, when we had once trod the path of forgetfulnes, we might not continually be drenched in our errours. I speake this (deare mistresse) not to impugne my latest greifes, which altogeather I accompt as insufficient, to reape the rewarde of so precious a iewell, and onely wishe to continue in reuerence of the desired saint, to whom of deuotion I haue abandoned my securitie: but to manifest the misfortune, that alwaies hath beene attendaunt, with vnlooked pennance to guerdon the inforcement of my continuall labours. Is it then follye that I thus pine? Is it wilfulnes wherein I now rage? Is it an error that I haue planted my vowes vpon so daintie a counterfait? Am I deceaued that embrace the virtues of such a sacred relique? no surely. For I confesse that Berecynthia in Rome was not so religious. Vlisses paragon was not so precious, the faire Timoclea was not so wondrous, nor wise Cornelia found so famous, as thou art to be honoured for thy virtue, esteemed for thy qualitie, aduanced for thy dignitie, and renoumed for thy excellencie. Beleeue me (and rightlye shall it bee confessed) that I am herein rather to be commended then discouraged, to be rewarded then hindered, that could first frame my selfe to endure penaunce for one so worthye, and by singular choyce esteeme her, that in her selfe, is becomme the sole patterne of so excellent a propertye. But alas, as in the one I merit, so if of the other by cosequence I be depriued, what hope may there rest of my continuance, what end of my labors: sith an other must possesse with libertie, that whiche I haue longed for with intollerable feruencie. What shall I then say, sith my faltering toong is not able to speake, my quiuering hand vnhable to support the weake force of a slender quill, may not indure to write, my sences stopped with so many and doubtfull imaginations are alreadie forced, and by confusion encombred? certainlie mought but craue, that of pittie you will yet haue remorse of my labours, and sith I pine in penurie, feede me not with the harsh fruites of such vndigested extremitie. So mightie Ioue deale with me in my choice, as I repent not my sorrowes, ne recke the long and laborsome toile of wearie labors, to winne and weare in the ende the fruitfull braunche of thy assured courtesie. Wherein not finding any greater obstacle, then that I feare the hardnes of that, which hath beene alreadie subdued and maistered, and that the delicacie once attained, the remainder, cannot so firmely be attached, as the vnripe fruites of increasing good will, woulde with liberalitie haue atchieued. I can but wishe that you were as I am, and would as I wish, become the owner of him, whose onely propertie resteth in you, and whome you haue alreadie counterchecked with such a commaunde, as henceforth hee hath vowed himselfe no more his owne, but euen yours alone whome he onely tendreth and serueth. B. L. I haue heard the partie much discommended, for the application of these immoderate and superlatiue termes, of those who neither in outward appearaunce or inward conceipt of the Gentlewoman, seemed to perceiue anye matter at al ministring such great effects, as herein were propozed: but what of that, such was his fancie, and so regarded was his opynion towardes her, as hee could not but extoll, what in others iudgementes was but meanely to be commended. Loue so wrought, and therefore the lesse was he to be accuser. But to the purpose, these things thus proceeding hee forgatte not aswell in speeches as in writing many times to sollicite her forward conceipt towardes him, sometimes by gratifiyng her with diuers sonettes, otherwise in admiring her prayses (to none so manifest, as to himselfe woonderfull) As occasion serued againe with letters, during all whiche, by misreporte of some one frequenting his mistresse companie (as Loue is neuer without Enuie) shee seemed to catche holde of some one thinge in her seruaunt, ill pleasing to her fantasie, which, (for that she meant but onely to cauile with hym, or otherwise to make it the originall of some after quarrell) shee brake vnto a friende of his at the last in great secret. Ielousie hereupon began to frame straunge countenaunces, good will went to wracke, and nothing so ordinarie as her daily mislike. He whome the same most concerned, marueiling at the chaunge, became at last acquainted with the manner, and as he disposed himselfe to attend his mistresse courtesie, and accustomed licence of parle, hoping thereby from her own mouth to be assertained at large, she flang away vpon a sodain, leauing a newcome straunger, resting with him in her own chamber, to whome approching an other minckes, of more antiquity then courtesie, she skittered out these speeches to the other in his solitarie hearing. In faith I can laugh said shee to see pleasure bred by liking, and trust vpon triall . These words to some better effect were vttered by an other gentleman (in her hearing) in the behalfe of the louer, to his mistris, but the louer perceiuing thereby howe the game wente posting to his woonted solitary closet, and reuoluing too and fro, what best befitted his alteration, concluded at last to searche out if it were possible at hys mistresse handes, the vtmost occasion, yet before he departed beeing better instructed in the some of all that stoode against hym, hee lastly resolued, to take notice of the action, and by iust defence therof to qualifie as he might, the moste part of vnkindnesse. The readinesse of his penne and conceipte concurring togethers, these lines sorted out according to hys present disquiet, in this disordered proportion. friend, the especiall good care you alwaies had of me, and wish of greatest choice and liking (without that you cannot graunt in youre owne person) might any wise betide vnto mee, I doe thanke you, as hee that in no state desireth otherwise, then to be beholding vnto you. And albeit vnweeting to my selfe, I am particularly touched with one speciall partie, whose conceites I knowe not, nor of whose fancie I am priuate, whiche I may not, nor am able heerein to leaue vnremembred, yet doe I take it for noe lesse woonder, then straunge, howe the vanitie of suche a surmise engendered vpon no occasion, should rayse so sodayne mislike, without matter of effecte to maintaine the continuance. For the man, I know not, but as I haue seene, for the cause, I enquire not, as being assured of my truth. In neyther parte curious, as thinges neuer spoken of. For which cause, seeing I finde the inducement soe rare, as the message you haue commended vnto me, seemeth straunge. I hope I may as iustly withdraw your opinion from the insufficiencie, as the misreport of the other hath led you by too muche credulitie. It is good Mistris, your sole  & onely good reckoning, and not the malice of anye other, that so muche I accompt of your curtesie and good acceptaunce of my endeuoures, that solie and of all others most princypallye contenteth mee, from the benefite whereof, I nothing doubte but the protection of your former liking, shal so farforth conduct me, as therof I shall neuer bee depriued without due desert to the contrarye. My loweliest affections beeing eftsoones recommended to your wonted curtesie, I continue. &c. Herewith the other Gentle. that by this time had inckeling sufficient of Mistris Mawdlins quippe , (by what meanes I know not) appearing maruelous ill contented, to see his honest speeches abuzed, by suche ill demeaned follie, had prepared an other letter aunswering to the others sawcy taunt, deliuered as you haue heard reported before ye recitall of this last letter. By the course of which it appeareth she was attendaunt vpon the Gentlewoman beloued, and had in charge, by diuers occasions to accompanie her, by which meanes ouer hearing some wordes of this Gentle. and not thorowly approouing the sute by the follower, to whome vppon some secret grudge shee bare a particuler enuie, she had first wrought the disgrace aforesayd, and the more to giue him to byte vpon, glaunced out the other speeches formerly remembred, the conuaiaunce whereof includeth more matter then may be heere rehearsed, but such was his letter. Mistres, what you are, I know not, and what I suppoze you to be I write not, onely for that I finde you in the place of a Gentlewoman, I determine for this season to entertaigne you accordinglye. And for that my new acquaintaunce, is founded vpon the deliuerie of a disdainful message, take it not I pray you in skorne, that in some things I touche you, which haue too far displaied your selfe by your needlesse curiositie. Trust mee, for mine owne part, I neither looked to see you, much lesse to be offended for you. I vnderstande you are nipped, I knowe not with what, and would bee healed I knowe not by whome, for whiche cause, finding such nicenes in your owne conceiptes, you are angrie with Margerie, for keeping company with Marrian, which moued you to vtter suche matter of modestie, that in aduising an other to beware, you must affirme, that you could not chuse but laugh to see pleasure breed by liking, and trust vpon triall . I am sorie beleue me, you past away with emptie hands (being so wel accustomed to lapfuls as you haue ben)  & none in presece to greete you. I wisse little soule your prettie elfe was an ace aboue 31. when you forgot your selfe so farre, to vtter more then your charge. For albeit you had in commaund to admonish, neyther was it in your misterisse good pleasure, or pertinent to her courtesie, that you by scoffing obiections should skorne others, in thinges especially whereunto in truth they were neuer parties, and the cause not concerning your selfe, whome to be plaine with I doe suppose to haue as little discretion in the same, as you hadde consideration in deliuerie of the rest. For whiche cause wishing you in his behalfe, whome I loue, to refraine youre priuie skoffes without occasion, and enuie without deserte, who for the Vertues in him appearing deserues more allowaunce, then at the handes of a better then your selfe might verie well haue perceiued, I herewith ende my letters. He that would haue aunswered you if he had heard you. R.B. The ill successe of this letter, hauing set a higher cullour then accustomed, on the top of Mistresse Mawdlins vizard, made her nose more rubie like a great deale, then the cullour of the painters  Vermilion, who beeing more chollericke then of fleagme, could haue serued a fierie face to anie skarlet die in this towne, but at this instant was somewhat whotter then a winters tost. Whervpon growing to great agonies, the market by her means was so euhaunst, that our sutor at the next meeting could not so much as haue a sight of that he liked, neither by intreatie nor mony. Now began the Louer to be perplexed, and becomming as one in a straunge countrie, voyd of knowledge or acquaintance, knew not which way to bend his passage. He cursed in his imaginations, the ouer rashe charge of his friend, without entertainment of anye daliaunce, wherein mistresse Mawdlin being touched with Lapfulles, could not for her life be qualified wt cartloades, so wonderfullie exceeded she by so great impatiency. Then was hee angrie with himselfe that coulde not consider how silence at sometimes was farre more necessarie then speache, and that he who hath sutes in hande, must otherwhiles honour a knaue with the seruice of a Lord, and be faine to set vp a candle before the deuill, till his purpose be obteined. But after-wit commeth too late, and so he resolued, & deeming it needefull to the state of his liking (that with wodden prickes would not easily be expelled) to assay (if he could) by all meanes to entreat her, hee once againe gathered to him paper and inke, and breaking foorth into manie and extreame tokens of a discontented minde, he setled in the end his imaginations, to this present matter following. The great care I haue (sweete misteris) aswell to auoyd any cause of mislike on your part, as also to continue my selfe by desert in your craued good likeing, haue obiected vnto my doubtfull minde so many and ouer greeuous imaginations as I partly stande in doubt to what side to encline. One while calling in question the hazard of my happe, and the extremitie I looke to ensue, if (not garded with your courtesie) I be made a common obiect of euerie enuious opinion. An other while reputing my selfe not fortunate in whatsoeuer chaunce may be tide me, being thus long banished from the sight of that shoulde moste content me. On neither part comforted with anie thinge, because being crossed with so many mishaps, I dare not hope for the remedie I would, nor giue place to the wishe I haue desired, seeing my self circumuented with so many false and feined conclusions. I protest I neuer gaue cause of offence to your person, seeing the honour is more that I beare you, then the life I craue to enioye not possessing you. Think not (deer misteris) I could so farre degenerate to reward a Iewes courtesie with fained trecherie, muche lesse a gentlewoman, your good selfe, she to whom the best part of my life is indebted, and for whome the sowrest death coulde not be to me vnpleasaunt. Let not therefore enuious flatterie preuaile aboue truth  & vnfained loyaltie, for so muche as to disprooue their reproches resteth yet in my life to verifie. Which onely depending vpon your courteous dismission of this bearer, remaineth till then surcharged with dolors as: He that is not his but yours : B.L. Hauing thus finished what hee meant, and by a conuenient bearer, posted the same to the handes of his implacable Misteris, hard were it to bee coniectured, how thoroughlie on eache parte the same was skanned. Misteris Mawdlin becomming by this time, the very bosome of all her imaginations, forgatte not to tattle what malice coulde vtter, and swore by no beggers that if it rested at her likyng, her selfe woulde looke (I trowe) to minse vppon higher pantophles, then to matche with suche vnderlinges. The wenche was wise, and spake of sound and perfit skill, for well was she mortized in her punie yeares, and knewe that to deale with younger brothers, was nothing comparable to an elders possessions. The gentlewoman notwithstonding, stoode but very sleightly (as I heard) with him vpon such trifles, onely the quarrell grewe vpon other matter, and so prayed shee the same might rest. Shee deemed (she said) that verie amplie he had deserned, which was not in posse at her hands to be requited, but what in good will shee might endeuour for him, how farre soeuer different they were in all other opinions, therein yet she stood confirmed, in some little more then ordinarie accompt to receiue him. Finally shee was not of her self alone,  & therfore enforced to limit her offers, in consideration of whiche, shee praied him to be satisfied, and not to search or assay at her hands to haue any farther progressions.  Sage Mawdlin in continuance of al this conference laughed in her sleue, she thought by this tyme her cake had caught heate, and was now somewhat more then dough, but hee on the other side greeuing at nothing so much as that he coulde not be satisfied in minde of the most substantiall part of her mislike, but that the passage of her speeches were conueied ouer with a manner of fseight regard, as though if it were well taken or not shee cared not, & yet would be lothe (too ouermuch discontentment) to break off, notwithstading neuer after hope might be conceiued of any wished good effect, was now in a greater muse then before. And frequenting oftentimes his mistresse ordinarie passages in purpose, if he might conueniently once more meete with her, to make his finall and extreamest matter of resolution against himselfe that might be: it was a thinge so vnpossible for him to compasse by reason of the continued drift of mistresse Mawdlin, whose saintish countenance, was not so pleasing vnto him (for she fawningly still receiued him, though inwardly shee coulde not abide him) as some other hellish aspect, that what by her diuers entercourses, or his misteris setled frowardnes hee was neuer able by anye meanes to speake with her. Wherewith greatly enraged in deepe disdaine and most harde mislike of suche her vncourteous dealinge, after many argumentes & encountrings obiected in his secrete imaginatios, he deemed in himself at last how greatly he deserued to be accused, in that by pursuite of so peeuish an intendment, he woulde goe about to make his discretion a laughing stocke, to those that hadde neither reason nor courtesie to accompt of it, & that by too liberall a proffer of that which in no point (according to the least desert included in the principall worthinesse) might bee esteemed of. Nowe began reason a little to peere in one corner of his decayed conceites, and though the former troden steps of Loue had before time left so manie broad paths in the greatest entrie of his woonted endeuours, yet was hee at this instant somthing perswaded by degrees to reclayme himselfe, and if his happe were not too muche addicted to his auowed ouerthrow, to become a new man. Wherupon departing from the place wherein he remained, hee posted immediately to his woonted lodge, and there beeing set downe, twixt auntient setled Loue and newe exected mislike, depending as it were in equall ballance, not fully resolued to leaue, and loth in such disordered daliance to be thus continued, he framed these lines, which in testimony of that he after performed, he causes to his misteris to be forthwith recommended. Shall I terme you a friend as importuned by necessitie, or induce you as a stranger solicited with hope of some better courtesie: or mazed as I stand in my doubtfull dumpes, shall I now deeme to gaine that by intreatie, which triall in many dayes could neuer haue performed by enguaged lot of assured loyaltie? No trust me, I will henceforth neither speake nor proffer auowe nor gainesay, but as counterchecked with my former pretence, I will seeke to man my fortune by a forced  & continual silence, Cruel I cannot say that you are, that proffer no more than you haue promised. Of vnkindnesse I charge you not, as in whome neuer anie good affection towardes me was planted. Vncurteous I dare not affirme (although causelesse I haue bin touched) because the same is a blemishe to the offspring of true gentilitie. But thus much I may lawfully auerre, that I neuer deserued the least parte of iniurie that as reward of my approoued good will hathe alwaies bene proffered me. If Theseus had no more felicitie in his labours, Iason in his aduentures, or Paris in his amours then I haue founde pleasure in pursuite of thy worthinesse, and quiet in abandoning my happinesse; I blame them not to bee noted of inconstancie, rather then to be yoked to so hard an extremity. Your wordes sauouring of too muche despite, and countenaunce towards me continually freight with intolerable disdaine, enforce me to thinke that eyther in deed I am become an vnwoonted and moste vile abiect, or else you haue vsurped more ouer me, then former familiaritie with a great many could heretofore enforce within me. Which if by singularitie you had obtayned why might not the same with like courtesie haue bene continued? But Fortune, euermore enuious of my good happ, willing alwayes to mate mee with a causlesse contrarie, giuing me to be the seruant of so daintie a misteris, must of necessitie heerein shew her blind bayardie: who not content eftsoones for my good will to plunge me in the waues of her seueritie, lyke a peeuishe and moste harebraine guide, draweth me on still to her crueltie, and will in no wise be intreated so muche as to looke backe on my passed euilles, but as blind and sottish, runneth pooring, as deafe plodding as inconstant wauering, not certayne whether she may throwe me into Stix with Tantalus , or giue me for an endlesse pennaunce to the rolling charge of Sisiphus . Pardon me if my wordes be more then woonted, sith in the lesse that I haue gained, I am forced to complaine of the more, whiche I neuer deserued. But why speake I heere of desert, sithe it was neuer in my skill to pleasure you, in my hability to profit you, nor in my choyce to content you, whiche although I haue often willed, manie times wished, and with great desire would haue accomplished, yet whether it were myne owne ill hap or what other cruell destinie that denyed me, I leaue to your indifferencie to iudge, and to mine owne mishappe to testifie, which if with equalitie you will deeme of, the euill shall surmount, that hath bin receiued aboue all the good that in fine was required. I woulde you coulde haue contented your selfe to haue become the hope misteris of my good fortune, as well as to my great griefe, I haue founde you a known misteris of mine euils. It is the propertie of a great many, to desire muche and to be contented with nothing, but I haue requested but a little, and coulde not bee satisfied with anye thing. If my demaund at anie time hath beene vnlawfull, I holde my peace as conuinced by mine owne importunitie, but if I haue required nothing but equitie, why then am I sequestred from my hope with suche hard discourtesie. Your opinion I knowe not, and how it may hereupon conceiue in my behalf I request not, but contenting my selfe with mine owne vnworthinesse, wishing that the same might as worthyly haue bene deemed at your handes, as vndeseruedly with others before you, it hath bene accompted of, sith my speech hathe troubled you, and my sight so much offended you, as I shall perforce surcease from the one, so I assure you for the other I will with as much resistaunce goe about to bridle my selfe, beeing contented to become your abiect, and and yet skorning to become hereafter to anie other, like subiecte. To this letter of all others she onely answered, wherein, as much as she might shee sought to discharge her selfe of all notes of discourtesie, declaring that shee was glad to see, that by discretion he would so well goe about to order his passions. But nowe in this meane time fell it out, that vppon some occasion greatly concerning her selfe, shee was to compasse a matter, wherein hee onely was able to satisfie her, and without whome shee coulde not in any sorte obtaine it. stoode vnconquered, and would not haue her to stoope in anie sorte, nor to be so muche recreant as either by courteous countenaunce or otherwise to giue suspition that she would intreat him. He neuerthelesse, remaining nothing ignoraunt that his seruice at this instant vnto his Misteris might become gratefull, yet not presuming in respect of his former ill fortune, that touching her accompt, the same might any thing profit him, in shewe of his owne good nature and gentle condition, aswell as in regarde of his former louing (for loue also had yet left in him, verye sound markes of his dwelling) he secretly dispatched the same, whilste her selfe and mistresse Mawdlin were theron yet amusing. Notwithstanding all whiche (so great was her discourtesie, and so muche persisted shee, in this selfe willed opinion of her great councellour Mistresse Mawdlin ) as albeit she wel vnderstood how much the same did aduantage her, and that his exceeding courtesie becomming at all times a testimonie most euident, in what sort he reuerenced her, and with how great loyaltie he stil endeuoured to pursue her, yet vouchesafed she not so much as her speech or sight, by anye one iote of apparaunce whatsoeuer, to giue shew that it was thankes worthy. But our louer beeing throughly by this time accustomed to all these varieties, contenting him selfe to haue deserued well, though it rested not in her good gouerment at that instant to vse him well, determined finally to giue notice thereof in this letter, and therupon (with the same affection as before time) neuer after to regard her. If I could suppose in my selfe any waies to be iniurious to your affections, it shoulde manifestly appeare vnto you, that without the wreake of your self, I could willinglye become a sufficient reuenge of your vtmost extremities. But trust me, if in manye thinges I haue beene faultie vnto the worlde, vnto your good selfe I haue no waies erred, vnlesse in louing too much I haue beene offensiue to your fauor, and for that I long since craued pardon. Sithence which time, without complaint what I haue suffered, I haue studied so much as in me, to with-drawe and forbidde whatsoeuer might sound to the breach of your least deniall. And albeit my thoughts being free, by a curious desire and reuerence borne to your worthines, yoked my inward conceiptes to the search of whatsoeuer pleasing and most affecting to the scope thereof, by reason of which, and by an inuincible determination thereunto, I had placed the some of all my blisse, and ensuing happiness, in the forward vse and practise of the same: yet soundeth it to very slender approbation, that in your selfe being beloued, there should so much coynes and little courtesie be approoued. I do not suppose it to be vniust, that God hath giuen vnto women so straunge a condition, for that where men subiect them selues to so vain a fantasie: it is great reason they beare with them the burthen incident to so vaine a folly. If I found not so great a scourge in these fruitles affections, I could with as little reason make challenge to your fauour, as you with small courtesie haue giuen me a sop of such sauor. But haply it falleth out as proper to your sexe, that till you know your selues to be certenly beloued, you haue curtesie at comandement,  & liking at pleasure: & whe good will is once offered, you by and by waxe coye because the same is profered. Trust me, if I had thought that thinges had therefore beene of lesse price, because they are willingly bestowed, the market shoulde haue beene enhaunst before I would haue bowed. But seeing there is so farre difference between vs, as that your pleasure is turned to my pennaunce, and your nicenes to my annoyaunce, with as much losse as by restraint resteth hetherto vnrewarded, I will master my liking, til with more vsury I may be repaied in causes of loue. Neuertheles not so farre estranged from you, but that in anye cause of courtesie, I will not forget you are a Gentlewoman, and therefore yet be content (as before time) in such sort to respect you, whereof had it not beene your contrary pleasure, you needed not as you haue done to make any exception. Not meaning heereafter to trouble your remembraunce with anie more of my speaches, otherwise then beseemeth a familiar acquaintaunce, I hereon doe conclude my laste determination and farewell. Vpon this resolution was defined all this matter of liking, occasioning the seuerall letters hereby in order deliuered, the maner whereof both in respect of the pleasure, as for the better opening of the occasio to the ful conceipt of their applications and meaning, I haue the more largely layd foorth. And for as much as the diuersities already deliuered in this booke, doe arise to so grose a volume, as seemeth in quantitye sufficient for the firste perusing, and that the laying hereunto the residue of the partes Iudiciall and Familiar, with such other thinges as thereunto are intended to be added, woulde greatlye and more then doble haue augmented the bignes of the same, I haue thought good in this place to determine this foremost worke. Praying the courteous viewers of these my labours, to become as friendly censurers, as gladly I haue gone about herein to publish my indeuours, so shall they bind me by their bounty, in performing no more then they owe in courtesie. Laus Deo & domino Iesu. 
