 title, and their purpose by their posie, what els I pray you doe these bable bookemungers endeuor, but to repaire the ruinous wals of Venus Court, to restore to the worlde, that forgotten Legendary licence of lying, to imitate a fresh the fantasticall dreames of those exiled Abbie-lubbers, from whose idle pens, proceeded those worne out impressions of the feyned no where acts, of Arthur of the rounde table, Arthur of litle Brittaine, Sir Tristram, Hewon of Bordeaux, the Squire of low degree, the foure sons of Amon, with infinite others. It is not of my yeeres nor studie to censure these mens foolerie more theologi, but to shew how they to no Common-wealth commoditie, tosse ouer their troubled imaginations to haue the praise of the learning which they lack. Many of them to be more amiable with their friends of the Feminine sexe, blot many sheetes of paper in the blazing of Womens slender praises, as though in that generation there raigned and alwaies remained such singuler simplicitie, that all posterities should be enioyned by duetie, to fill and furnish theyr Temples, nay Townes and streetes, with the shrines of the Saints. Neuer remembring, that as there was a loyall Lucretia, so there was a light a loue Lais, that as there was a modest Medullina, so there was a mischiuous Medea, that as there was a stedfast Timoclea, there was a wanton Clodia. I leaue these in their follie, and hasten to other mens furie, who make the Presse the dunghill, whether they carry all the much of their mellancholicke imaginations, pretending forsooth to anatomize abuses, and stubbe vp sin by the rootes, whe as there waste paper beeing wel viewed, seemes fraught with nought els saue dogge daies effects, who wresting places of Scripture against pride, whoredome, couetousnes, gluttonie, and drunkennesse, extend their inuectiues so farre against the abuse, that almost the things remaines not whereof they admitte anie lawfull vse. Speaking of pride, as though they were afraid some body should cut too large peniworthes out of their cloth: of couetousnes, as though in them that Prouerbe had beene verified, Nullus ad amissas ibit amicus opes : of gluttonie, as though their liuing did lye vppon another mans trencher: of drunkennesse, as though they had beene brought vppe all the dayes of their life with bread and water: and finally of whoredome, as though they had beene Eunuches from theyr cradle, or blind from the howre of their conception. But as the Stage player is nere the happier, because hee represents oft times the persons of mightie men, as of Kings & Emperours, so I account such men neuer the holier, because they place praise in painting foorth other mens imperfections. These men resemble Trees, which are wont eftsoones to die, if they be fruitfull beyond their wont, euen so they to die in vertue, if they once ouershoote themselues too much wyth inueighing against vice, to be brainesicke in workes if they be too fruitfull in words. And euen as the Uultures slay nothing themselues, but pray vpon yt which of other is slayne, so these men inueigh against no new vice, which heeretofore by the censures of the learned hath not beene sharply condemned, but teare that peecemeale wise, which long since by ancient wryters was wounded to the death, so that out of their forepassed paines, ariseth their Pamphlets, out of their volumes, theyr inuectiues. Good God, that those that neuer tasted of any thing saue the excrements of Artes, whose thredde-bare knowledge beeing bought at the second hand, is spotted, blemished, and defaced, through translaters rigorous rude dealing, shoulde preferre their sluttered sutes, before other mens glittering gorgious array, should offer them water out of a muddie pit, who haue continually recourse to the Fountaine, or dregs to drink, who haue wine to sell. At scire tuum nihil est, nisi te scire hoc sciat alter . Thy knowledge bootes thee not a button, except another knowes that thou hast this knowledge. Anacharsis was wont to say, that the Athenians vsed money to no other ende but to tell it, euen so these men make no other vse of learning, but to shew it. But as the Panther smelleth sweetelie but onely to brute beastes, which shee draweth vnto her to theyr destruction, not to men in like maner, so these men seeme learned to none but to Idiots, who with a coloured shew of zeale, they allure vnto them to their illusion, and not to the learned in like sort. I know not howe it delighteth them to put theyr Oare in another mans boate, and their foote in another mans boote, to incurre that prouerbiall checke, Ne sutor vltra crepidam, with the Elephant to wade and wallowe in the shallow water, when they woulde sooner sincke then swym in the deepe Riuer, to be conuersant in those Authors which they cannot vnderstande, but by the translatour their Interpreter, to vaunte reading when the sum of their diuinitie consists in twopennie Catichismes: and yet their ignoraunt zeale wyll presumptuously presse into the Presse, enquiring most curiouslie into euery corner of the Common wealth, correcting that sinne in others, wherwith they are corrupted themselues. To prescribe rules of life, belongeth not to the ruder sorte, to condemne those callings which are approoued by publique authoritie, argueth a proude contempt of ye Magistrates superiority. Protogenes knew Apelles by one lyne, neuer otherwise seene, and you may knowe these mens spirit by theyr speeche, their minds by their medling, their folly by their phrase. Uiew their workes, and know their vanitie, see the Bookes bearing their name, and smile in thy sleeue at their shame. A small ship in a shallow Riuer, seemes a huge thing, but in the sea a very litle vessell, euen so each trifling Pamphlet to the simpler sorte, a most substantiall subiect, whereof the wiser lightly account, and the learned laughing contemne. Therefore more earnestly I agrauate their faulte, because their crime is crept into credit, and their dooinges deemed deuotion, when as purposelie to some mans despight, they bring into act their cholericke motions. Hence come our babling Ballets, and our new found Songs and Sonets, which euery rednose Fidler hath at his fingers end, and euery ignorant Ale knight will breath foorth ouer the potte, as soone as his braine waxeth hote. Be it a truth which they would tune, they enterlace it with a lye or two to make meeter, not regarding veritie, so they may make vppe the verse, not vnlike to Homer, who cared not what he fained, so hee might make his Countrimen famous. But as the straightest things beeing put into water, seeme crooked, so the crediblest trothes, if once they come with in compasse of these mens wits, seeme tales. Were it that the infamie of their ignoraunce, did redound onelie vppon themselues, I could be content to apply my speech otherwise, then to their Apuleyan eares, but sith they obtaine the name of our English Poets, and thereby make men thinke more baselie of the wittes of our Countrey, I cannot but turne them out of their counterfet liuerie, and brand them in the foreheade, that all men may know their falshood. Well may that saying of Campanus be applyed to our English Poets, which hee spake of them in his time: They make (saith he) Poetry an occupation, lying is their lyuing, and fables are their mooueables, if thou takest away trifles, sillie soules they will famish for hunger. It were to be wished, that the acts of the ventrous, and the praise of the vertuous were by publique Edict prohibited, by such mens merry mouthes to be so odiouslie extolde, as rather breedes detestation then admiration, lothing then lyking. What politique Counsailour or valiant Souldier will ioy or glorie of this, in that some stitcher, Weauer, spendthrift, or Fidler, hath shuffled or slubberd vp a few ragged Rimes, in the memoriall of the ones prudence, or the others prowesse. It makes the learned sort to be silent, whe as they see vnlearned sots so insolent. These Bussards thinke knowledge a burthen, tapping it before they haue halfe tunde it, venting it before they haue filled it, in whom that saying of the Orator is verified. Ante ad dicendum quam ad cognoscendum veniunt . They come to speake before they come to know. They contemne. Arts as vnprofitable, contenting themselues with a little Countrey Grammer knowledge god wote, thanking God with that abscedarie Priest in Lincolneshire, that he neuer knewe what that Romish popish Latine meant. Uerie requisite were it, that such blockheads, had some Albadanensis. Appollonius, to send them to some other mechanicall Arte, that they might not thus be the staine of Arte. Such kind of Poets were they that Plato excluded from his Common wealth, and Augustine banished ex ciuitate Dei , which the Romans Archilocus bookes to remaine in their Countrey, and amisse it were not, if these which meddle with the Arte they knowe not, were bequethed to Bridwell, there to learne a new occupation: for as the Basiliske with his hisse, driueth all other Serpents from ye place of his aboad, so these rude Rithmours with their iarring verse, allienate all mens mindes from delighting in numbers excellence, which they haue so defaced, that wee may well exclaime with the Poet, Quantum mutatus ab illo. But least I should be mistaken as an enemie to Poetrie, or at least not taken as a friend to that studie, I haue thought good to make them priuie to my mind, by expressing my meaning. I account of Poetrie, as of a more hidden & diuine kinde of Philosophy, enwrapped in blinde Fables and darke stories, wherin the principles of more excellent Arts and morrall precepts of manners, illustrated with diuers examples of other Kingdomes and Countries are contained: for amongst the Grecians there were Poets, before there were any Philosophers, who embraced entirely the studie of wisedome, as Cicero testifieth in his Tusculanes, whereas he saith, that of all sorts of men, Poets are most ancient, who to the intent they might allure men with a greater longing to learning, haue folowed two things, sweetnes of verse, and variety of inuention, knowing that delight doth prick men forward to the attaining of knowledge, and that true things are rather admirde if they be included in some wittie fiction, like to Pearles that delight more if they be deeper sette in gold. Wherefore seeing Poetry is the very same with Philosophy, the fables of Poets must of necessitie be fraught with wisedome & knowledge, as framed of those men, which haue spent all their time and studies, in the one and in the other. For euen as in Uines, the Grapes that are fayrest and sweetest, are couched vnder the branches that are broadest and biggest, euen so in Poems, the thinges that are most profitable, are shrouded vnder the Fables that are most obscure: neither is there almost any poeticall fygment, wherein there is not some thing comprehended, taken out either of Histories, or out of the Phisicks or Ethicks, wher vpon Erasmus Roterdamus very wittilie termes Poetry, a daintie dish seasoned with delights of euery kind of discipline. Nowe whether ryming be Poetry, I referre to the iudgment of the learned: yea let the indifferent Reader diuine, what deepe misterie can be placed vnder plodding meeter. Who is it, that reading Beuis of Hampton, can forbeare laughing, if he marke what scambling shyft he makes to ende his verses a like. I will propound three or foure payre by the way for the Readers recreation. The Porter said, by my snout, It was Sir Beuis that I let out. He smote his sonne on the breast, That he neuer after spoke with Clark nor Priest. This almes by my crowne, Giues she for Beuis of South-hamptoune. Some lost a nose, some a lip, And the King of Scots hath a ship. But I let these passe as worne out absurdities, meaning not at this instant to vrge (as I might) the like instance of Authors of our time, least in laying foorth their nakednesse, I might seeme to haue discouered my mallice, imitating Aiax, who obiecting more irefully vnto Vlysses flattery, detected him selfe of follie. As these men offend in the impudent publishing of witles vanitie, so others ouershoote theselues as much another waie, in sencelesse stoicall austeritie, accounting Poetrie impietie, and witte follie. It is an old Question, and it hath beene often propounded, whether it were better to haue moderate affections, or no affections? The Stoicks said none. The Peripaticians answered to haue temperate affections, and in this respect I am a professed Peripatician, mixing profit with pleasure, and precepts of doctrine with delightfull inuention. Yet these men condemne them of lasciuiousnes, vanitie, and curiositie, who vnder fayned Stories include many profitable morrall precepts, describing the outrage of vnbridled youth, hauing the reine in their owne hands: the fruits of idlenes, the of-spring of lust, and how auaileable good educations are vnto vertue. In which their preciser censure, they resemble the that cast away the nutte for mislike of the shell, & are like to those which loath the fruite for the leaues, accounting the one sower, because ye other is bitter. It may be some dreaming dunce whose bald affected eloquence making his function odious, better beseeming a priuie then a pulpit, a misterming Clowne in a Comedy, then a chosen man in the Ministerie, will cry out that it breedes a scabbe to the conscience, to peruse such Pamphlets, beeing indeed the display of their duncerie, and breeding a mislike of such tedious dolts barbarisme, by the view of their rethoricall inuention. Such trifling studies say they infect the minde and corrupt the manners, as though the minde were only conuersant in such toies, or shold continuallie stay where the thoughts by chaunce doo stray. The Sunne beames touching the earth, remaine still from whence they came, so a wyse mans mind, although sometimes by chance it wandereth here and there, yet it hath recourse in staied yeeres to that it ought. But graunt the matter to be fabulous, is it therfore friuolous? Is there not vnder Fables, euen as vnder the shaddowe of greene and florishing leaues, most pleasant fruite hidden in secrete, and a further meaning closely comprised? Did not Virgill vnder the couert of a Fable, expresse that diuine misterie, which is the subiect of his sixt Eglogue. Iam noua progenis coelo demittis alto. the olde worldes ouerthrowe in the Fable of Deucalion and Pirrha, vnder which, vndoubtedly it is manifest, (although diuers Authors are of cotrarie opinion) he meaneth Noes floodde, in so much as there is a place in Lucian in his booke De Siria Dea, by the which it appeareth, that by Deucalions Deluge, is vnderstoode, not (as some will) that Enundation, whereby in times past, Greece and Italie was ouerflowne, and the Ile Atlanta destroied, but that vniuersall flood which was in the time of Noe opinion among the Grecians, that this generation of men that nowe is, hath not been from the beginning, but that it which first was, wholy perrished, and this second sort of men which now are, be of a newe creation, growing into such a multitude by Deucalion and Pirrhas meanes. As touching the men of the first worlde, thus much (saith he) is committed to memorie, that when as they began to be puft vppe with pride of their prosperitie, they enterprised all iniquitie priuiledged by impunitie, neither regarding the obseruation of oath, nor the violation of hospitalitie, neither fauouring the fatherlesse, nor succouring the helplesse, whereuppon in lieu of their crueltie, they were plagued with this calamitie, the springs brake foorth and ouerflowed their bounded banks, ye watrie clowdes with pashing showres vncessantlie, sending down their vnreasonable moysture augmented the rage of the Ocean, so that whole fieldes and mountaines could not satisfie his vsurping furie, but Citties wyth their suburbs, Townes with their streetes, Churches with their porches, were nowe the walke of the waues, the dennes of the Dolphin, and the sporting places of the huge Leuiathan: men might haue fisht where they sold fish, had they not by the suddaine breaking foorth of the showres been made a pray vnto fish: the child in the cradle could not be saued by the embracings of the dying mother, the aged Criple remouing his wearie steps by stilts, was faine to vse them in steed of Oares, till at length his dismaied gray haires despairing of the sight of any shoare, gaue place to death and was swallowed vppe in the deepe, and so the bellie of the Whale became his graue. The earth after this sort beeing excluded from the number of the Elements, there was no memorie left of mankinde in this watry world, but onely in Deucalions Arke, who in regarde of his prudence and pietie, was reserued to this seconde generation, who hauing made a great Arke wherin he put his wife and children, tooke two beastes of euery kind as wel Lions as Serpents, Hawkes as Partriches, Wolues as Lambes, Foxes as Geese, amongst which there was such mutuall concord, that as they were harmelesse towardes him, so they were hurtlesse one towards another, al which sailed with him till the waters ceased. Treatise De industria animalium , that a Doue beeing sent out of Deucalions Arke, shewed the waters ceasing. By these proofes it is euident, that by Deucalions Deluge is vnderstoode Noes flood, because the very like thinges are sette downe in Genesis, of brute Beastes receiued by Noe into the Arke, and the Doue sent forth by him also. I trust these probabilities beeing duely pondered, there is no man so distrustful to doubt, that deeper diuinitie is included in Poets inuentions and therefore not to be reiected, as though they were voide of all learning and wisedome. I woulde not haue any man imagine, that in praysing of Poetry, I endeuour to approoue Virgils vnchast Priapus, or Ouids obscenitie, I commende their witte, not their wantonnes, their learning, not their lust: yet euen as the Bee out of the bitterest flowers, and sharpest thistles gathers honey, so out of the filthiest Fables, may profitable knowledge be sucked and selected. Neuerthelesse tender youth ought to bee restrained for a time from the reading of such ribauldrie, least chewing ouer wantonlie the eares of this Summer Corne, they be choaked with the haune before they can come at the karnell. Hunters beeing readie to goe to their Game, suffer not their dogges to taste or smell of any thing by the way, no carrion especially, but reserue the wholy to their approching disport, euen so youth beeing ready to vndertake more waightier studies, ought in no case be permitted to looke aside to lasciuious toyes, least the pleasure of the one should breed a loathing of the profit of the other. I would there were not any, as there be many, who in Poets and Historiographers, reade no more then serueth to the feeding of their filthy lust, applying those things to the pampering of their priuate Venus, which were purposely published to the suppressing of that common wandering Cupid. These be the Spyders which sucke poyson out of the hony combe, and corruption out of the holiest thinges, herein resembling those that are troubled with a Feuer, in whome diuers things haue diuers effects, that is to say of hote things they waxe cold, of cold things hote, or of Tygers, which by the sound of melodious Instruments are driuen into madnesse, by which men are wont to expell melancholie. He that wil seeke for a Pearle, must first learne to know it when he sees it, least he neglect it when hee findes it, or make a nought worth peeble his Iewell: and they that couet to picke more precious knowledge out of Poets amorous Elegies, must haue a discerning knowledge, before they can aspire to the perfectio of their desired knowledge, least the obtaining of trifles be the repentant end of their trauell. Who so snatcheth vp follies too greedilie, making an occupation of recreation, and delight his day labour, may happes proue a wittome whiles he fisheth for finer witte, and a Foole while hee findes himselfe laughing pastime at other mens follies, not vnlike to him who drinking Wine immoderatly, besides that hee many times swallowes downe dregs, at length prooues starke drunke. There is no extremitie either in actiue or contemplatiue life, more outragious the the excessiue studies of delight, wherwith young Students are so besotted, that they forsake sounder Artes, to followe smoother elequence, not vnlike to him that had rather haue a newe painted box, though there be nothing but a halter in it, then an olde bard hutch with treasure inualuable, or Æsops Cocke, which parted with a Pearle for a Barlie kurnell. Euen as a man is inclined, so his studies are bended, if to vaine-glorie, to eloquence: if to profounde knowledge, to Aristotle: if lasciuious, good in some English deuise of verse, to conclude, a passing potman, a passing Poet. There is no such discredit of Arte, as an ignoraunt Artificer, men of meaner iudgement, measuring oft times the excellencie of the one, by the ignoraunce of the other. But as hee that censureth the dignitie of Poetry by Cherillus paultry paines, the maiestie of Rethorick by the rudenesse of a stutting Hortensius, the subtiltie of Logique by the rayling of Ramus, might iudge the one a foole in writing he knewe not what, the other tipsie by his stammering, the thirde the sonne of Zantippe by his scolding; so he that estimats Artes by the insolence of Idiots, who professe that wherein they are Infants, may deeme the Uniuersitie nought but the Nurse of follie, and the knowledge of Artes, nought but the imitation of the Stage. This I speake to shew what an obloquie, these impudent incipients in Arts, are vnto Art. Amongst all the ornaments of Artes, Rethorick is to be had in highest reputation, without the which all the rest are naked, and she onely garnished: yet some there be who woulde seperate Arts from Eloquence, whose oppugne, because it abhorres from common experience. Who doth not know yt in all tongues taske eloquence is odious if it be affected, and that attention is altogether wanting, where it is reiected. A man may baule till his voice be hoarse, exhort with teares till his tongue ake, and his eyes be drie, repeate that hee woulde perswade, till his stalenes dooth secretlie call for a Cloake bagge, and yet moue no more then if he had been all that while mute, if his speech be not seasoned with eloquence, and adorned with elocutions assistance. Nothing is more odious to the Auditor, then the artlesse tongue of a tedious dolt, which dulleth the delight of hearing, and slacketh the desire of remembring, and I know not how it comes to passe, but many are so delighted to heare themselues, that they are a cumber to the eares of all other, pleasing their Auditors in nothing more then in ye pause of a ful point, when as by their humming and hawking respit, they haue leisure to gesture the mislike of his rudenes. To the eschewing therefore of the lothing hatred of them that heare them, I would wish them to learne to speake many things in few, neither to speake all things, which to theyr purpose they may speake, least those things be lesse profitably spoken which they ought to speake: neither would I haue them ouershoote themselues with an imitation of breuitie, so that striuing to be very short, they should prooue very long, namelie, when as they endeuor to speake many things breefelie. Perswade one point throughlie, rather then teach many things scatteringly, that which we thinke let vs speake, and that which we speake let vs thinke, let our speeche accorde with our life. Endeuour to adde vnto Arte Experience, experience is more profitable voide of arte, then arte which hath not experience. Of it selfe arte is vnprofitable without experience, and experience rashe without arte. In reading, thou must with warie regard learne as wel to discerne thy losse as thy gaine, thy hurt as good, least being wonne to haue a fauourable like of Poets wanton lines, thou be excited vnto the imitation of their lust. It is very vnseemely that nobler wits shoulde be discredited with baser studies, and those who high and mightie callings doo expect, shold be hindered by the inticements of pleasure and vanitie. Young men are not so much delighted with solide substances, as with painted shadowes, following rather those thinges which are goodly to the viewe, then profitable to the vse, neither doo they loue so much those things that are dooing, as those things that are sounding, reioycing more to be strowed with flowers then nourished with frute. How many be there that seeke truth, not in truth, but in vanitie, and find that they sought not according to trueth, but according to vanitie, and that which is most miserable, in the words of life, they toile for the merchandise of death. Hence commeth it to passe, that many make toyes their onely studie, storing of trifles, when as they neglect most precious treasures, and hauing left the Fountaines of truth, they folow the Riuers of opinions. I can but pittie their folly, who are so curious in fables, and excruciate themselues about impertinent questions, as about Homers Country, parentage, and sepulcher, whether Homer or Hesiodus were older, whether Achilles or Patroclus more ancient, in what apparrell Anacharsis the Scithian Historiographers, in what Moneth in the yere Virgill died, with infinite other, as touching the Letters of the Hiacinth, the Chestnut tree, the children of Niobe, the trees where Latona brought foorth Diana, in all which idle interrogatories, they haue left vnto vs not thinges found, but things to be sought, and peraduenture they had founde necessary things, if they had not sought superfluous thinges. Innumerable such vnnecessary questions, according to Philosophy are made as touching the soule, as whence it is, what maner of one it is, when it doth begin to be, how long it may bee, whether it passeth not from his first mansion els where, and so alter his abiding, or shift into other formes of brute Beastes, whether one soule serueth no more but once and one, what it shall doo, when as by vs it shall cease to doe any thing, howe it shall vse his libertie, when as it is escaped out of this dungion, or whether it be forgetfull of former things? what do al these things auaile vnto vertue? Wherfore, euen as he that enterpriseth to saile ouer the endlesse Ocean, whiles he cannot passe any further, is constrained to returne by the way he came, so these men beginning to sound the infinite depth of these misteries in ignorance, are faine to cease in ignorance: let the therfore refraine from such folly, and not seeke that which is not to be found, least they find not that which is to be found. Socrates who reduced all Philosophy vnto the manners, sayd, that thys was the greatest wisedome, to distinguish good & euill thinges. Unto which discerning distinction, is required deliberatiue meditation, in so much as in it, consists our liues vertuous direction. Neither is it to liue well one daies worke, but the continuall exercise of our whole life, beeing the best effect that euer knowledge did afford. When as wee duely consider, whether euery way leadeth, or wisely ponder with our selues to what end we refer each one of our actions, and exact of our straying thoughts a more seuere account of their wandering course, we shal find no victory so great, as the subduing of vice, nothing so hard as to liue well, no such vnestimable iewell, as an honest conuersation: let him that is inclined but to one extreame, secretly try by himselfe, with what facilitie or difficulty he may suppresse it in himselfe, and his owne practise will teache him, that he is led captiue by his owne inclinations, and ouercome by his wicked cogitations. If the so difficult a thing in accomplishment, seemes one sins suppression, howe laborious woulde be the reformation, of an altogether euill conuersation. Since then the onely ende of knowledge, ought to be to learne to liue well, let vs propound this vse and end vnto our selues, least after so many yeres paines, we misse of the marke whereat our parents in our education aymd. Turning ouer Histories, and reading the liues of excellent Orators and famous Philosophers, let vs with Themistocles, set before our eyes one of the excellentest to imitate, in whose example insisting, our industry may be doubled, to the adequation of his praise. I know the learned wil laugh me to scorne, for setting down such Rams horne rules of direction, and euen nowe I begin to
