 haue his friskes, & careers an other while: and what comparable to this spowte of yarking eloquence? Giue me the fellow, that is as Peerelesse, as Pennylesse; and can oppose all the Libraries in Poules Churchyard, with one wonderfull work of Supererogation; such an vnmatcheable peece of Learning, as no bookes can counteruaile, but his owne; the onely recordes of the singularities of this age. Did I speake at a venture, I might deceiue, and be deceiued: but where Experience is a witnesse, and iudgement the Iudge, I hope the errour will not be vnreasonably great. There was a time, when I floted in a sea of encountring waues; and deuoured many famous confutations, with an eager, and insatiable appetite: especially Aristotle against Plato, and the old Philosophers: diuers excellent Platonistes, indued with rare, & diuine wittes, (of whome elsewhere at large,) Iustinus Martyr, Philoponus, Valla, Viues, Ramus, against Aristotle: oh but the great maister of the schooles, and high Chauncellour of Vniuersities, could not want pregnant defence: Perionius, Gallandius, Carpentarius, Sceggius, Lieblerus against Ramus: what? hath the royall Professour of Eloquence, and Philosophy, no fauourites? Talaeus, Ossatus, Freigius, Minos, Rodingus, Scribonius, for Ramus against them; and so foorth, in that hott contradictory course of Logique, and Philosophy. But alas silly men, simple Aristotle, more simple Ramus, most simple the rest, either ye neuer knew, what a sharpeedged, & cutting Confutation meant: or the date of your stale oppositions is expired; and a new-found land of confuting commodities discouered, by this braue Columbus of tearmes and this onely marchant venturer of quarrels; that detecteth new Indies of Inuention, & hath the winds of Æolus at commaundement. Happy, you flourishinge youthes, that follow his incomparable learned steps: and vnhappy we old Dunses, that wanted such a worthy President of all nimble and liuely dexterities. What should I appeale infinite other to their perpetuall shame: or summon such, and such to their foule disgrace? Erasmus in Latine, and Sir Thomas More in English, were supposed fine, and pleasant Confuters in their time, and were accordingly embraced of the forwardest and trimmest wittes: but alacke how vnlike this dainty minion? Agrippa was reputed a gyant in confutation; a demi-god in omnisufficiency of knowledge; a diuell in the practise of horrible Artes: oh, but Agrippa was an vrcheon, Copernicus a shrimpe, Cardan a puppy, Scaliger a baby, Paracelsus a scab, Erastus a patch, Sigonius a toy, Cuiacius a bable to this Termagant; that fighteth not with simple wordes, but with dubble swordes: not with the trickling water of Helicon, but with piercing Aqua fortis: not with the sorry powder of Experience, but with terrible gunpowder: not with the small shott of contention, but with the maine ordinaunce of fury. For breuity I ouerskip many notable men, and valorous Confuters in their seuerall vaines: had not affection otherwhiles swinged their reason, where reason should haue swayed their affection. But Partiality, was euer the busiest Actour; and Passion, the whottest Confuter: whatsoeuer plausible cause otherwise pretended: and hee is rather to bee esteemed an Angell, then a man, or a man of Heauen, not of Earth, that tendereth integrity in his hart; equity in his tounge; and reason in his penne. Flesh, and bloud are fraile Creatures, and partiall discoursers: but he approacheth neerest vnto God, & yeeldeth sweetest fruite of a diuine disposition, that is not transported with wrath, or any blinde passion, but guided with cleere, and pure Reason, the soueraigne principle of sound proceeding. It is not the Affirmatiue, or Negatiue of the writer, but the trueth of the matter written, that carryeth meat in the mouth, and victory in the hande. There is nothing so exceeding foolish, but hath beene defended by some wise man: not any thinge so passinge wise, but hath bene confuted by some foole. Mans will, no safe rule, as Aristotle sayth: good Homer sometime sleepeth: S. Augustine was not ashamed of his retractations: S. Barnard saw not all thinges: and the best chart may eftsoones ouerthrow. He that taketh a Confutation in hand, must bringe the standard of Iudgement with him; & make Wisedome the moderatour of Wit. But I might aswell haue ouerpassed the censure, as the persons: & I haue to do with a party, that valueth both alike, and can phansy no Autor, but his owne phansy. It is neyther reason, nor rime, nor witt, nor arte, nor any imitation, that hee regardeth: hee hath builded towers of Superarrogation in his owne head, and they must stand, whosoeuer fall. Howbeit I cannot ouerslipp some without manifest iniury, that deserue to haue their names enrolled in the first rancke of valiant Confuters: worthy men, but subiect to imperfections, to errour, to mutuall reproofe; some more, some lesse, as the manner is. Harding, and Iewell, were our Eschines, and Demosthenes: and scarsely any language in the Christian world, hath affoorded a payre of aduersaries, equiualent to Harding, and Iewell; two thundring and lightning Oratours in diuinity: but now at last infinitely ouermatched by this hideous thunderbolt in humanity; that hath the onely right tearmes inuectiue, and triumpheth ouer all the spirites of Contradiction. You that haue read Luther against the Pope: Sadolet, Longolius, Omphalius, Osorius, against Luther: Caluin against Sadolet: Melanchthon against Longolius: Sturmius against Omphalius: Haddon against Osorius: Baldwin againste Caluin: Beza againste Baldwin: Erastus against Beza: Trauers against Erastus: Sutcliff against Trauers: and so foorth: (for there is no ende of endlesse controuersies: nor Bellarmine shall euer satisfye the Protestantes: nor Whittaker contente the Papistes: nor Bancroft appease the Precisians: nor any reason pacify affection: nor any authority resolue obstinacy:) you that haue most diligently read these, and these, and sundry other, reputed excellente in their kindes, cast them all away, and read him alone: that can schoole them all in their tearmes inuectiue, and teacheth a new-found Arte of confuting, his all-onely Arte. Martin himselfe but a meacocke: and Papp-hatchet himselfe but a milkesop to him: that inditeth with a penne of fury, and the incke of vengeance; and hath cart-loades of papershot, and chainshot at commaundement. Tush, no man can blason his Armes, but himselfe. Behold the mighty Champion, the dubble sword-bearer, the redowtable fighter with both handes, that hath robbed William Conquerour of his surname, and in the very first page of his Straunge Newes, choppeth-off the head of foure Letters at a blow. Hee it is, that hath it rightly in him indeede; and can roundly doe the feate, with a witnesse. Why, man, he is worth a thousand of these pidlinge and driblinge Confuters, that sitt all day buzzing vpon a blunt point, or two: and with much adoe drisle-out as many sentences in a weeke, as he will powre-downe in an howre. It is not long, since the goodlyest graces of the most-noble Commonwealthes vpon Earth, Eloquence in speech, and Ciuility in manners, arriued in these remote parts of the world: it was a happy reuolution of the heauens, and worthy to be chronicled in an English Liuy, when Tiberis flowed into the Thames; Athens remoued to London; pure Italy, and fine Greece planted themselues in rich England; Apollo with his delicate troupe of Muses, forsooke his old mountaines, and riuers; and frequented a new Parnassus, and an other Helicon, nothinge inferiour to the olde, when they were most- solemnely haunted of diuine wittes, that taught Rhetorique to speake with applause, and Poetry to sing with admiration. But euen since that flourishing transplantation of the daintiest, and sweetest lerning, that humanitie euer tasted; Arte did but springe in such, as Sir Iohn Cheeke, and M. Ascham: & witt budd in such, as Sir Phillip Sidney, & M. Spencer; which were but the violetes of March, or the Primeroses of May: till the one begane to sprowte in M. Robart Greene, as in a sweating Impe of the euer-greene Laurell; the other to blossome in M. Pierce Pennilesse, as in the riche garden of pore Adonis: both to growe to perfection, in M. Thomas Nashe; whose prime is a haruest, whose Arte a misterie, whose witt a miracle, whose stile the onely life of the presse, and the very hart-blood of the Grape. There was a kind of smooth, and clenly, and neate, and fine elegancy before: (proper men, handsome giftes:) but alacke, nothinge liuelie, and mightie, like the braue vino de monte , till his frisking penne began to playe the Sprite of the buttry, and to teach his mother-tongue such lusty gambolds, as may make the gallantest French, Italian, or Spanish gagliards to blushe, for extreame shame of their ideot simplicitie. The difference of wittes is exceeding straung, and almost incredible. Good lord, how may one man passe a thousand, and a thousande not compare with one. Arte may giue out precepts, and directoryes in communi forma : but it is superexcellent witt, that is the mother pearle of precious Inuention; and the goulden mine of gorgeous Elocution. Na, it is a certaine pregnant, and liuely thing without name, but a queint mistery of mounting conceit, as it were a knacke of dexterity, or the nippitaty of the nappiest grape, that infinitly surpasseth all the Inuention, and Elocution in the world; and will bunge Demosthenes owne mouth with new-fangled figures of the right stampe, maugre all the thundering, and lightninge Periodes of his eloquentest orations, forlorne creatures. I haue had some prettie triall of the finest Tuscanisme in graine; and haue curiously obserued the cunningest experiments, and brauest complements of aspiring emulation: but must geeue the bell of singularity, to the humorous witt; and the garland of victory, to the dominiering Eloquence . I come not yet to the Praise of the olde Asse: it is young Apuleius, that feedeth vpon this glory: and hauing enclosed these rancke commons, to the proper vse of himselfe,  & the capricious flocke; adopteth whom he listeth, without exception: as Alexander the great, had a huge intention, to haue all men his subiectes, and all his subiectes called Alexanders. It was strange newes for some, to be so assefied: and a worke of Supererogation for him, so bountifully to voutchsafe his golden name: the appropriate cognisance of his noble stile. God-night poore Rhetorique of sorry bookes: adieu good old Humanity: gentle Artes, and Liberall Sciences content your selues: Farewell my deere moothers, sometime floorishing Vniuersities: some that haue long continued your sonnes in Nature; your apprentises in Arte, your seruauntes in Exercise; your louers in affection; and your vassalles in duety: must either take their leaues of their sweetest freendes; or become the slaues of that dominiering eloquence, that knoweth no Art but the cutting Arte; nor acknowledgeth any schoole, but the Curtisan schoole. The rest is pure naturall, or wondrous supernaturall. Would it were not an infectious bane, or an incroching pocke. Let me not bee mistaken by sinister construction, that wreasteth and wrigleth euery sillable to the worst. I haue no reference to my selfe; but to my superiours by incomparable degrees. To be a Ciceronian, is a flowting stocke: poore Homer, a wofull wight, may put his finger in a hole, or in his blind eye: the excellentest histories, and woorthiest Chronicles, (inestimable monumentes of wisdome, and valour,) what but stale Antickes? the flowers, and fruites of delicate humanity, that were wont to be dainetily and tenderly conserued, now preserued with dust, as it were with sugar, and with hoare, as it were with hoony. That frisking wine, & that liuely knacke in the right capricious veine, the onely booke, that holdeth-out with a countenance; and will be heard, when woorme-toungued Oratours, dust-footed Poets, and weatherwise historians shall not bee allowed a woord to cast at a dogg. There is a fatall Period of whatsoeuer wee terme flourishinge: the worlde runneth on wheeles: and there must be a vent for all thinges. The Ciceronian may sleepe, til the Scogginist hath plaid his part: One sure Conny-catcher, woorth twenty Philosophers: A phantasticall rimester, more vendible, then the notablest Mathematician: no profession, to the faculty of rayling: all harsh, or obscure, that tickleth not idle phantasies with wanton dalliance, or ruffianly iestes: Robin Good-fellow the meetest Autor for Robin Hoodes Library: the lesse of Cambridge, or Oxforde, the fitter to compile woorkes of Supererogation: and wee that were simply trayned after the Athenian, and Romane guise, must bee contente to make roome for roisters, that know their place, and will take it. Titles, and tearmes are but woordes of course: the right fellow, that beareth a braine, can knocke twenty titles on the head, at a stroke; and with a iugling shift of that same inuincible knacke, defende himselfe manfully at the Paper-barre. Though I be not greatly employed, yet my leisure will scarsely serue, to moralize Fables of Beares, Apes, and Foxes: (some men can giue a shrewd gesse at a courtly allegory:) but where Lordes in expresse tearmes are magnifically contemned, Doctours in the same stile may be courageously confuted. Liberty of Tounge, and Pen, is no Bondman: nippitaty will not be tied to a post: there is a cap of mainetenaunce, called Impudency: and what say to him, that in a superabundaunce of that same odd capricious humour, findeth no such want in England, as of an Arctine, that might stripp these golden Asses out-of their gay trappinges, and after he had ridden them to death with rayling, leaue them on the dunghill for carrion ? A frolicke mind, and a braue spirite to bee employed with his stripping instrument, in supply of that onely want of a diuine Arctine, the great rider of golden Asses. Were his penne as supererogatory a woorkeman, as his harte; or his lines such transcendentes, as his thoughtes: Lord, what an egregious Aretine should we shortly haue: how excessiuely exceeding Aretine himselfe; that bestowed the surmountingest amplifications at his pleasure, and was a meere Hyperbole incarnate? Time may worke an accomplishment of woonders: and his graund intentions seeme to prognosticate no lesse, then the vttermost possibilities of capacity, or fury extended: would God, or could the Diuell, giue him that vnmeasurable allowance of witt, and Arte, that he extreamely affecteth, and infinitely wanteth, there were no encounter, but of admiration, and honour. But it may very-well beseeme me to conceale defectes: and I were best to let him runne out his iolly race, and to attende hys pleasure at all assayes, for feare hee degrade mee, or call mee a Letter-monger. Oh, would that were the worst. Gallant Gentlemen, did you euer see the blades of two brandished swordes in the handes of a Fury? See them now: and Lo how the victorious Duellist stretcheth-out the armes of his Prowesse, to runne vppon those poore Letters with a maine carreere. Aut nunc, aut nunquam : now the deadly stroke must be stricken: now, now he will surely lay about him, like a lusty throssher, and beate all to powder, that commeth in the mighty swinge of his dubble flayle. But I know not what astonishing terror may bedimm my sight: and peraduenture the one of those vnlawfull weapons is no sword, but a shaken firebrand in the hand of Alecto. All the worse: and he twice wo-begon poore soule, that is at once assaulted with Fier, and Iron, the twoo vnmercifull instrumentes of Mars enraged. God shield quiet men from the handes of such cruell Confuters: whose argumentes are swoordes; whose sentences, murthering bullets; whose phrases, crosbarres; whose tearmes no lesse, then serpentine powder; whose very breath, the fier of the match: all exceedingly fearefull, saue his footinge, which may haply giue him the slipp. Hee that standeth vppon a wheele, let him beware he fall not. I haue heard of some feate Stratagems, as sly, as the slyest in Frontine, or Polyen:  & could tell you a pretty Tale of a slippery grounde, that woulde make some bodies eares glow: but hee that reuealeth the secrete of his owne aduauntage, may haue scope enough to beshrew himselfe. The Ægyptian Mercury would prouide to plant his foote vpon a square; and his Image in Athens was quadrangular, whatsoeuer was the figure of his hatt: and although he were sometime a Ball of Fortune, (who can assure himselfe of Fortune?) yet was he neuer a wheele of folly, or an eele of Ely. The glibbest tunge must consult with his witt; & the roundest head with his feete: or peraduenture hee will not greatly thanke his tickle deuise. The Wheelewright may bee as honest a man, as the Cutler: the Drawer, as the Cutter: the Deuiser, as the Printer: the worst of the six, as the Autor: but some tooles are false Prophets; and some shoppes fuller of sophistry, then Aristotles Elenches: and if neuer any witty deuiser did suttelly vndermine himselfe, good enough. I can tell you, the Wheele was an auncient Hieroglyphique of the most-conning Ægyptians; & figured none of their highest mysteries of triumph, or glory. But when againe I list-vp mine eyes, and behold the glorious picture of that most-threatning Slassher: is it possible, so couragious a Confuter, should bee lesse terrible, then the Basiliske of Orus Apollo, that with his onely hissing, killed the poore snakes, his neighbours? can any Letters liue, that hee will slay? Were not Patience, or Submission, or any course better, then farther discourse?what fonder businesse, then to troble the Printe with Pamphlets, that cannot possibly liue, whiles the Basiliske hisseth death? Was I woont to iest at Eldertons ballatinge; Gascoignes sonnettinge; Greenes pamphletting; Martins libelling; Hollinsheads engrosing; some-bodies abridging; and whatchicaltes translating: & shall I now become a scribling Creature with fragmentes of shame, that might long sithence haue beene a fresh writer with discourses of applause? The very whole matter, what but a thinge of nothinge? the Methode, what but a hotchpott for a gallymafry? by the one, or other, what hope of publike vse, or priuate credite? Socrates minde could as lightly digest poison, as Mithridates boddy: and how easely haue the greatest stomackes of all ages, or rather the valiantest courages of the worlde, concocted the harshest, and rankest iniuries? Politique Philip victorious Alexander, inuincible Scipio, triumphant Caesar, happy Augustus, magnificent Titus, and the flower of the noblest mindes, that lmmortality honoureth, with a sweete facility gaue many bitter reprehensions the slip, and finely ridd their handes of roughest obloquies. Philosophy professeth more: and the Philosopher of Emperours, or rather the Emperour of Philosophers, Marcus Antoninus, when hee deserued best, could with a felicity heare the woorst. Cherrish an inward contentment in thy selfe, my minde: and outwarde occurrences, whome they will not make, shall not marre. It is as great a prayse, to be discommended of the dishonest, as to be commended of the vertuous: say, affirme, confirme, approoue, iustify what you can, the Captaine-scolde hath vowed the last word: none so bolde to aduenture any thinge, as he that hath no good thinge to loose: let him forge, or coyne, who will beleeue him? Lay-open his vanity, or foolery, who knoweth it not? yet who so eager to defende, or offende, with tooth, or nayle, by hooke or crooke? The Arte of figges, hadd euer a dapper witt, a dest conceite, a slicke forhead, a smugg countenaunce; a stinginge tongue; a nippinge hande; a bytinge penne; and a bottomlesse pitt of Inuention, stoared with neuer--fayling shiftes of counterfeite cranckes: and my betters by many degrees, haue bene faine to bee the God-sonnes of young Apuleius. Diuers excellente men haue praysed the olde Asse: giue the young Asse leaue to praise himselfe, and to practise his minion Rhetorique vppon other. There is no dealinge, where there is no healinge. To striue with dirt, is filthy: to play with edged tooles, daungerous: to trie masteries with a desperate aduersary, hazardous: to encounter Demosthenes Viper, or Apolloes Basiliske, deadly. To intende your owne intentions with an inuiolable constancy, and to leuell continually at your owne determined scope, without respecte of extrauagant endes, or cumbersome interruptions: the best course of proceeding, and onely firme, cheerefull, gallant, and happy resolution. Euery by-way, that strayeth or gaddeth from that direct Path, a wandring errour: and a perillous, or threatninge by-way, a forrest of wilde beastes. Hande, touch not the ranckeling byle, and throw-away the launcing instrument. I could conceiue no lesse, then thus, and thus, when I beganne first to surview that brauing Emprese: and euer me thought, Aut nunc, aut nunquam , seemed to prognosticate greate tempestes at hande, and euen such valorous workes of Supererogation, as woulde make an employed man of Florence, or Venice, to breake day with any other important businesse of state, or traffique. I went on,  & on, still, and still loking for those presaged woondermentes: & thought it Platoes great yeare, till I hadd runne-thorough the armed pikes, and felte the whole dinte of the two vengeable vnlawfull weapons. But I beleeue, neuer poore man found his Imagination so hugely mocked, as this cofuting Iugler coosened my expectation without measure: as if his whole drift had bene nothinge else, but a pleasurable Comedy, or a mad Stratagem, (like those of Bacchus, and Pan) queintlye deuised to defeate the opinion of his credulous reader, and to surprise simple minds with a most vnlikely euent. A fine piece of conueniance in some pageantes: and a braue deseigne in fitt place. Arte knoweth the pageants: and pollicy the place. In ernest, I expected nether an Oratour of the stewes: nor a Poet of Bedlam: nor a knight of the alehowse: nor a quean of the Cuckingstole: nor a broker of baggage stuffe: nor a pedler of straunge newes: nor anye base trumperye, or meane matters, when Pierce should racke his witt, and Penniles stretch-out his courage, to the vttermost extent of his possibility. But with out more circumlocution, pryde hath a fall: and as of A Catt, so of Pierce himselfe, howsoeuer inspired, or enraged, you can haue but his skinne, puffed vp with winde, and bumbasted with vanitye. Euen when he stryueth for life, to shewe himselfe brauest in the flaunt-aflaunt of his courage; and when a man would verily beleeue he should nowe behold the stately personage of heroicall Eloquence face to face; or see such an vnseene Frame of the miracles of Arte, as might amaze the heauenly eye of Astronomy: holla sir, the sweete Spheres are not too-prodigall of their soueraine influences. Pardon mee S. Fame. What the first pang of his diuine Furie, but notable Vanitie: what the seconde fitte, but woorthy vanitye: what the thirde career, but egregious vanity? what the glory of his ruffian Rhetorique, and curtisan Philosophy, but excellent villany? That that is Pierces Supererogation: and were Penniles a person of any reckoning, as he is a man of notorious fame, that, that perhaps, in regarde of the outragious singularity, might be supposed a Tragicall, or Heroicall villany, if euer any villany were so intituled. The present consideration of which singularity, occasioneth me to bethinke me of One, that this other day very soberlie commended some extraordinary giftes in Nashe: and when he had grauelie maintayned, that in the resolution of his conscience, he was such a fellowe, as some wayes had few fellowes; at last concluded somewhat more roundly. Well, my m aisters, you may talke your pleasures of Tom Nash; who yet sleepeth secure, not without preiudice to some, that might be more ielous of their name: but assure your selues, if M. Penniles had not bene deepely plunged in a profound exstasie of knauery, M. Pierce had never written that famous worke of Supererogation, that now stayneth all the bookes in Paules- churchyard, and setteth both the vniuersites to schoole. Till I see your finest humanitie bestow such a liberall exhibition of conceit, and courage, vpon your neatest wittes; pardon me though I prefer one smart Pamflet of knauery, before ten blundring volumes of the nine Muses. Dreaming, and smoke amount alike: Life is a gaming, a iugling, a scoulding, a lawing, a skirmisbing, a warre; a Comedie, a Tragedy: the sturring witt, a quintessence of quicksiluer; and there is noe deade fleshe in affection, or courage. Tou may discourse of Hermes ascending spirit; of Orpheus enchating barpe; of Homers diuine furie; of Tyrtoeus enraging trumpet; of Pericles bounsinge thunderclaps; of Platos enthusiasticall rauishment; and I wott not what maruelous egges in mooneshine: but a flye for all your flying speculations, when one good fellow with his oddiestes, or one madd knaue with his awke hibber-gibber, is able to putt downe twentye of your smuggest artificiall men, that simper it so nicely, and coylie in their curious pointes. Try, whe you meane to be disgraced: & neuer giue me credit, if Sanguine witt putt not Melancholy Arte to bedd. I had almost said, all the figures of Rhetorique must abate me an ace of Pierces Supererogation,: and Penniles hath a certayne nimble and climbinge reach of Inuention, as good as a long pole, and a hooke, that neuer fayleth at a pinch. It were vnnaturall, as the sweete Emperour, Marcus Antoninus said, that the fig-tree should euer want inice. You that purpose with great summes of studdy, & candles to purchase the worshipfull names of Dunses, & Dodipoles, may closely sitt, or sokingly ly at your bookes: but you that intende to be fine companionable gentlemen, snurkinge wittes, and whipsters in the world, betake yee timely to the liuely practis of the minion profession, and enure your Mercuriall fingers to frame semblable workes of Supererogation. Certes other rules are fopperies: and they that will seeke out the Archmistery of the busiest Modernistes, shall find it nether more, nor lesse, then a certayne pragmaticall secret, called Villany, the verie science ofsciences, and the Familiar Spirit of Pierces Supererogation. Coosen not your selues with the gay-nothings of children, & schollers: no priuitie of learning, or inspiration of witt, or reuelation of misteryes, or Arte Notory, counteruayleable with Pierces Supererogation: which hauing none of them, hath them all, and can make them all Asses at his pleasure. The Book-woorme was neuer but a pickgoose: it is the Multiplying spirit, not of the Alchimist, but of the villanist, that knocketh the naile one the head, and spurreth cutt farther in a day, then the quickest Artist in a weeke. Whiles other are reading, wryting, conferring, arguing, discoursing, experimeting, platforminge, musing, buzzing, or I know not what: that is the spirrit, that with a woondrous dexterity shapeth exquisite workes, and atchieueth puissant exploites of Supercrogation. O my good frends, as ye loue the sweete world, or tender your deare selues, be not vnmindfull what is good for the aduauncemente of your commendable partes. All is nothing without aduancement. Though my experieece be a Cipher in these causes, yet bauing studiously perused the newe Arte-notory, that is, the foresaid Supererogation; and hauing shaken so manie learned asses by the eares, as it were by the hands; I could say no lesse, and might think more. Something else was vttered the same time by the same Gentleman, as well concerning the present state of France, which he termed the most vnchristian kingdome of the most christian kinge; as touching certaine other newes of I wott not what dependence: but my minde was running on my halfpeny, and my head so full of the foresaid round discourse, that my hand was neuer quyet, vntill I had altered the tytle of this Pamphlet, and newlie christened it Pierces Supererogation : aswell in remembrance of the saide discourse, as in honour of the appropriate vertues of Pierce himselfe; who aboue all the writers that euer I knew, shall go for my money, where the currantest forgery, impudency, arrogancy, phantasticalitie, vanity; and great store of little discretion may go for payment; and the filthiest corruption of abhominable villany passe vnlaunced. His other miraculous perfections are still in abeyance: and his monstrous excellencyes in the predicament of Chimera. The birde of Arabia is longe in hatchinge: and mightye workes of Supererogation are not plotted,  & accomplished attonce. It is pittie so hyperbolicall a conceite, ouerhawty for the surmounting rage of Tasso in his furious angoy, should be humbled with so diminitiue a witt; base enough for Elderton, and the riffe-raffe of the scribling rascality. I haue heard of many disparagementes in felowship: but neuer sawe so great Impudency married to so little witt; or so huge presumption allyed to so petty performance. I must not paint, though hee dawbe. Pontan decipher thy vauntinge Alopantius Ausimarchides a new: and Terence display thy boastinge Thraso a new: and Plautus addresse thy vain-glorious Pyrgopolinices anew: heere is a bratt of Arrogancy, a gosling of the Printing-house, that can teach your braggardes to play their partes in the Printe of woonder, & to exploit redowtable workes of Supererogation; such as neuer were atchieued in Latin, or Greeke. Which deserue to bee looked-for with such a longing expectation, as the Iewes looke for their kingly Messias: or as I looke for Agrippas dreadfull Pyromachy: for Cardans multiplied matter, that shall delude the force of the Canon: for Acontius perfect Arte of fortifieng little townes against the greatest Battery: for the Iliades of all Courtly Stratagems, that Antony Riccobonus magnifically promiseth: for his vniuersall Repertory of all Histories, contayning the memorable actes of all ages, all places, and all persons: for the new Calepine of all learned, and vulgar languages, written, or spoken, whereof a loud rumour was lately published at Basill: for a generall Pandectes of the Lawes, and statutes of all nations, and commonwealthes in the worlde, largely promised by Doctor Peter Gregorius, but compendiously perfourmed in his Syntagma Iuris vniuersi : for sundry such famous volumes of hugy miracles in the cloudes. Do not such Arch-woondermentes of supernaturall furniture, deserue arch-expectation? What should the Sonnes of Arte, dreame of the Philosophers Stone, that like Midas, turneth into golde, whatsoeuer it toucheth: or of the soueraine, and diuine Quintessence, that like Esculapius restoreth health to sicknesse; like Medea, youth to Olde- age; like Apollonius, life to Death? No Philosophers Stone, or foueraine Quintessence, howsoeuer preciously precious, equiualent to such diuine woorkes of supererogation. O highminded Pierce, hadd the traine of your woordes, and sentences bene aunswearable to the retinue of your bragges, and throates; or the robes of your apparaunce in person, suteable to the weedes of your ostentation in tearores: I would surely haue beene the first, that should haue proclaimed you, the most-singuler Secretary of this language, & the heauenliest creature vnder the Spheres. Sweete M. Ascham; that was a flowing spring of humanity, and worthy Sir Phillip Sidney, that was a florishing spring of nobility, must haue pardoned me: I would directly haue discharged my conscience. But you must giue plaine men leaue to vtter their opinion without courtinge: I honor high heads, that stand vpon low feet; & haue no great affection to the gay fellowes, that build vp with their clabring hartes, and pull downe with their vntoward hands. Giue me the man that is meeke in spirit, lofty in zeale: simple in presumption, gallant in endeuour: poore in profession, riche in performance. Some such I knowe; and all such I value highly. They glory not of the golden Stone, or the youthfull Quintessence: but Industrie is their goulden Stone; Action thier youthfull Quintessence; and Valour their diuine worke of Supererogation. Euerye one may thinke as he listeth; & speake as he findeth occasion: but in my fancy, they are simply the simplest fellows of al other, that boast they will exploite miracles, & come short in ordinarie reckonings. Great matters are no woonders, when they are menaced, or promised with big othes: and small thinges are maruels, when they are not expected, or suspected. I wondred to heare, that Kelly had gotten the Golden Fliece, and by vertue therof was sodenly aduaunced into so honorable reputation with the Emperours maiestye; but would haue woondred more, to haue seene a woorke of Supererogation from Nashe: whose witt must not enter the listes of comparison with Kellyes Alchimy: howsoeuer he would seeme to haue the Greene Lion, and the Flying Eagle in a boxe. But Kelly will bidd him looke to the swolne Toade, & the daunsing Foole. Kelly knoweth his Lutum Sapienti ae , and vseth his termes of Arte. Silence is a great misterye: and lowde wordes but a Coweherds horne. He that breedeth mountaynes of hope, and with much adoe begetteth a molehill (shall I rell him a newe tale in ould Inglishe? ) beginneth like a mightie Oxe, & endeth like a sory Asse. To archieue it without oftentation, is a notable prayse: but to vaunt it without atcheuement, or to threaten it without effecte; is but a dubble proofe of a simple witt. Execution sheweth the hability of the man: presumption bewraieth the vanitie of the mind. The Sunne sayth not; I will thus, and thus displaye my glorious beames, but shineth indeede: the springe braggeth not of gallant flowers, but florisheth indeede: the Haruest boasteth not of plentifull fruit, but fructifieth in deede. Æsops fellowes being asked, what they could doe, answered they could doeany thing; but Æsope making a small showe, coulde doe muchindeede: the Greeke Sophisters knowing nothinge in comparison, (knowledge is a dry water) professed a skill in all thinges; but Socrates knowing in a manner all things, (Socrates was a springing rocke) professed a skill in nothinge: Lullius, and his sectaryes, haue the signer of Hermes, and the admirable Arte of disputinge infinitly de omni scibili ; but Agrippa; one of the vniuersallest schollars, that Europe hath yealded, and such a one, as some learned men of Germany, France,  & ltalie, intituled The Omniscious Doctour, Socraticallie declameth against the vanitye of sciences, and for my comfort penneth the Apology of the Aste. Neudrany of these prating vagabundes had the vertuous Elixir, or other important secret: (yet who such monarches for Phisique, Chirurgery, Spagirique, Astrology, Palmastry, naturall & supernaturall Magique, Necromancy, Familiar-spitishipp, and all profound cunninge, as some of these arrant Impostours;) hee is a Pythagorean, and a close fellow of his tongue, & pen, that hath the right magisterium indeede;  & can dispatch with the finger of Art, that they promis with the mouth of cosenage. They that vaunt, do it not: & they that pretend least, accomplish most. High-spirited Pierce doe it indeede, that thou crakest in vaine; and I will honour thy worke, that scorne thy worde. When there was no neede, thy breath was the mouth of Ætna; & like a Cyclops, thou didst forge thunder in Mongibello: now the warringe Planet was expected in person, and the Fiery Trigon seemed to giue the Alarme; thou talkeste of Cattes meate and Dogges meate enough : and wilt try it our by the teeth at the signe of the Dogs-head in the pot. Oh, what a chatering Monky is here:  & oh what a dog-fly, is the dogstarr proued: Elderton would haue answered this geere out of-cry: or had I the witt of Scoggin, could say some thing to it: but I looked for Cattes meate in aquafortis ,  & Dogs meat in Gunpowder, & can no skill of these termes, steeped in thy mothers gutter, & thy fathers kennel. Na, if you will needes strike it as dead as a dore naile; and run vpon me with the blade of Cattes meate, & the fierbrond of Dogges-meate: I haue doone. Or in case your meaning be, as you sroutely protest, to trounce me after twenty in the hundred, and to haue about with me, with two staues, and a pyke , like a tall fellowe of Cracouia: there is no dealing for short weapons. Young Martin was an ould hackster:  & had you plaid your maisters pryzes in his time, he peraduenture durste haue looked those two staues in the face, and would haue desired that pike of some more acquaintance: but Truce keepe me out of his handes, that fighteth furiously with two staues of Cattes meate and a pyke of Dogges meate: and is resolutly bente, the beste blood of the brothers shall pledge him in vineger. Happy, it is noe worse, then vineger; a good sawce for Cattes meate, and Dogges meate. Gentlemen, you that thinke prommisse a bonde, and vse to performe more, then you threaten; neuer beleeue Braggadocio againe for his sake. When he hath done his best, and his worst: trust me, or credit your owne eies, his best Best is but Cattes meate, & his worst Worst but Doggs-meate enough. What should I goe circuiting about the bushe? He taketh the shortest cutt to the wood, and dispatcheth all controuersies in a fewe significant termes: not those of Gunpowder, which would aske some charging, and discharging: but these of dogges-meat, which are vp with a vomit. He that is not so little, as the third Cato from heauen, or the eight wiseman vpon earth, may speake with authority; and christen me a Dunse, a foole, an ideot, a dolt, a goose-capp, an asse , and I wot not what, as filthy, as filthy may be. Dogged Impudecy hath his proper Idiotisme;  & very clarkly scholeth the eares of Modestie, to spell, Fa-fe-fi-fo-fu. Simple wittes would be dealt playnly withall: I stand not vpon coye or nice poyntes; but am one of those, that would gladlie learne their owne imperfections, errours, and follies, in specialissima specie : Be it knowne vnto all men by these presentes, that Thomas Nashe, from the topp of his witt looking downe vpon simple creatures, calleth Gabriell Haruey a Dunse, a foole, an ideot, a dolt, a goose-capp, an asse, and soe fourth: (for some of the residue, is not to be spoken but with his owne manerly mouth): but the wise man in printe, should haue doone well in his learned Confutation, to haue shewed particulerlie, which woords in my Letters, were the wordes of a Dunse: which Sentences, the sentences of a foole: which Arguments, the arguments of an Ideot: which Opinions, the opinions of a dolt: which Iudgements, the iudgements of a goose-cap: which Conclusions, the conclusions of an Asse. Eyther this wold be dun, (for I suppose, he would be loth to proue some Asses, that in fauour haue written otherwise, and in reason are to verify their owne testimonies): or he must be fayne himselfe, to eate his owne Cattes-meate,  & Dogges-meat: and swallow-downe a Dunse, a foole, an ideot, a dolt, a goose- cap, an asse in his owne throate; the proper case of his filthiest excrements, and the sinke of the famous rascal; that had rather be a Poulcatt with a stinkinge stur, then a musk-cat with gratious fauor. Pardon me gentle Ciuilitie: if I did not tender you, & disclame impudency, I could do him some peece of right; & shew him his well fauored face in a Cristall, as true as Gascoignes steele-glas. But trust him not for a dodkin (it is his owne request) if I euer did my Doctors Actes : which a thowsand heard in Oxforde; and some knew to be done with as little premeditation, as euer such actes were done: (for I answered vpon the questions, that were giuen me by Doctor Cathedr ae, but two dayes before; and read my Cursory Lecture with a dayes warning:) or if I be not A Fawne-guest Messenger betweene M. Christopher Bird , in whose company, I neuer dined, or supped these six yeares, and M. Emmanuell Demetrius , with whom I neuer dranke to this day. Other matters, touching her Highnesse aff abilitie toward Schollers , (so her Maiesties fauour toward mee must bee interpreted:) the Priny watchword of honourable men in their Letters Commendatory, euen in the highest degree of praysing , (so our high Chauncellours commendation must bee quallified:) Nashes graue Censure of Publike Inuectines, and Satyres , (so Harueyes slight opinion of contentious, and seditious Libels must be crosbitten:) his testimony of Ciceroes consolation ad Dolabellam , (which he will needes father vpon me in reproch, though his betters wil neuer pen such a peec of Latin, whosoeuer wer the Stepp-Tully:) his derision of the most profitable, and valorous Mathematical Arts , (whose industrie hath atcheeued woonders of mightier puissance, then the labours of Hercules:) his contempt of the worthiest persones in euery faculty, (which he alwayes censureth as his punyes, and vnderlinges:) his palpable Atheisme, and drinkinge a cupp of Lammeswool to the Lambe of God: his gibinge at Heauen , (the hauen, where my deceased brother is arriued,) with a deepe cut out-of his Gramer rules; Astra petit disertus : the very starres, are scarres, where he listeth: and a hundred such, and such Particularities; that requier sum larger Discourse; shew him to be a youngman of the greenest springe, as beardles in iudgement, as in face; and as Penniles in witt, as in purse. It is the least of his famous aduentures, that hee vndertaketh to be Greenes aduocate : as diuine Plato assayed to defend Socrates at the Barr: and I knowe not whether it be the least of his dowtye exploites, that he salueth his frendes credit, as that excellent disciple saued his maisters life. He may declare his deere affection to his Paramour; or his pure honestye to the world; or his constant zeale to play the Diuels Oratour: but noe Apology of Greene, like Greenes Grotes-worth of witt : and when Nash will indeede accomplish a worke of Supererogation, let him publish, Nashes Penniworth of Diserction . If he be learneder, or wiser then other, in so large an assise, as should appeare by the reporte of his owne mouth; it is the better for him: but it were not amisse, he should sumtime looke-backe to the budget of Ignorance, and Folly, that hangeth behind him; as otherwhiles he condescendeth to glaunce at the satchell of his grammar bookes. Calumny,  & her coosen-german Impudency, wil not alwaies houldout rubbers: and they neede not greatlie bragge of their haruest, that make Phantasie the roote, vanity the stalke, Follye the eare, Penurye the cropp, and Shame the whole substance of their studdies. To be ouer-bould with one, or two, is something: to be sawcy with many, is much: to spare fewe, or none, is odious: to be impudent with all, is intollerable. There were fayre playe enough, though foule play were debarred: but Boyes, fooles, and knaues, take all in snuffe, when the variance might be debated in the language of Curtesie: and nothing but horseplay will serue, where the colt is disposed to playe the iade. Did I list to persecute him in his own vaine, or were I not restrained with respectiue termes of diuine, and ciuill moderation: o Aretin, how pleasurably might I canuas the bawling cur, in a tossing sheete of paper: or o Gryson, who could more easilie discouer a newe Arte of riding a headstrong beaste? But that which Nashe accounteth the brauery of his witt, and the dubble creast of his style, I am in discretion to cut-of: and in modesty yeeld it his onely glorye, to haue the fowlest mouth, that I euer sawe, and the strongest breath, that I euer fealt. When witty girding faileth, as it pitifully fayleth in euery page of that Superarrogatory worke: Lord, what odious baggage, what rascal stuffe, what villanous trumpery filleth-vpp the leafe: and howe egregiously would he playe the vengeable Sycophant, if the conueiance of his Arte, or witt, were in anye measure of proportion, correspondent to his pestilent stomacke? But in the fellest fitt of his Furye, euen when he runneth vponme with openest mouth, & his Spite like a poysonous toade, swelleth in the full: as if some huge timpany of witt would presentlye possesse his braine; or some horrible Fiery Spright would flye in my face, and blast me to nothing: then good Dick Tarleton is dead, & nothing aliue but Cattes-meat, & Dogges-meat enough. Na, were it not, that hee hadd dealt politiquely, in prouidinge himself an autenticall suerty, or rather a mighty protectour at a pinch, such a deuoted freend, and inseparable companion, as Æneas was to Achates, Pylades to Orestes, Diomedes to Vlysses, Achilles to Patroclus, and Hercules to Theseus: doubtlesse hee had beene vtterly vndone. Compare olde, and new histories, of farre, & neere countries: and you shall finde the late manner of Sworne Brothers , to be no new fashion, but an auncient guise, and heroicall order; deuised for necessity, continued for security, and mainetayned for proffite, and pleasure. In brauest actions, in weightiest negotiations, in hardest distresses, in how many cases, One man, no-boddy; and a dayly frend, as necessary, as our dayly bread. No treasure, more precious: no bonde, more indefesible: no castle, more impregnable: no force, more inuincible: no trueth, more infallible: no element, more needefull; then an entire,  & assured associate; euer prest, aswell in calamity to comfort, or in aduersity to relieue, as in prosperity to congratulate, or in aduancemente to honour. Life is sweete, but not without sweete societie: & an inward affectionate frend, (as it were an other Thesame, or a second Selfe ,) the very life of life, and the sweet-harte of the hart. Nashe is learned,  & knoweth his Leripup. Where was Euryalus, there was Nisus: where Damon, there Pythias: where Scipio, there Laelius: where Apollonius, there Damides: where Proclus, there Archiadas: where Pyrocles, there Musidorus: where Nashe, there his Nisus, his Pythias, his Laelius, his Damides, his Archiadas, his Musidorus, his indiuisible companion, with whose puissant helpe hee conquereth, wheresoeuer he raungeth. Na, Homer not such an author for Alexander: nor Xenophon for Scipio: nor Virgil for Augustus: nor Iustin for Marcus Aurelius: nor Liuy for Theodosius Magnus: nor Caesar for Selymus: nor Philip de Comines for Charles the fift: nor Macchiauell for some late princes: nor Aretin for some late Curtesans; as his Authour for him; the sole authour of renowned victorie. Maruel not, that Erasmus hath penned the Encomium of Folly; or that so many singular learned men haue laboured the commendation of the Asse: he it is, that is the godfather of writers, the superintendent of the presse, the muster-maister of innumerable bands, the Generall of the great feilde; hee, and Nashe will consute the world. And wher is the Ægles quill, that can sufficiently aduance the first spoiles of their new conquestes? Whist sory pen, and be aduised how thou presume aboue the highest pitch of thy possibility. Hee that hath christened so many notable authours; censured so many eloquent pennes; enrowled so many worthy garrisones; & encamped so many noble, and reuerend Lordes; may be bould with me. If I be an Asse, I haue company enough: and if be no Asse, I haue fauour to be enstalled in such companye. The name will shortly grow in request, as it somtime florished in glorious Roome: and who then will not sue, to be free of that honorable Company? Whiles they are ridden, I desire not to be spared: when the hott-spurr is aweary with tyring them, he wil scarsly troble himself with a skin. Or if he do, I may chance acquaint him with a secret in distillation; He that drinketh Oyle of prickes, shall haue much adooe to voide syrup of roses; and he that eateth nettles for prouander, hath a priuiledg to pisse vpon Lillyes for litter. Poule wharfe honour the memorye of oulde Iohn Hester, that would not sticke with his frende for twentye such experimentes; & would often tell me of A Magistral vnguent for all sores. Who knoweth not that Magistrall vnguent, knoweth nothing: and who hath that magistrall vnguent, fearerh no gunshott. The Confuter meant to be famous, like Poggius, that altobe-assed Valla, Trapezuntius, and their defendantes, many learned Italians: or might haue giuen a gesse at some possible afterclaps, as good as a prognostication of an after-winter. Though Pierce Penniles, for a spurt were a ranke rider, and like an arrant knight ouerran nations with a carreer; yet Thomas Nashe might haue beene aduised, and in pollicy haue spared them, that in compassion fauoured him; and were vnfaynedlye sory, to finde his miserable estate, aswell in his style, as in his purse, and in his wit, as in his fortune. Some complexions haue much a dooe to alter their nature:  & Nashe wil carrie a tache of Pierce to his graue, (we haue worse prouerbes in englishe:) yet who seeith not, what apparent good, my Letters haue done him, that before ouercrowed all commers, and goers with like discretion, but nowe forsooth hath learned some fewe handsome termes of respecte, and verye manerly beclaweth a fewe, that he might the more licentiously besmeere one. S. Fame giue him ioye of his blacke cole, and his white chalke. Who is not limed with some default; or who reddier to confesse his own imperfections, then miselfe: but when in professed hatred, like a mortal feudist, he hath vttered his very vttermost spite, & wholy disgorged his racorous stomacke: yet can he not, so much as deuise any particular actionof trespas, or obiect any certaine vice against me, but only one greuous crime, called Pumps, & Patofles, (which indeede I haue worne, euer since I knewe Cambridge,) & his owne deerest hart-root, Pride: which I protest before God, and man, my soule in iudgment as much detesteth, as my body in nature lotheth poyson; or any thing abhorreth his deadlye enemy, euen amongst those creatures, which are found fatally contrary by naturall Antipathy. It is not excesse, but defecte of pride, that hath broken the head of some mens preferment. A spring mindes can soare aloft: and Selfe-conceit, with the countenaunce of Audacity, the tongue of Impudency, & the hand of Dexterity, preaseth bouldly into the forwardest throng of the shouldring ranke: whiles Discretion hath leasure to discourse, whether somedeale of Modesty were meeter for manye, that presume aboue their condition; and some deale of Selfe-liking sitter for some, that haue fealt no greater want, then want of Pride. It may seeme a rude disposition, that sorteth not with the quality of the age: & Pollicy deemeth that vertue a vice, that modesty, simplicity, that resolutenes, dissolutenes, that conformeth not it selfe, with a supple & deft correspodence to the present time: but no such oxe in my mind, as Tarquinius Superbus: no such calfe, as Spurius Maelius: no such colt, as Publius Clodius: no such Ape, as Lucians Rhetorician, or the Diuels Oratour. Blind ambition, a noble bayarde: proud arrogancy, a goulden Asse: vaine conceit, a gaudy Peacocke: all brauery, that is not effectuall, a gay nothing. Hevpbraideth me with his own good nature: but where such an insolent braggard, or such a puffing thing, as himselfe? that in magnifying his owne bable, & debasing me, reuileth them, whose bookes, or pantofles he is not worthy to beare. If I be an Asse, what asses were those curteous frendes, those excellent learned men, those worshipfull, & honorable personaes, whose Letters of vndeserued, but singular comendation may be shewen? What an asse was thiselfe, whe thou didst publish my praise amongst the notablest writers of this realme? or what an Asse art thiself, that in the spitefullest outrage of thy maddest Confutatio, dost otherwhiles enterlace some remembrances of more account, then I can acknowledge without vanity, or desier without ambition? The truth is, I stande as little vpon others commendations, or mine owne titles, as any man in England whosoeuer; if there be nothing els to solicite my cause: but being so shamefully and intollerably prouoked in the most villanous termes of reproch, I were indeede a notorious insensate asse, in case I should eyther sottishly neglect the reputation of soe worthy fauorers, or vtterly abando mine owne credit. Sweet Gentlemen, renowned knightes, and honorable Lordes, be not ashamed of your Letters, imprinted, or written: if I liue, seeing I must eyther liue in tenebris with obloquy, or in luce with proofe; by the leaue of God, I will prooue miselfe no Asse. I speake not onely to M. Bird, M. Spencer, or Monsieur Bodin, whom he nothinge regardeth: (yet I would his owne learning, or iudgmente were anye way matchable with the worst of the three:) but amongst a number of sundrie other learned, and gallant Gentleme, to M. Thomas Watson, a notable Poet; to M. Thomas Hatcher, a rare Antiquary; to M. Daniel Rogers of the Court; to Doctor Griffin Floyd, the Queenes professour of lawe at Oxforde; to Doctor Peter Baro a professour of diuinity in Cambridg; to Doctor Bartholmew Clark, late Deane of the Arches; to Doctor William Lewen, Iudge of the prerogatiue Court; to Doctor Iohn Thomas Freigius, a famous writer of Germany: to Sir Philip Sidney; to M. Secretary Wilson; to Sir Thomas Smith; to Sir Walter Mildmay; to milord the bishop of Rochester; to milord Treasurer; to milord the Earle of Leicester: Vnto whose worshipfull and honorable fauours I haue bene exceedingly beholding for letters of extraordinary commendation; such, as some of good experience haue doubted, whether they euer voutsafed the like vnto any of either vniuersity. I beseech God, I may deserue the least patte of their good opinion, eyther in effectuall proofe, or in dutifull thankefullnesse: but how little soeuer I presume of mine owne sufficiency, (he that knoweth himselfe, hath smal cause to conceiue any high hope of low meanes:) as in reason I was not to flatter miselfe with their bountifull commendation: so in iudgement I am not to agreeue miselfe with the odious detraction of this pestilent libeller, or any like despiteous slanderer: but in patience am to digest the one with moderation, as in temperance I qualified the other with modesty. Some would say, what is the peuishe grudge of one beggarly rakehell, to so honorable liking of so many excellet,  & some singular me? But god in heaue, teach me to take good by my aduersaries inuectiue; and no harme by my fauourers approbation. It is neither the one, nor the other, that deserueth euill, or well; but the thing it selfe, that edifieth; without which, praise is smoke; and with which, dispraise is fyer. Let me enioy that essential point: & hauke, or hunt, or fishe after praise, you that list. Many contumelious, and more glorious reports haue passed from Enemies, & Frends, without cause, or vpon smal occasion: that is the onely infamy, that cannot acquit it selfe from guiltinesse; & that the only honor, that is grounded vpo desert. Other winds of diffamation, want matter to vpholde it: and other shadowes of glory, lacke a body to support it. In vnhappinesse they are happy, of whose bad amounteth good; & in happinesse they vnhappy, whose good prooueth bad: as glory eftsoones followeth them, that fly from it, & flyeth from them, that followe it. There is a Terme Probatory, that wil notly: and commendations are neuer autenticall, vntill they bee signed with the seale of approoued Desert, the only infallible Testimoniall. Desert, (maugre Enuy, the companion of Vertue) Socrates high waye to Honour; & the totall summe of Osorius De Gloria . I will not enter into Macchiauels discourses, Iouius Elogyes, Cardas natiuities, Cosmopolites Dialogues, or later Histories in dyuers languages: but some worthelye continue honorable, whom they make dishonorable,  & contrariwise. Reason hath an euen hande, and dispenseth to euerye one his right: Arte amplifieth, or extenuateth at occasion: the residue, is the liberality of the pen, or the poyson of the inke: in Logique, Sophistrie; in law, iniury; in historie, a fable; in diuinity, a lye. Horace, a sharpe, and sententious Poet, after his pithy manner, comprizeth much in fewe wordes: Falsus honor iuuat, & mendax infamia terret , Quem nisimendacem, & mendosum ? For mine owne part, I am reasonably resolute both wayes, & stand affraide of phantasticall discredit, as I esteeme imaginatiue credit, or a contemplatiue banquett. It fitteth not with the profession of a Philosopher, or the constancie of a man, to carrye the minde of a childe, or an youth, or a woman, or a slaue, or a tyrant, or a beast. That resteth not in my power, to reforme, or alter, I were very vnwise if I should not endure with patience, mittigate with reason, & contemne with pleasure. Onely I can be content in certain behoouefull respects, to yeeld a peece of a satisfaction vnto some, that requier it in affectionate termes: and what honest minde, in case of mortalitie, hath not a care, how the posterity may be informed of him? Other reasons I haue elswhere assigned: and am here to present a vowe to Humilitie, in detestatio of that, which my disposition abhorreth. As for his lewd supposals, & imputations of counterfait praises, without anye probability of circumstance, or the least suspition, but in his owne vengeable malitious head, the common forge of pestilent surmyzes, and arrant slaunders; they are like my imprisonment in the Fleete of his strong Fantasie, and doe but intimate his owne skill in falsifying of euidence, and suborning of witnesses to his purpose: he museth, as he vseth; & the goodwife his mother would neuer haue sought her daughter in the Oouen, if herselfe had not beene well acquainted with such shiftes of cunninge conueiance. He was neuer a non proficient in good matters,; and hath not studied his fellowes Arte of Cunnycatching for nothinge. Examin the Printers gentle Preamble before the Supplication to the Diuell: and tell me in good sooth, by the verdicte of the Tuchstone, whether Pierce Penniles commende Pierce Penniles, or no; and whether that sory praise of the Authour Thomas Nashe, be not lothsome from the mouthe of the Printer Thomas Nashe. In coniectural causes I am not to auouch any thinge; and I mentioned not anye such supposition before: but the tenour of the style,  & as it were the identitye of the phrase, togither with this newe descant of his profound insight in forgery, may after a sort tel tales out of the tytle De Secretis non reuelandis ;  & yeld a certain strong sauour of a vehement presumption. There is pregnant euidence enough, though I leaue probable colectures, & violent presumptions, wher I found them. His Life daily feedoth his Stile; & his Stile notoriously bewraieth his Life. But what is that to me, or the world, howe Nashe liueth; or howe the poore fellowe his father hath put him to his foisting, and scribling shiftes; his onely gloria patri , when all is done. Rule thy desperate infamous penne;  & bee the sonne of a mule, or the printers Gentleman, or what thou wilt for me. If thou wilt needs deriue thy pettigree fro the noble blood of the Kilprickes, and Childeberds, kinges of France: what commission haue I to sitt vpo Genealogies, or to call nobilitie in question? If thou beist disposed to speake as thou liuest, & to liue like Tonosconcoleros, the famous Babilonian king: in curtesy, or in pollicy forbeare one, that is not ouer-hasty to troble himselfe with trobling other. What I haue heard credibly reported, I can yet be cotent to smother in silence: & nether threaten thee with Tiburne, nor Newgate, nor Ouldgate, nor Counter, nor Fleete, nor any publique penance; but wishe thy amendment: and dare not be too-sawcy with your good qualities, les you confute my Maistership of Arte, as you haue done my Doctorship of Lawe. Neuer poore Doctorship was soe confuted. The best is, I dote not vpon it; and would rather be actually degraded, then any way disparage the degree, or derogate from them, that are worthier of it. Rest you quiet; and I will not onely not struggle with you for a tytle; but offer here to renounce the whole aduantage of a late inquisition vpon a clamorous denunciation of S. Fame herselfe: who presumed she might be as bould to play the blab with you, as you were to play the slouen with her. Or if your pen be so ranke, that it cannot stande vpon any ground, but the foile of Calumny, in the muck-yard of Impudency: or your tongue soe laxatiue, that it must vtterly vtter a great horrible deale more then all; whuist a while: and for your instruction, til some pregnanter lessons come abrode, I will breefely tell you in your care, A certaine familiar history, of more then one or two breakfastes, wherein some eight or nine eggs, & a pound of butter for your pore part, with Gods plenty of other victuals, & wine enough, powred-in by quartes, and pottels, was a scant pittance for an inuincible stomack, two houres before his ordinary. I haue readd of Apicius, and Epicures Philosophy: but I perceaue you meane not to be accounted a Pythagorean, or a Stoique. What? gorge vpon gorge, egges vpon egges, & sacke vpo sacke at these yeares? Berlady, Sir Kilpricke, you must prouide for a hott kitchin againste you growe ould; if you purpose to liue Doctor Pernes, or Doctor Kenols years. Such egging and whitling may happen bring you acquainted with the triumphant chariot of rotten egges; if you take not the better order in tyme, with one, or two of the seue deadly sinnes. I will not offend your stomacke with the nice and queint regiment of the dainty Platonistes, or pure Pythagoreans: fine Theurgy, too-gant and meager a doctrine for the Diuels Oratour: if the Arte Notory, cannot be gotten without fasting, and praying, muchgoditch-them that haue it: let phantasticall, or superstitious Abstinence, daunce in the aier, like Aristophanes clowdes, or Apuleius witches: your owne method of those deadly sinnes, be your Castell of Health. No remedy, you must be dieted; & lett-blood in the Cephalica veine of Asses, fooles, doltes, ideots, Dunses, dodipoules, and so foorth infinitly: & neuer trust me, if you be not as tame-tonged, and barren-witted, as other honest men of Lumbardy, & the Low-Cuntries. Tushe man, I see deeper into thee, then thou seeist into thy selfe: thou hast a superficiall tange of some little somethinge, as good as nothing; and a runing witt, as fisking as any fisgig, but as shallow as Trumpington foorde, and as slight as the newe workemanship of guegawes to please children, or of toys to mocke apes, or of trinketts to conquer sauages. Only in that singular veine of asses, thou art incomparable; and such an egregious arrant foole-munger, as liueth not againe. She knew what she said, that intituled Pierce, the hoggeshed of witt: Penniles; the tospot of eloquence: & Nashe, the verye inuentor of Asses. She it is, that must broach the barrell of thy frisking conceite, and canonise the Patriarke of newe writers. I will not heere decipher thy vnprinted packet of bawdye, and filthy Rymes, in the nastiest kind: there is a fitter place for that discouery of thy foulest shame, & the whole ruffianisme of thy brothell Muse, if she still prostitute her obscene ballatts, and will needes be a younge Curtisan of ould knauery. Yet better a Confuter of Letters, then a confounder of manners: and better the dogges-meate of Agrippa, or Cattes-meate of Poggius, then the swines-meate of Martial, or goates-meate of Arretine. Cannot an Italian ribald, vomit-out the infectious poyson of the world, but an Inglishe horrel-lorrel must licke it vp for a restoratiue; and attempt to putrify gentle mindes, with the vilest impostumes of lewde corruption? Phy on impure Ganimeds, Hermaphrodits, Neronists, Messalinists, Dodecomechanists, Capricians, Inuentours of newe, or reuiuers of old leacheries, and the whole brood of venereous Libertines, that knowe no reason, but appetite, no Lawe but Luste, no humanitie, but villanye, noe diuinity but Atheisme. Such riotous, and incestuous humours would be launced, not feasted: the Diuell is eloquent enough, to play his owne Oratour: his Damme an old bawde, wanteth not the broccage of a young Poet: Wanton sprites were alwayes busie, & Duke Allocer on his lustye Cocke-horse, is a whot Familiar: the sonnes of Adam, & the daughters of Eue, haue noe neede of the Serpentes carowse to set them agogg: Sodome still burneth; and although fier from heauen spare Gomorra, yet Gomorra stil consumeth itselfe. Euen amorous Sonnets, in the gallantest and sweetest ciuill veine, are but daintyes of a pleasurable witt, or iunkets of a wanton liuer, or buddes of an idle head: whatsoeuer sprowteth farther, would be lopped. Petrarckes Inuention, is pure Loue it selfe; and Petrarckes Elocution, pure Bewty it selfe: his Laur a was the Daphne of Apollo, not the Thisbe of Pyramus; a delitious Sappho, not a lasciuious Lais; a sauing Hester, not a destroying Helena; a nimph of Diana, not a Curtisan of Venus. Aretines muse was an egregious bawd,  & a haggishe witch of Thessalia: but Petrarcks verse, a fine loouer, that learneth of Mercury, to exercise his fayrest giftes in a faire subiect; & teacheth Wit to be inamored vpon Beautye: as Quicksiluer embraseth gold; or as vertue affecteth honour; or as Astronomy gazeth vpon heauen; to make Arte more excellent by contemplation of excellentest Nature. Petrarck was a delicate man, and with an elegant iudgement gratiously confined Loue within the limits of Honour; Witt within the boundes of Discretion; Eloquence within the termes of Ciuility: as not many yeares sithence, an Inglishe Petrarck did, a singular Gentleman, and a sweete Poet; whose verse singeth, as valour might speake; and whose ditty, is an Image of the Sun, voutsafing to represent his glorious face in a clowde. All posterity honour Petrarck, that was the harmony of heauen; the lyse of Poetry; the grace of Arte; a precious tablet of rare conceits, & a curious frame of exquisite workemanship; nothing but neate Witt, and refined Eloquence. Were the amorous muse of my enemy, such aliuely Spring of sweetest flowres; & such a liuing Haruest of ripest fruits: I would abandon other loues, to dote vpon that mostlouely muse, and would debase the Dyamant in comparison of that most Dyamant muse. But out- vpon ranke, & lothsome ribaldry, that putrifieth, where it should purify, and presumeth to deflowre the moste florishinge wittes, with whom it consorteth, eyther in familiarity, or by fauour. One Ouid was too-much for Roome; and one Greene too-much for London: but one Nashe more intollerable then both: not bicause his witt is anye thinge comparable, but bicause his will is more outragious. Ferraria could scarcely brooke Manardus, a poysonous Phisitian: Mantua hardly beare Pomponatius, a poysonous Philosopher: Florence more hardly tollerate Macchiauel, a poysonous politician: Venice most hardly endure Arretine, a poysonous ribald: had they liued in absolute M onarchies, they would haue seemed vtterly insupportable. Germany, Denmarke, Sweden, Polony, Boemia, Hungary, Moscouy, are noe soiles of any such wittes: but neither Fraunce, nor Spaine, nor Turky, nor any puissant kingdom, in one, or other Monarchy of the old, or new world, could euer abide any such pernicious writers, deprauers of comon discipline. Ingland, since it was Inglad, neuer bred more honorable mindes, more aduenturous hartes, more valoroushandes, or more excellent wittes, then of-late: it is enough for Filly-folly to intoxicate it selfe, though it be not suffered to defyle the lande, which the water enuironeth, the Earth enritcheth, the aier ensweeteneth, and the Heauen blesseth. The bounteous graces of God are sowen thicke, but come vp thin: corruption had little need to be fostred: wantonnesse wil be a nurse, a bawde, a Poet, a Legend to itselfe: vertue hath much-a doe to holdout inuiolably her purposed course: Resolution is a forward fellow, and Valour abraue man; but affections are infections, and appetite must sometime haue his swinge. Were Appetite a loyall subiect to Reason, and Will an affectionate seruant to Wisdom; as Labour is a dutifull vassal to Commodity, and Trauail a flying post to Honour;  o heauens, what exploites of worth, or rather what miracles of excellency, might be atcheeued in an age of Pollicy, & a world of Industry. The date of idle vanityes is expired: awaye with these scribling paltryes: there is an other Sparta in hande, that indeede requireth Spartan Temperance, Spartan Frugality, Spartan exercise, Spartan valiancye, Spartan perseuerance, Spartan inuincibility: and hath no wanton leasure for the Comedyes of Athens; nor anye bawdy howers for the songes of Priapus, or the rymes of Nashe. Had he begun to Aretinize, when Elderton began to ballat, Gascoine to sonnet, Turberuile to madrigal, Drant to versify, or Tarleton to extemporise; some parte of his phantasticall bibble-bables, and capricious panges, might haue bene tollerated in a greene, and wild youth: but the winde is chaunged, & there is a busier pageant vpon the stage. M. Aschams Toxophilus long sithence shot at a fairer marke: and M. Gascoigne himselfe; after some riper experience, was glad to trye other conclusions in the Lowe Countryes; and bestowed an honorable commendation vpon Sir Humfrye Gilbertes gallant discourse, of a discouery for a newe passage to the East Indyes. But read the report of the worthy Westerne discoueries, by the said Sir Humfry Gilbert: the report of the braue West- Indian voyage by the conduction of Sir Frauncis Drake: the report of the horrible Septentrionall discoueryes by the trauail of Sir Martin Forbisher: the report of the politique discouery of Virginia, by the Colony of Sir Walter Raleigh: the report of sundry other famous discoueryes, & aduentures, published by M. Rychard Hackluit in one volume, a worke of importance: the report of the hoatt wellcom of the terrible Spanishe Armada to the coast of Inglande, that came in glory, and went in dishonour: the report of the redoubted voyage into Spaine, and Portugall, whence the braue Earle of Essex, and the twoo valorous Generals, Sir Iohn Norris, and Sir Frauncis Drake returned with honour: the report of the resolute encounter about the Iles Azores, bewixt the Reuenge of Ingland, and an Armada of Spaine; in which encounter braue Sir Richard Grinuile most vigorously & impetuously attempted the extreamest possibilities of valour and fury: for breuity I ouerskipp many excellent Traicts of the same, or the like nature: but reade these, and M. William Borrowghes notable discourse of the variation of the compas, or magneticall needle; annexed to the new Attractiue of Robert Norman Hydrographer: vnto which two, Ingland in some respectes is as much beholding, as Spayne vnto Martin Cortes, & Peter de Medina, for the Arte of Nauigation: and when you haue obserued the course of Industry; examined the antecedents, and consequents of Trauail; compared Inglish, and Spanish valour; measured the Forces of both parties; weighed euery circumstance of Aduantage; considered the M eanes of our assurances and finally found proffit to be our pleasure, prouision our security, labour our honour, warfare our welfare: who of reckoning, can spare anye lewde, or vaine tyme for corrupt pamphlets; or who of iudgment, will not cry? away with these paultringe fidle-faddles. When Alexander in his conquerous expeditions visited the ruines of Troy, and reuolued in his minde the valiant actes of the Heroicall Woorthies there atchieued; One offered to bring his Maiesty, the Harpe of Paris: Let it alone, quoth hee, it is the Harpe of Achilles, that must serue my turne. Paris vppon his harpe, sang voluptuous,  & lasciuious Carols: Achilles harpe was an instrument of glory, and a quier of diuine Hymnes, consecrated to the honour of valorous Captaines, and mighty Conquerours. He regarded not the dainety Lydian, Ionian, or Æolian Melody: but the braue Dorian, and impetuous Phrygian Musique: and waged Zenophantus to inflame and entage his courage with the furious notes of Battail. One Alexander was a thousand Examples of Prowesse: but Pyrrhus, the redoubted king of the Epirots, was an other Alexander in tempestuous execution: and in a most-noble resolution contemned the Vanities of vnnoble Pastimes: in so much that, when one of his Barons asked his Marestie, whether of the twoo Musitians, Charisius, or Python, pleased his Highnesse better: Whether of the two, quoth Pyrrhus: marry Polysperces shall go for my money. He was a braue Captaine for the eie, & a fitt Musitian for the eare of Pyrrhus? Happy Polysperces, that serued such a master: and happy Pyrrhus that commaunded such a seruaunt. Were some demaunded, whether Greenes, or Nashes Pamflets, were better penned: I beleeue they would aunsweare; Sir Roger Williams Discourse of War, for Militare Doctrine in Esse; and M. Thomas Digges Stratioticos, for Militate Discipline in Esse. And whiles I remember the Princely care of Gelo, a famous Tyrant of Sicill, (many tyrants of Sicill were very politique) that commaunded his great horse to be brought into the banquetting house, where other Lordes called for the Harpe, other Knightes for the Waites: I cannot forget the gallant discourse of Horsemanship, penned by a rare gentleman, M. Iohn Asteley of the Court: whome I dare intitle our Inglish Xenophon; and maruell not, that Pietto Bizzaro, a learned Italian, proposeth him for a perfect Patterne of Castilios Courtier. And thinking vpon worthy M. Asteley, I cannot ouerpasse the like labour of good M. Thomas Blundeuil, without due commendation: whose painefull, and skillfull bookes of Horsemanship, deserue also to be registred in the Catalogue of Xenophontian woorkes. What should I speake of the two braue Knightes, Musidorus, and Pyrocles, combined in one excellent knight, Sir Philip Sidney; at the remembrance of whose woorthy, and sweete Vertues, my hart melteth? Will you needes haue a written Pallace of Pleasure, or rather a printed Court of Honour? Read the Countesse of Pembrookes Arcadia, a gallant Legendary, full of pleasurable accidents, and proffitable discourses; for three thinges especially, very notable; for amorous Courting, (he was young in yeeres,) for sage counselling, (he was ripe in iudgement;) and for valorous fighting, (his soueraine profession was Armes:) and delightfull pastime by way of Pastorall exercises, may passe for the fourth. He that will Looue, let him learne to looue of him, that will teach him to Liue; & furnish him with many pithy, and effectuall instructions, delectably interlaced by way of proper descriptions of excellent Personages, and common narrations of other notable occurrences; in the veine of Salust, Liuy, Cornelius Tacitus, Iustine, Eutropius, Philip de Comines, Guicciardine, and the most sententious Historians, that haue powdred their stile with the salt of discretion, and seasoned their iudgement with the leauen of experience. There want not some suttle Stratagems of importance, and some politique Secretes of priuitie: and he that would skillfully, and brauely manage his weapon with a cunning Fury, may finde liuely Precepts in the gallant Examples of his valiantest Duellists; especially of Palladius, and Daiphantus; Zelmane, and Amphialus; Phalantus, and Amphialus: but chiefly of Argalus, and Amphialus; Pyrocles, and Anaxius; Musidorus, and Amphialus, whose lusty combats, may seeme Heroicall Monomachies. And that the valor of such redoubted men, may appeere the more conspicuous, and admirable, by comparison, and interview of their contraries; smile at the ridiculous encounters of Dametas, & Dorus; of Dametas, and Clinias: and euer when you thinke vpon Dametas, remember the Confuting Champion, more surquidrous then Anaxius, and more absurd then Dametas: and if I should alwayes hereafter call him Dametas, I should fitt him with a name, as naturally proper vnto him, as his owne. Gallant Gentlemen, you that honor Vertue, and would enkindle a noble courage in your mindes to euery excellent purpose; if Homer be not at hand, (whome I haue often tearmed the Prince of Poets, and the Poet of Princes) you may read his furious Iliads, & cunning Odysses in the braue aduentures of Pyrocles, and Musidorus: where Pyrocles playeth the dowty sighter, like Hector, or Achilles; M usidorus, the valiant Captaine, like Pandarus, or Diomedes; both, the famous errant Knightes, like  Æneas, or Vlysses. Lord, what would himselfe haue prooued in fine, that was the gentleman of Curtesy, the Esquier of Industry, and the Knight of Valour at those yeeres? Liue euer sweete Booke; the siluer Image of his gentle win, and the golden Pillar of his noble courage: and euer notify vnto the worlde, that thy Writer, was the Secretary of Eloquence; the breath of the Muses; the hoony-bee of the dayntiest flowers of Witt, and Arte; the Pith of morall, & intellectuall Vertues; the arme of Bellona in the field; the toung of Suada in the chaber; the spirite of Practise in esse; and the Paragon of Excellency in Print. And now whiles I consider, what a Trompet of Honour, Homer hath bene to sturre-vp many woorthy Princes; I cannot forget the woorthy Prince, that is a Homer to himselfe, a Golden spurre to Nobility, a Scepter to Vertue, a Verdure to the Spring, a Sunne to the day; and hath not onely translated the two diuine Poems of Salustius du Bartas, his heauenly Vrany, and his hellish Furies: but hath readd a most valorous Martial Lecture vnto himselfe in his owne victorious Lepanto, a short, but heroicall worke, in meeter, but royal meeter, fitt for a Dauids harpe. Lepanto, first the glory of Christendome against the Turke; and now the garland of a soueraine crowne. When young Kings haue such a care of their flourishing Prime; and like Cato, are ready to render an accompt of their vacant howers; as if Aprill were their Iuly, and May their August: how should gentlemen of yeeres, employ the golden talent of their Industry, and trauaile? with what feruency; with what vigour; with what zeale, with what incessant, and indefatigable endeuour? Phy vpon fooleries: there be honourable woorkes to doe; and notable workes to read. The afore-named Battas, (whome elsewhere I haue stiled the Treasurer of Humanity, and the Ieweller of Diuinity) for the highnesse of his subiect, and the maiesty of his verse, nothing inferiour vnto Dante, (whome some Italians preferre before Virgil, or Homer,) a right inspired, and enrauished Poet; full of chosen, graue, profound, venerable, and stately matter; euen in the next Degree to the sacred, and reuerend stile of heauenly Diuinity it selfe. In a manner the onely Poet, whome Vrany hath voutsafed to Laureate with her owne heauenly hand: and worthy to bee alleadged of Diuines, and Counsellours, as Homer is quoted of Philosophers, & Oratours. Many of his solemne verses, are oracles: & one Bartas, that is, one French Salomo, more weighty in stern, and mighty counsell, then the Seauen Sages of Greece. Neuer more beauty in vulgar Languages: but his stile addeth fauour, and grace to beauty; and in a goodly Boddy representeth a puissant Soule. How few verses carry such a personage of state? or how few argumentes, such a spirite of maiesty? Or where is the diuine instincte, that can sufficiently commend such a volume of celestiall inspiration? What a iudgement hath the noble youth, the haruest of the Spring, the sapp of Apollos tree, the diademe of the Muses, that leaueth the enticingest flowers of delite, to reape the maturest fruites of wisedome? Happy plants, that speedily shew-foorth their generous nature: and a soueraigne good possesseth those worthy mindes, that suffer not their affections to be inueigled, or entangled with any vnworthy thought. Great Excercises become great personages: as the Magnes approoueth his Nobility in commaunding Iron, and taming the Sea: baser, or meaner pastimes belong vnto meaner Persons; as Iett discouereth his gentry, in drawing chasse, haires, and such trifles. A meete qualitie for Iett, or a pretty feate for Amber, to iuggle chaffe, festues, or the like weighty burdens: but excellent mindes are employed, like the noble M agnes, and euer conuersant either in effecting, or in perusing, or in penning excellent workes. It were an impossible attempte, to do right vnto the great Captaine, M onsieur de la No e, and the braue soldiour, the French King himselfe, two terrible thunderboltes of warre, and two impetuous whirlewinds of the Field: whose writinges are like their actions, resolute, effectuall, valiant, politique, vigorous, full of aery, & fiery spirite, honourable, renowned wheresoeuer Valour hath a mouth, or Vertue a pen. Could the Warlie Horse speake, as he can runne, and fight, he would tell them, they are hoat Knightes: and could the bluddy Sword write, as it can sheare, it would dedicate a volume of Fury vnto the one, and a monument of Victory vnto the other. Albeit men should be malitious, or forgetfull, (Spite is malitious, and Ingratitude forgetfull) yet Prowesse hath a Clouen Tounge; and teacheth Admiration in a fiery language to pleade the glorious honour of emproued valiancy. Some accuse their destiny: but blessed Key, that openeth such lockes: and lucky, most lucky fortune, that yeeldeth such vertue. Braue Chiualry, a continuall witnesse of their valour and terribility in warre: and gallant Industry, the dayly bread of their life, in peace, or truce. Report shining Sunne, the dayes-worke of the King: and burning Candle, relate his Nightes- studdy: and both ridd me of an endlesse labour. For who euer praysed the wonders of Heauen? And what an infinite course were it, to runne-thorough the particular commendations of the famous redoubted actours, or the notable pregnant writers of this age, euen in the most-puissant H eroicall, and Argonauticall kinde? Nimble Entelechy hath beene a straunger in some Countries: albeit a renowned Citisen of Greece; and a free Denisen of Italy, Spaine, Fraunce, and Germany: but wellcome the most-naturall inhabitant of the world; the saile of the ship, the flight of the bowe, the shott of the gunne, the wing of the Eagle, the quintessence of the minde, the course of the sunne, the motion of the heauens, the influence of the starres, the heate of the fire, the lightnesse of the Ayer, the swiftnesse of the winde, the streame of the water, the frutefulnesse of the Earth, the singularitie of this age: and thanke thy most-vigorous selfe for so many precious workes of diuine furie, and powerable consequence; respectiuely comparable with the richest Treasuries, and brauest armories of Antiquitie. Thrise-happie, or rather a thousand times-happie Creature, that with most aduantage of all honorable opportunities,  & with the extremest possibilitie of his whole powers, inward, or outward; emploieth the most-excellent excellencie of humane, or diuine Nature. Other Secretes of Nature, and Arte, deserue an high reputation in their seuerall degrees, and may challenge a souerain interteinement in their speciall kinds: but Entelechy is the mysterie of mysteries vnder heauen, and the head-spring of the powerfullest Vertues, that diuinitie infuseth, humanitie imbraceth, Philosophie admireth, wisedome practiseth, Industrie emproueth, valour extendeth; or he conceiued, that conceiuing the wonderfull faculties of the mind, & astonished with the incredible force of a rauished, & enthusiasticall spirite; in a profound contemplation of that eleuate, and transcendent capacitie, (as it were in deepe ecstasie, or Seraphicall vision,) most-pathetically cryed-out; o magnum mir aculum Homo . No maruel,  o great miracle, & o most powerful Entelechy, though thou seemist A Pilgrim to Dametas, that art the Familiar Spirite of Musidorus: & what woder, though he empeach thy estimation, that despiseth the graces of God, flowteth the constellations of heaue, frumpeth the operations of nature, mocketh the effectuallest & auayllablest Arts, disdayneth the name of Industrie, or Honesty, scorneth whatsoeuer may appeare Vertuous, fawneth onely vpon his owne conceits, claweth only his owne fauorits, and quippeth, bourdeth, girdeth, asseth the excelletest writers of whatsoeuer note, that tickle not his waton sense. Nothing memorable, or remarkable with hm, that feasteth not the riotous appetite of the ribald, or the humorous conceit of the phatast. It is his S. Fame, to be the infamy of learning: his reformatio, to be the corruption of his reader: his felicitie, to be the miserie of youth: his health, to be the scurfe of the Citie, the scabbe of the Vniuersitie, the bile of the Realme: his saluation, to be the damnation of whatsoeuer is termed good, or accounted honest. Sweet Gentlemen, and florishing youthes, euer aime at the right line of Arte, and Vertue, of the one for knowledge, of the other for valour: and let the crooked rectifie itselfe. Resolution wandreth not, like an ignorant Traueller, but in euery enterprise, in euery affaire, in euery studdie, in euery cogitation leuelleth at some certaintie; and alwayes hath an eye to Vse, an eare to good report; a regard to worth, arespect to assurance, and a reference to the end. He that erreth, erreth against Truth, and himselfe: and he that sinneth, sinneth against God, and himselfe: he is none of my charge: it suffiseth me to be the Curate of myne owne actions, the master of mine owne passions, the frend of my frends, the pittyer of my enemies, the loouer of good witts, and honest mindes, the affectionate seruant of Artes, & Vertues, the humble Oratour of noble Valour, the Commender of the foresaid honorable writinges, or any commendable workes. Reason is no mans tyrant: & Dutie euery mans vassall, that deserueth well. Would this pen were worthy to be the staue of the worthiest actours, or the bondman of the aboue-mentioned, and the-like important Autours. Such Mercuriall, and Martiall Discourses, in the actiue, and chiualrous veine; pleade their owne eternall honour: and write euerlasting shame in the forhead of a thousand friuolous, & ten thousand phantasticall Pamflets. I would to Christ, some of them were but idle toyes, or vayne trifles: but impuritie neuer presumed somuch of impunitie: and licentious follie by priuiledge, lewd ribaldrie by permission, and rank villanie by conniuence, are become famous Autours: not in a popular state, or a petty-principalitie, but in a souerain Monarchie, that tendereth politique gouernment, & is to fortifie itselfe against forrein hostilitie. If Wisedome say not, Phie for shame; & Autoritie take not other order in conuenient time: who can tell, what generall plague may ensue of a speciall infection? or when the kinges-euill is past cure, who can say, we will now heale it? The baddest weede, groweth fastest: and no Gangrene so pregnantly dispreddeth itselfe, as riott. And what riott so pestiferous, as that, which in sugred baites presenteth most poisonous hookes? Sir Skelton, and Master Scoggin, were but Innocents to Signior Capricio, and Monsieur M adnesse: whose pestilent canker scorneth all the M edicine of Earth, or heauen. M y writing, is but a priuate note for the publique aduertisemot of some fewe: whose youth asketh instruction,  & whose frailtie needeth admonition. In the cure of a canker, it is a generall rule with Surgeos: it neuer perfectly healeth, vnlesse the rootes and all be vtterly extirped; and the fleshe regenerate. But the soundest Principle is: Principiss obsta :  & it goeth best with them, that neuer knewe, what a canker, or leper meant. I still, hoped for some graffes of better fruite: but this grand Confuter of my Letters, and all honestie, still proceedeth from worse to worse, from the wilding-tree to the withie, from the dogge to the goate, from the catt to the swine, from Primerose hill to Colman hedge: and is so rooted in deepe Vanitie, that there is no ende of his profound follie. Which deserueth a more famous Encomiasticall Oration, then Erasmus renowned Follie: and more gloriously disdaineth any cure, then the Goute. I may answer his hoat rauing in cold termes: and conuince him of what notorious falsehood, or villanie I can: but see the frake spirite of a full stomack: & who euer was so parlously matched? Were not my simplicitie, or his omnisuficiencie exceeding great; I had neuer bene thus terriblie ouer-challeged. Gabriel, if there be any witt, or industrie in thee, now I will dare it to the vttermost: write of what thou wilt. in what language thou wilt, and I will confute it, and answere it. Take Truthes part, & I will prooue truth to be no truth, marching out of thy doung-voiding mouth ; & so forth in the brauing tenour of the same redoutable stile. Good Gentlemen, you see the sweet dispositio of the man; & neede no other window into the closet of his coscience, but his owne Glosse vpon his owne Text. Whatsoeuer poore I say, in any matter, or in any language, albeit Truth auerr and iustifie the same, he will flatly denie, and confute, euen bicause I say it; & onely bicause in a frolick and dowtie iollitie, he will haue the last word of me. His Grammer, is his Catechisime; Si ais, nego : his stomack, his Dictionarie in any language; and his quarrell, his Logique in any argument: Lucian, Iuliun, Aretin, I protest were you ought else but abhomivable Atheists, thas I would obstinatly defende you, onely bicause Laureate Gabriel articles against you . Were there not otherwise a maruelous oddes, and incomprehensible difference betwixt our habilities, he would neuer dare me, like a bold Pandare, with such stout challenges, and glorious protestations: but singular wittes haue a great aduantage of simple men: and cunning Falsehood is a mightie confuter of plaine Truth. No such champion, as he that fighteth obstinatly with the target of Confidence, and the long-sword of Impudence. If any thing extraordinarily emprooueth valour, it is Confidence: and if any thing miraculously singularizeth witt, it is Impudence. Distrust, is a naturall foole: and M odestie, an artificiall foole: he that will exploit wodermentes, and karrie all before him, like a sweepe-stake, must haue a hart of Iron, a forhead of Brasse, and a toung of Adamant. Pelting circumstances, marre braue executions: looke into the proceedinges of the greatest doers; and what haue they more then other men, but Audacitie, and Fortune? Audendum est aliquid, Vinctis, & caxcere dignum , Si vis esse aliquid. Simplicitie may haue a gesse at the Principles of the world: and Nashe affecteth to seeme a compound of such Elements; as bold, as  aeger, and as aeger, as a mad dogge. He will confute me, bicause he will: and he can conquer me, bicause he can. If I come vpon him with a gentle reply, he will welcome me with a fierce reioynder: for any my briefe Triplication, he will prouide a Quadruplication at-large: & so forth in infinitu , with an vndauntable courage: for he sweareth, he will never leaue me as long as he is bable to lift a penne . Twentie such famous depositions proclaime his dowtie resolution, and indefatigable hand at a pight fielde. Were I to begin agayne, or cold I handsomely deuise to giue him the cleanly slipp, I would neuer deale with a sprite or Coleman hedge, or a May Lord of Primerose hill, that hath all humours in his liuerie,  & can put conscience in a Vices coate. Na, hee will atchieue impossibilities; and in contempt of my simplicitie, prooue Truth a counterfaict, and himselfe a true witnesse of falsestlyes. But Lord, that so inuincible a Gentleman should make so solemne account, of confuting, and reconfuting a person of so litle worth in his valuation? Sweet man, what should you thinke of troubling your-selfe with so tedious a course, when you might so blithly haue taken a quicker order, & may yet proceede more compendiously? It had bene a worthy exploit, and beseeming a witt of supererogation, to haue dipped a sopp in a goblet of rennish wine ; and naming it Gabriel, (for you are now growne into great familiaritie with that name) to haue deuoured him vpp at one bit: or taking a pickle herring by the throte, and christening it Richard, (for you ca christen him at your pleasure) to haue swallowed him downe with a stomack. Did you neuer heare of detestable Iewes, that made a picture of Christ; and then buffetted, cuggelled, scourged, crucified, stabbed, pierced, and mangled the-same most vnmercifully? Now you haue a patterne, I doubt not but you can with a dexteritie, choppof the head of a dead hoony-bee, and boast you haue stricken Iohn, as dead as a doore- nayle. Other spoyle, or victorie (by the leaue of the foresaid redoubted daring) will prooue a busie peece of worke for the sonne of a mule, a rawe Grammarian, a brabling Sophister, a counterfaict cranke, a stale rakehell, a piperly rymer, a stump worne railer, a dodkin autor: whose two swordes, are like the hornes of an hodmandod; whose courage, like the furie of a gad-bee; and whose surmounting brauerie, like the wings of a butterfly. I take no pleasure to call thee an Asse: but thou proouest thi-selfe a Haddock: and although I say not, Thou art a foole, yet thou wilt needs bewray thy dier, and disgorge thy stomack of the Lobster, and coddeshed, wherewith thou didst englutt thiselfe, since thy notorious surfett of pikle herring,  & dogfish. Thou art neither Dorbell, nor Duns, nor Thomas of Aquine : thy were three sharpedged, and quicksented schoolemen, full of nimble witt, and intricate quiddities in their arguing kinde, especially Duns, and Thomas : but by some of the cauilling Ergos , thou shouldest seeme to be the spawne of Iauell, or Tartaret:  & as very a crabfish at an Ergo , as euer crawled-ouer Carters Logique, or the Posteriorums of Iohannes de Lapide . When I looke vpo thy first page (as I daily behold that terrible Emprese for a recreation) still methinkes there should come flushing-out the great Atlas of Logique, and Astronomie, that supported the orbes of the heauens by Art: or the mightie Hercules of Rhetorique and Poetrie, that with certaine maruelous fine, and delicate chaines, drewe after him the vassals of the world by the eares. But examin his suttelliest Ergos ,  & tast his nappiest Inuention, or daintiest Elocution, (he that hath nothing else to do, may hold himselfe occupied): and Art will soone finde the huge Behemoth of Conceit, to be the sprat of a pickle herring; and the hideous Leuiathan of Vainglorie, to be a shrimpe in Witt, a periwinkle in Art, a dandiprat in Industrie, a dodkin in Valu; and such a toy of toyes, as euery right Schollar hisseth at in iudgement, and euery fine Gentleman maketh the Obiect of his scorne. He can raile: (what mad Bedlam cannot raile?) but the sauour of his railing, is grosely fell, and smelleth noysomly of the pumpe, or a nastier thing. His gayest floorishes, are but Gascoignes weedes, or Tarletons trickes, or Greenes crankes, or Marlowes brauados: his iestes, but the dregges of comon scurrilitie, or the shreds of the theater, or the of-scouring of new Pamflets: his freshest nippitatie, but the froth of stale inuentios, long-since lothsome to quick tastes: his shrouing ware, but lenten stuff, like the old pickle herring: his lustiest verdure, but ranke ordure, not to be named in Ciuilitie, or Rhetorique: his only Art, & the vengeable drift of his whole cunning, to mangle my sentences, hack my arguments, chopp and change my phrases, wrinch my wordes, and hale euery sillable most extremely; euen to the disioynting, and maiming of my whole meaning. O times: o pastimes: o mostrous knauerie. The residue whatsoeuer, hath nothing more in it, then is vsuallie in euery ruffianly Copesmate, that hath bene a Gramar schollar, readeth riotous bookes, hanteth roisterly companie, delighteth in rude scoffing, & karrieth a desperate minde. Let him be thorowly perused by any indifferent reader whomsoeuer, that can iudiciously discerne, what is what; and will vprightly censure him according to his skill, without partialitie pro , or contra : and I dare vndertake, he will affirme no lesse, vpon the credit of his iudgement; but will definitiuely pronounce him, the very Baggage of new writers. I could nominate the person, that vnder his hand-writing hath stiled him, The cockish challenger, the lewd scribler, the offal of corruptest mouthes, the draff of filthiest pennes, the bag-pudding of fooles,  & the very pudding-pittes of the wife, or honest. He might haue read of foure notable thinges, which many a iollie man weeneth he hath at will, when he hath nothing lesse: much knowledge; sound wisedome; great power; & many frends. And he might haue heard of other foure speciall thinges, that worke the destruction, or confusion of the forwardest practitioners: a headlong desire to know much hastily a greedie thirst to haue much suddainly; an ouerweening conceit of themselues; and a surly contempt of other. I could peradueture arread him his fortune in a fatall booke, as verifiable, as peremptorie: but I looue not to insult vpo miserie: & Destinie is a Iudge, whose sentence needeth no other execution, but itselfe. No preuention, but deepe repentance; an impossible remedy, where deepe (bstinacie is grounded, and high Presumption aspireth aboue the Moone. Hawtie minds may stie alost, and hasten their owne ouerthrow: but it is not the wainscott forhead of a Rudhuddibras, that can arreare such an huge opinion, as himselfe in a strong conceit of a mighty conception, seemeth to trauaill withall: as it were with a flying Bladude, attempting wonderments in the Ayre, or a Simon Magus, experimenting impossibilities from the top of the Capitoll. He must either accomplish some greater worke of Supererogation, with actual atchieuement, (that is now a principall point): or immortalize himselfe the prowdest Vaine sott, that euer abused the world with foppish ostentation; not in one, or two pages, but in the first, the last, & euery lease of his Strange Newes. For the end is like the beginning; the midst like both; and euery part like the whole. Railing, railing, railing: bragging, bragging, bragging: and nothing else, but fowle railing vpon railing, and vayne bragging vpon bragging; as rudely, grosely, odiously, filthily, beastly, as euer shamed Print. Vnlesse he meant to sett-vpp a Railing Schoole, and to read a publike Lecture of bragging, as the onely regall professour of that, and that facultie, now other shiftes begin to fayle; I wonder, his owne mouth can abide it without many a phah. You haue heard some worthie Premisses: behold a braue conclusion: Awaite the world, the Tragedy of Wrath : What next I paint, shall tread no common Path : with an other doubble Aut , for a gallant Embleme, or a glorious Farewell; Aut nunquam tentes, aut perfice . Subscribed with his owne hand; Thomas Nash . Not expect, or attend but a wait : not somefew, or the Citty, or the Vniuersity, or this Land, or Europe, but the World : not a Comedy, or a Declamation, or an Inuectiue, or a Satire, or any like Elencticall discourse: but a Tragedy , and the very Tragedy of Wrath ; that shall dash the direfullest Tragedies of Seneca, Euripides, or Sophocles, out of Conceit. The next peece , not of his Rhetorique, or Poetry, but of his Painture , shall not treade the way to Poules, or Westminster, or the Royall Exchange; but at-least shall perfect the Venus face of Apelles, or sett the world an euerlasting Sample of inimitable artificiality. Other mens writing in prose, or verse, may plodd-on, as before: but his Painting will now tread Arare Path ; and by the way bestow A new Lesson vppon Rhetorique, how to continue a metaphor, or vphold an Allegory with aduauntage. The treading of that rare Path , by that exquisite Painting , (his woorkes are miracles; and his Painting , can treade , like his dauncing, or frisking, no common, but a proper Path ) who expecteth not with an attentiue, a seruiceable, a coouetous, a longing expectation? A wait world : and Apelles tender thy most affectionate deuotion, to learne a wonderfull peece of curious workemanship, when it shall please his next Painting to tread the path of his most singular singularity. Meanewhile it hath pleased soome sweete wittes of my acquaintaunce, (whome Heauen hath baptized the Spirites of harmony, and the Muses haue enterteyned for their Paramours) to reacquite Sonnets with Sonnets, and to snibb the Thrasonicall rimester with Angelical meeter, that may haply appeero in sitt place: and finely discouer young Apuleius in his ramping roabe; the fourth Furie in his Tragicall Pageant; the new Sprite in his proper haunt, or buttry; and the confuting Diuell in the horologe. One She,  & two He's haue vowed, they will pumpe his Railing Inkhorne as dry, as euer was Holborne Conduit: and squise his Craking Quill to as emptie a spunge, as any in Hosier Lane. Which of you, gallat Gentleme, hath not stripped his stale Iestes into their thredbare ragges: or so seldome as an hundred times pittied his creast-falne stile,  & his socket-worne inuention? Who would haue thought, or could haue imagined, to haue found the witt of Pierce, so starued and clunged: the conceit of an aduersarie, so weatherbeaten, and tired: the learning of a schollar, so pore-blind, and lame: the elocutio of the Diuels Oratour, so lanke, so wan, so meager, so blunt, so dull, so fordead, so gastly, where the masculine Furie meant to play his grisliest, and horriblest part? Welfare a good visage in a bad cause: or farwell Hope, the kindest coosener of forlorne harts. The desperate minde, that assayeth impossibilities in nature, or vndertaketh incredibilities in Art, must be cotent to speed thereafter. When euery attempt faileth in performance, and euery extremitie foileth the enterpriser, at-last euen Impudencie itselfe must be faine to giue-ouer in the plaine fielde: and neuer yeeld credit to the word of that most credible Gentlewoman, if the very brasen buckler prooue not finally a notorious Dash-Nash. He summed all in a briefe, but materiall Summe; that called the old Asse , the great A, and the est Amen of the new Supererogation . And were I here copelled to dispatch abruptly, (as I am presently called to a more commodious exercise) should I not sufficietly haue discharged my taske; and plentifully haue comended that famous creature , whose prayse the Title of this Pamflet professeth. He that would honor Alexander, may crowne him the great A. of puissance: but Pyrrhus, Hanniball, Scipio, Pompey, C aesar, diuers other mightie Conquerours, & cuesom moderne Worthies would disdaine, to haue him sceptred the est-Amen of Valour. What a braue, and incomparable Alexander, is that great A . that is also the est-Amen of Supererogatio; a more miraculous and impossible peece of worke, the the dowtiest puissance, or worthiest valour in the old, or new world? Shall I say, blessed, or peerelesse young Apuleius, that from the swathing bandes on his infancie in Print, was suckled of the sweetestnurses, lulled of the deerest groomes, cockered of the finest minios, cowled of the daintiest paramours, hugged of the enticingest darlinges, and more then tenderly tendered of the most delitious Muses, the most-amiable Graces, and the most-powerfull Vertues of the said vnmatchable great A. the graund founder of Supererogatio, and sole Patron of such meritorious clients. As for other remarkable Particulars in the Sttaunge Newes; Ink is so like Ink, spite so like spite, impudencie so like impudencies, brocage so like brocage, and Tom- Penniles now, so like Papp-hatchet, when the time was; that I neede but ouerrun an old censure of the One, by way of a new application to the Other. The notes of Martinisme appertaine vnto those, whom they concerne. Pierce would laugh, to be charged with Martinisme, or any Religion: though Martin himselfe for a challenging, rufling, and railing: stile, not such a Martin. Two contraries: but two such contraries, as can teach Extremities to play the contraries, and to confound themselues. Papp-hatchet, desirous for his benefit, to currie fauour
