 different: viewing the shepheards heauinesse, the husbandman thus said. I muse not a little Menalcas , nowe when euery creature takes delight in company, you shoulde desire this solitude: Did snow couer the mountains, or swelling flouds ouercharge the valleyes: Did ysicles dangle downe the dew laps of your Heard, or diseases inuade your flocks, somewhat it were you should be thus sorrowfull: But seeing on the hills your Goats brouse on sweete smelling Thyme, in the dales your sheepe chew no lesse delightfull grasse: those teaching their Kids to skip the hollowe places of the crag, these wantoning with their Lambes amonge the flowers of the meades: fields abounding with Floraes beauty, flouds not ouerchargde with Phoebes plenty: all yeelding you good, your selfe exceeding each neighboring shepheard in goods: woonder it is, euery of them froliking, you should alone sit thus disconsolate. Want which greeues you I knowe it is not, that my last reason hath refuted: Wealth that lifts you vp, I am sure it cannot bee, that familiar conuersation hath refelled: for as yee are not poore, so were ye neuer proud: that you hate any deadly, your woonted mildnes forbids me to suppose, that you loue Lycoris alone, your vowes and her vertue, (beside your seauen yeares marriage) assures mee: so that seeing neither from loue, nor hate, nor wealth, nor want in my conceit, these passions of solitarines are sprung, let Corydon your olde acquaintance intreat yee to vnfold your griefs, which if it be not in my power wholly to redresse, I will indeuour to procure some remedy, if either countenance, counsell, or coyne can giue ayde. Disclose it therefore Menalcas , I am prepard to heare, and will be as ready to aduise. Kindely offered Corydon , replyed Menalcas : and well hast thou gest mee free from euery incommodity before named, and shalt be immediatly resolud whence now my meditation arises: being free from sorrowe I protest, yet full of suspect, I trust causeles: but when thou hearest it, as thou shalt like, so counsaile me. A two daies since, when last Lycoris and I visited thee and thy Palma , in our return home we entertaind a new seruant, plaine in condition for any thing I can gesse, of body strong, of wit prompt, of speech not altogether rude, but exceeding Satyrical: his bringing vp I know not, thence arises my doubt, seeing last weeke Damon , last yeare Lycostes (both my neighbors, and thy familliars) had by entertaignement of straglers strange misfortunes. Coulde thy affaires Corydon permit thee so much leysure, I would require thy company to conferre with him: About this time hath hee vnfolded his sheepe, and thus haue I answered thy suspect: what I doubted thou knowest, assist mee to be of this doubt resolude if thou maist. To this Corydon easily consented, Menalcas rose, they left the Groue and entred the plaine, where Piers Plainnes (for so was Menalcas mans name) hauing set his sheepe to feede, founde himselfe no little worke with platting wheate strawe for a summer bonnet, to to beare off the violence of the Sunnes beames: while his fingers went, his tonge lay not still, but thus to his sheepe and himselfe he sung: Feede on my flocke securely, Your shepheard watcheth surely; Runne about my little Lambs, Skipp and wanton with your Dams: Your louing Heard with care will tend yee. Sport on faire flocke at pleasure, Nip Vestaes flouring treasure; I my selfe will duely harke, When my watchfull Dogg doth barke: From Woolfe and Foxe wee will defende yee. As he was going on, he spied his Master and Corydon at hand: wherewith leauing his song, he attended Corydons words that first saluted him in this sort: God morrow friend, well worthy the name of a shepheard, if thy seruice bee answerable to thy song. If it bee not said Piers , I doo but imitate the most, that whatsoeuer they say, liue as they list. Of them what thinkst thou said Corydon ? As they doo of themselues replyed Piers , and you suspect of mee: I gesse them to be hypocrites, which they knowe true, you doubt to be an eye-seruant, wherein ye deeme vntruely. Thou art very plaine with mee quoth Corydon . I cannot choose saide Piers , for I am plaine by name and nature. Thou art too blunt quoth Menalcas , he is my honest friend, and kinde familiar. Master said Piers , how long hath he beene your familiar? This twenty winters answered Menalcas . And hath hee euersince quoth Piers beene your assured friend? He hath said the other. Happy is Piers then to happen in such a seruice, for in Thrace and Creete haue I seuen yeares beene a prentice, howe many Masters in that time I haue serued, it were a story to tell, and were it worth the telling I would describe it in a Story: but in al that time could I neuer be acquainted with any man so happie that had a true friend of tenne dayes standing. Menalcas and Corydon hearing him so pleasantly offer, what they onely required, willed him to deliuer as hee thought best, the places of his seruice, the persons hee serude with, and manner of his vsage: He as ready to performe as they to demaunde, craude pardon to sit because the taske was long, which they willingly graunted. Then in an artificiall seate formde out of a fresh budding thorne, sate they all three downe, and Piers hauing the preheminence of the middle place, beganne as followeth. Childrens, and Aeliana the Cretan Queens (during my seuen yeres seruice) I wil handle, that you may know both what I haue beene, and what the world is. Hylenus had two sonnes, Celinus and Aemilius , and one daughter, named Rhodope : the Daughters birth-day was her Mothers deaths-day, by the treacherous complot of a Persian Hand-maid, that of priuate grudge poysoned the new deliuered Queene: and being apprehended, denide not the fact, for which shee suffered a deserued death. The sonnes were borne twinnes, about three yeres elder than their sister, Celinus so like Aemilius in constitution of bodie, and so vnlike in disposition of mind, that it bred admiration in all that knew their bringing vp: Aemilius being no lesse loued for his vertue, than Celinus hated for his vice. In the Court (and in no meane account) swayed a Noble man, named Celydon : one of his mens men was my master, a master to his master so seruiceable, as no slaue could be more submisse. Celydon had the charge of Hylenus Nauie, hauing likewise charge of a Castle on the mouth of Hebrus , to defend the entrie from forren inuasion. Popular hee was and liberall, of King and people well beloued. The remisse dealing of Celinus drew from him his fathers heart, who by publike Edict proclaimed Aemilius his heir apparant. Celydon vnder whose smoothe looks ambitions fire lay couered, thinking to take the fittest of opportunities, presently vpon this Edict sent for Celinus , and in priuate demaunds how he tooke so publike an iniurie? Who minding more the fulfilling of his lust than anie regall dignitie: made answere, it was no wrong to him to liue at libertie. But with many reasons Celydon reprouing his remissenes, laying open the glorie of estate, the power to will anye thing vncontrould, and such like: Celinus began a little to giue eare, protesting he would be Aemilius priest if his father immediately reuokd not the Edict. To calme this furie, yet kindle a more vnnaturall flame, Celydon thus slily practisde. It is in vaine (saith he) to purpose the ruine of Celinus alone, sith your father (vtterly forgetting the follies of his owne youth, exceeding yours by infinite degrees) hath absolutely dispossest you of all claime to the Kingdom, naming your sister next in succession if Aemilius die: if both he and she depart issulesse, he hath bequeathed the Kingdome to the election of the State. To this his will haue all assented, and I durst not (beeing alone, denie to giue consent: but how much against my will, shall well appeare by this that followes. To morrow intends the King priuatly to disport with me at my Castle builded on the banke of Hebrus, Aemilius and Rhodope with some small traine shall beare him companie: when they are there, wold your Lordship consent, Celydon would set the crowne of Thrace vpon your head, before the Sunne were twice set. Would I consent (saith Celinus )? Why Celydon , what will I not doo? Shall we there murder Hylenus , no more of me meriting the name of father, beeing so vnnaturall? Shall we strangle Aemilius my vsurping brother? commit Rhodope to the mercie of some rude mercenarie, that may crop the flower of her beautie, or drag her Polixena -like to sacrifice? What will not Celinus attempt that Celydon can set downe to reuenge an iniurie so notorious. Then said Celydon , let your Highnes see this performd, Gather together against morning the desperatest associates you can consort your selfe withall, rush violently into the Pallace, breake open the Treasurie, seaze on the diademe and kingly ornaments, while I make sure Hylenus, Aemilius and Rhodope: for neuer shall Prince of Thrace of his birth- right be disposest, while Celidon hath power to lift a sword. With millions of thankes, and protestation of as manie rewards, Celinus embraces Celydon , giuing him the name of father, patrone and protector, promising the whole Realm shalbe at his direction, and thus this plot of conspiracie confirmd, celinus and celydon part. Thus went the matters of State: now to our houshold affaires, and yet no houshold affaires neither, for my master kept no house: but be it house or chamber, thus it was. Being at my choyce of masters, of sundrie ages & occupations: I that had in my childhood bin experienst in trades, and found in few of them plaine dealing, desperate to doo among them anie good, they had so small delight in goodness, I left Gods blessing for the warme sunne: and wondring what braue life it was to bee a Courtier, I bound my selfe for seuen yere with one Thrasilio , as smooth a tongud Gentleman, as euer Terences Gnatho was a Parasite. At my first entertainment, hee told me hee was a retainer to Lord celydon whose verie name in all the Countrey was highly reuerenced: but the truth was as I afore said, he retayned to Flauius a wastfull Gentleman, belonging to celidon : by attending on whose trencher, hee got bare maintenance for himselfe and me. This Flauius vsde him as a Iester: for if loud lyars be iesters, he was the excellentst I euer knewe. Hee was acquainted with none but Kings and great Captaines of Armies, on whom he had bestowed infinite summes of money toward their expences: for he was so well seene in the Philosophers stone, that gold was to him as drosse. In set Emperiall battells, on horsebacke and on foote, he had serud some thirtie times, and alwaies on his part attended victorie: his wardrop & iewels were without number. These were his brags notoriouslie noted in Court and Citie. Yet trust mee I take it he had some skill in Alchymie, for hee helpt Flauius to conuert much faire liuing into fine gold: for his valor, a purer coward knew I neuer, and for hys wealth, he hourely marched in the midst of it. In his diet he was verie sparing, because he had small store of spare money to buy meate: and had not the scullerie at the Court been my best ambrie, I must either haue left my master, or lost my life. With this Braggart had I scarce been two yeres, when the conspiracie of celinus and celydon began. The night before it brake foorth, Flauius sent word to my master to prouide his weapons, for next day should be a desperate fray, Flauius being a yongster of celinus consort. But he that had seene the pitifull plight my master was in, whe these tidings of fighting came, might well haue gest his valour by his visage: yet he bragd it out, saying the palenes of his colour came fro the anger of his heart, and swore the quaking of hys ioynts onely presaged his impatience. All that night had I the office of an Armorer, but with his daily wearing rapier had I most adoo, for it was almost two howers ere I could draw it: how well he vsde it when he had it, you shall heare when time serues. Let vs now returne to celydon . Night the darke shrowd of euerie euill, had giuen courage to his desperate abhord consorts: who beeing placed in the way, & resolued to performe this insuing stratageme, celydon with speede postes to conduct the vnmisdeeming King and his innocent Children to the place appoynted for the perfection of his desperate intent: while celinus scattered troupes await in the Citie their time. That morning, no sooner did the Forrest Clearkes chaunt forth their variable noates, but Hylenus, Aemilius and Rhodope , slenderly accompanied, trustely relying on celydon , set forward to his Castle: and riding through an edge of Hemus , on sodaine were violently assailed, their followers slaine, themselues surprized, the intention by celydons owne mouth vttred, death sharpe and hastie for them prepared. Hylenus at this sodaine conspiracie amazed, seeing the traitrous butchers prouided for Aemilius and Rhodopes slaughter, thus for a time stayed them from their desperate and diuelish resolution. Celydon (said he) the manie fauours Hylenus hath bestowed on thee and thy fathers house (were I silent) would plead my sorrow for this sinne of thine, beeing so much the greater, by reason of my exceeding loue to thee. Beeing in thy infancie left fatherlesse, I of thy prince became thy fatherly protector: and in the increasing of thy yeares of a priuate man I haue made thee a Prince, and Protectour of the cheefest strength of Thrace : and hast thou thus (false celydon ) requited all my good? But thou colourest thy vile treason, with celinus charge: why ( celydon ) when was he sworn thy King? what Nobles (with thee) haue giuen theyr oathes to him? His leaud life, and manners lasciuious, (by thee most of anie other noated, and misliked) drew me to frustrate him of all hope to inherite. And is he now become thy King? wilt thou by him be so sodainly commanded? No, no celydon, celinus onely is thy shadowe, thou the intruder, hee thy instrument. Why delayest thou false conspirer, seaze on me, & commit both these sinnes in one, Licaon -like murder thy guest, so sinne against the Gods of hospitalitie, traitor-like stab thy king, and expect the fit reward of trecherie: but spare these innocents, least earth no longer beare thy vile impietie. Celydon (bending his browes) ruthlesly commanded Aemilius and Rhodope to be strangled, giuing no other reply to Hylenus : who seeing reproofe of no power to preuaile, humbled his heroicke heart, and prostrating himselfe before Celydon , cryed out. Stay, stay, O let me once more speake to thee, before thou lop off two such braunches from my wythered trunke. If not my kindnes, dignitie, and charge: yet let my age, humblenesse, and teares, intreate thee to shew pitie. Be not more ruthlesse than things senslesse: drops of raine pierce rockie marble, let my showers of teares enter thy stonie heart. In this Wood Tereus rauisht and wrongd Philomele , he & his sonne did perish for her onely rape: if in this Wood thou kill these innocents, thinkest thou to escape for so great an outrage? he was a king, thou but a subiect, his State sure, thine vnsetled. I sweare to thee by the immortal powers, and my children with like vow shall confirme my oath, if thou exile vs together, or seuerall, so thou preserue our liues, we will obscure our States, and neuer returne to Thrace , except recalled by thee, Celinus , or both. Celydon at this relenting, knowing how religiously Hylenus euer regarded an oath, gaue charge they should foorthwith be conuayed to Sea in three seuerall ships, and landed where the fortune of the wind should first driue them: which courtesie (though it included small kindnesse) all three accepted of him verie gratefully. They being dispatcht to sea, Celydon poasted to the Citie: where Celinus against his comming, had thus played his pageant. Scarce were the King and his Companie departed two miles from the Citie, when Celinus (hauing gathered together a multitude of desperate vnthrifts) seased violently on the ancient Nobles, slew some, forced other to flie: and possessing himselfe of the Regall ornaments, proclaimed himselfe King, and Celydon Protector of the Realme. The Citizens shut vp their houses, the better sort hidde their heads, onely the leaud and riotous Liuers flocked in bands, crying out, Long liue Celinus King of Thrace . To this vpshot came Celydon with a companie of approoued souldiers: and looking strangely at that Celinus had done, pacified the tumult with milde perswasions: and appoynted the fourth day following a time of hearing, when as Celinus should either answere, or yeelde reason for that hee had attempted: still making faire weather to the people, that Hylenus was onely withdrawen for feare of treason, not vttring the effectiue working of their trecherie: for had the Kings miserie been knowen, the multitude could not haue been appeasd. In the beginning of this broyle, Flauius had sent for Thrasilio my master: who hearing the Onset giuen, leasurely armed himselfe, and by then the tumult was appeasd, marching in stately equipage with hys two hand sword on his shoulder, his rapier on one side his pistoll on the other, mounted the scaffolde (among other squaring cutters) where Celinus in viewe of all the people sate royally inuested in his Regall state and dignitie. Among other things, it is not to be omitted, how like a tall squire I attended my master, with an old Morian on my head, and a iauelin in my hand, which he a thousand times swore was the same leading staffe that Alexander vsde in his last battell against Darius : & like inough it was of great antiquitie: for canker and rust had consumde both substance and beautie. All weapond though we were, welcome wee were, and among our fellow Caualiers had the Bien venuto : for there euerie cobler was a captaine, and he that had but a bat on his necke, thought himselfe a commander. O had you seene the miserie in those few houres of Insurrection, with what violence the giddie headed people were carried to ill, how easely disswaded from their alleagance, how willingly misled, no man scarcely knowing which part to take, the multitude were diuided into so manie parts: you might haue thought such happie, which had perished by one mans sword, and not liued the torment of so manie slaughterers: for in that broyle there perished sixe thousand persons, sonne, father and kindred, each by other murdred, and mangled with manie wounds. As I earst said, with celydons faire speech the people were satisfied. Euerie man withdrew him home, my master and I waiting at an inch on Flauius for reward of our daies seruice and our supper: where my masters iests scarcely past currant, the companie were so busied about that bold attempt of celinus , being in such disgrace, the easie shutting vp of the matter by celydon , the absence of the King, and such other accidents. That night it was my destinie to be deliuered from the seruice of Thrasilio that base Braggadoche: for wearied with my bluntnes (that could neither sooth his leaudnes nor smoothe his lying) he began to indent for some crownes with Flauius to sell my time. What mooud him to affect mee I knowe not well: this afterward he said caused it, that he saw me plaine, & among many soothers, he needed one reprouer to acquaint him with their seuerall infirmities. In briefe, he bought my yeares, and I was rid from the bondage both of a foole and a flatterer, beeing my first master in Court, farre worse than euer anie I had in the Countrey: he was euer begging, still beggarly, prying, complaining, soothing, swearing, bold to accuse, fearefull to continue accusations: in fine he was as all flatterers are, the very tennis ball of them he soothed, to tosse and bandie with at pleasure. Of him to speake more I haue no pleasure: to sorrowfull Hylenus and his two children will I returne, seuered in three sundry Barkes, mindefull of all their vowes, mournefull at their infortunate aduenture: to imagine their seuerall passions passeth poore Piers his conceit, the course of the story onely will I continue: One winde breathed on each ships shrowdes wherein these infortunate Princes sailed: Before Crete they all anchored, where the Masters of either vessell compassionating their sorrows, to shew some kindnes thus deuised. Unknowne to either of them they were all in Crete landed, Hylenus himselfe vpon a plaine sand, the Continent of the Ile next neighboring was a pleasant forrest: Æmilius was set on shore at Hydrutum , a Castle frontering the sea: and poore Rhodope solde for a bonde woman to an aged fisherman vppon the Coast: This done, they loosed toward Thrace againe to attend celidon their ambitious Lord. In crete at this time was Soueraigne, the vertuous and famous virgin Aeliana , feared and loued not only in the Mediterranean Regions, but in the vtmost East admired. The managing of the Commonwealths affaires were committed by her authoritie to Rhegius her naturall Unckle: A man for bountie, vertue, and magnanimity, vnequalled with any neighboring Prince. But as in earth there is no perfection without some impediment, no beauty without her blemish, rust fretting the purest steele, cancker the finest siluer: So this Noble man (otherwise for vertue admirable) had giuen the rayne to one vice, which violently hastned the disquiet of the Realme, and drue him headlong to his destruction: and this was it, incestuously he loued vertuous Aeliana , drawen by the admirable wonder of her beauty, yet durst not vtter his affection, he was so daunted with remembrance of hir excelling vertue. Now would he begin to write his pasons, imitating Phaedra when she affirmed,  Dicere quae puduit, scribere iussit Amor. then rend those lines, as open scandals to his honour: Sometimes he intended to attempt by force, but that by reason of her Gard he feared: another while he practised to assay by charmes, but those meanes old example had prooued vaine: For if neither Medea, circes , no not Apollo himselfe, were able by incantations, hearbes, or spels, to inforce liking where there was no loue, in vaine hee gest his indeuours that way imployed. Now lastly he determines sometime while shee is a hunting, (in which game Aeliana principally delighted) by some false cry to traine her from her traine, and then in disguise of a sauage seaze on her, and so satisfie his long desired lust and returne vnsuspected to Court. Resolude on this, the very day of Hylenus and his childrens landing, he had intreated the Queene to a house of pleasure of his in the Forrest, assuring her hee had lodgde so Princelike game, as should bee highly to her Highnes contentment. Aeliana easily consented, and Diana -like shee furnisheth her selfe for that daies sport, on her head she wore a Coronet of orientall Pearle, on it a chaplet of variable flowers perfuming the Ayre with their diuers odors, thence carelesly descended her amber coloured haire, with which the winde wantoning nowe sometime vncouered her frocke of white tissue, anone suffred the same to lye hidde, which then seemed like cleare Isis when Titan descending, casts his golden beames on her siluer coloured streames: her Buskins were richly wrought like the Delphins spangled Cabazines, her Quiuer was of Unicornes horne, her Darts of yuorie, in one hand shee helde a Boare speare, the other guided her Barbary Iennet, proud by nature, but nowe more proude, in that he carried Natures fairest worke, the Easterne worlds chiefe woonder. O what oyle added these faire ornaments to wretched Rhegius kindled fire, euery minute hee countes a yeare, till they be in the wood, till he possesse his will: But for all his hast, heere fell an accident, that caused some time of more protraction. On a sodaine from the Forrest edge issued an olde man, his snowy beard couering his breast, his face reuerend, yet repleate with apparant signes of sorrowe, his eyes swolne with teares but lately shed, his countenance cast downe as one disconsolate. On him aboue all other Aeliana cast a gratious eye, and causing him to be called neere, askt if hee were a Cretan or a stranger in that Countrey: I was said he great Princesse, sometime a Samothracian , but now of no Countrey, beeing wrongfully expeld my owne: In Crete and all Countreys a stranger I am to all good fortune, the mappe of discontent, and slaue of misery. Be not discouraged Father, said Aeliana , the goods of Fortune are as her self fickle, of their happines no man can glory till his ende: It is our vertues that in despite of Fortune will make vs fortunate. Time now will not giue me leaue to make long questioning, but if in Court thou wilt content thee to leade a quiete and contented life, I will immediately prouide for thy ease and safety: If not, bethinke thee speedily of any other course, and commaunde Aeliana , that vnder the Gods commaundeth Crete : Deny me thou shalt not one of these, for in reuerence of thy Age I will doo thee some good, therefore aske whatsoeuer thou wilt, and it shall be graunted. To this Hylenus (for it was hee) replied: By this thy charitie, sacred and sweet Empresse, thou meritest a greater name than either by thy beauty, wisedome, or iustice, though for all and either of these thou art through Europe and Asia famoused: And if old Saganes in this distresse should refuse grace offred from one of so high dignitie, hee were vnworthy to possesse any good: Pleaseth it therefore your Highnesse to appoint mee some solitary mansion, where I may meditate on my follies past, and quietly begge heauens fauour to bee powrde on you my Patronesse, I shall be farre happier than euer I was in Court, where I haue too long conuerst. Aeliana , condiscended to his sute, and sent him presently to a solitary Lodge neere Hydrutum , commanding order to bee taken for his daily prouision. This deede of charity dispatcht, Aeliana, Rhegius , and all their traine enter the Forrest, some choose the Stagge, some the Boare, others the Beare, all as their occasion fitted at first sight of game. They that were appointed for rousing the game, hauing done their dilligence, the woods ecchoed with cry of houndes, sounding of horns, and hallowing of hunters. Rhegius was prouided of his sauage sute, and still kept Aeliana company till she had lost all other company, hauing a wilde Boare in chase, which he perceiuing, and knowing hir eagernes in pursute, followed so long till hee sawe the wrathfull Boare returne and mortally wounde her Steede, so that Aeliana was forst to leaue him, and with her darts and speare, to offend him, and defend her selfe. While thus the Queene stroue for victory, the Boare for life, raging, fretting, foming, whetting his tuskes on euery tree: Rhegius bestird him to play the counterfet sauage, and the incestuous adulterer: fitted in all points, his face discoloured, his head with shaggy haire couered, his body cloathed in a mossy sute, his weapon being a yong Oake, he slily paced to the place where faire Aeliana fiercely contended against this orped and ouergrowne swine. There did he vnnaturally beholde his neece, and vndutifully refuse to ayde his Princesse, neere hand surprised by a mortall and merciles enemy. Her darts were all spent, yet not vainly spent: But as her obiect enemy was no lesse fierce than the Erimanthian Boare, so her fortune was more lucky than the maids, that among so many valiant hunters drewe first the blood of that beast, which Meleager too soone for himselfe and his Unckles slewe. For Aeliana had firmed three dartes in her aduersary, one most annoying him in the groyne, which when hee offred to drawe foorth the Princesse with the poynt of her Boare speare (being nowe her last refuge) in the same place made a farre wyder wound: which following with heroicke courage, she buried halfe her staffe by the body of the beast, who beating his wrathfull head against the vnder earth, distained it with fome & blood, and finally gaue Æliana the glory of the conquest: who sounded the fall, that her followers might heare, giuing heauens glory for her protection, and treading on that heade which lately assailed her with instrumentes of death and terror. Shee had scarce breathed in this new ioy, but fresh feare presented it selfe: For on a sodaine rushed forth this counterfet sauage, whose first sight the more affrighted her, for that shee was vtterly weaponlesse to make defence: yet when she saw no violence offred by the wilde man, but signs of duty, and manifest showes to conduct her forth of the Forrest, shee offred to drawe foorth her speare from the body of the deade Boare, which he espying, roughly laid hold of it himselfe. The Queene thinking the sauage had before time bin chased with such staues, smiled at his feare and let him keepe the same, and being of vndaunted courage, went boldly whether he led her, being into the thickest of the wood. There was a spring shaded with trees, and circled with marble, in which artificially were seates framde, naturally furnished with hearbs and flowers: To this spring brought the sauage the Queene, and eft soones casting himself therein, offered by signes to teach her to doo the like, but when he sawe she made no semblance of perceiuing him, he roughly begins to disrobe her royall body, and menacing her with sterne lookes mingled with some strokes, he first puls of her Bugle, which shee had twice sounded, and casting her roughly on the earth, makes open his vile intent to her no little terror. Aeliana thus distrest, cried to heauen for helpe, often called for her followers, oftner on Diana , but most she cried on her Unkle, inuocating his helpe, that sauagely attempted hir hurt. We left Aemilius landed at Hydrutum , who inquiring toward the Court, was certified of that royal hunting in the Forrest: who desirous to see the Countreys fashion, got to the woode side with other of the people that went to haue a sight of Aeliana their Princesse. The time being long that the people attended, Aemilius walked alone into the woode, meditating on the treacherie of Celinus & Celidon , the wrong his aged father himself & Rhodope suffred, inuocating reuenge of heauens, & humbly desiring the destinies to fauour them in meeting either with other before their deaths: Being in this contemplation, hee was vnawares so far in the wood, that which way to returne hee knewe not. The better part of the day he strayed vp & downe, oft times a far off hearing the noyse of hunters, but nere them he had no power to come. Faint he was both with trauell & hunger, beside his sorrowe made him heauy. On the ground he durst not sleepe, lest some sauage beast should seaze on him, therefore he climed a tree, in whose toppe when he thought to rest, he scant had closed eyes when he easily heard a small bugle twice sound very nere the place: & listning again where it should be, he in a while after heard the lamentable shreekes of Aeliana , wherewith descending the tree, he passed through the thickest of the couert, stil folowing the voice, till he came where Aeliana with striuing breathles, with weeping sightles, with crying voyceles, and sorrowe senseles, lay at the mercy of an inhuman sauage, who shameles of sin, relentles at her intreats, & secure by reason of the place, was now ready to discouer that hidden beauty, which had so long beene desired by his beast-like appetite. Aemilius no sooner set eye on this shame-forgetting Monster, but he cryed out, Uillaine attempt not to defloure the Nymph, but looke to defend thy selfe for thy barbarous assailement. Both Rhegius & Aeliana . wer at this sodaine voice seuerally passioned, he with feare, she with hope, he starts to his weighty staffe, shee lifts vp her weeping eyes, he furiously assails Aemilius , she feeble, yet feruently impetrates heauens aid for his defence. Aemilius shunning sundry fierce blowes of Rhegius , wounded him with his sword so deep in the arme, that not able to hold his club, & fearing to be discouered, he flung the tree from him with violence, the fury wher of while Aemilius sought to shun, Rhegius giuing a great cry, betook him to his feet: The wood being thick, the sight of him was soone lost, & being doubtful what other company hee had at hande, he left him to comfort the Queen: who reuiued as it wer from a dedly trance, gazed on Aemilius , imagining him no mortal creature, but some celestiall power descended in her defence: he on the other side admired the excellence of her beauty, & by her Coronet of golde that lay not far off, he thought hir no meane personage: which instantly desiring to know she immediately resolude him off: and inquiring of his estate and name, he reported himselfe to be a traueller, borne in Italie , his name he changed not. With such like parle, they come to the place where the Boare lay slaine, where Aeliana discoursed the manner of his death, which Aemilius heard with no small wonder. Piers saide corydon , now thou hast ridde vs of this feare, & set Aeliana free, I would wish thee to remember thy selfe, what of thy selfe thou promisedst: Thou hast yet tolde but of one Master, and thy newe entertaignement with another. Reach hither thy bottle that wee may drinke round, I am sure thou must needes bee dry with talking, when I am so a thirst with hearing. I but said Piers will ye remember me where I leaue in crete , els shall you finde me too obliuious. I warrant thee said Menalcas , let that bee corydons charge, mine to put thee in minde where thou leftst in Thrace. celydon appointed the people within three daies to hear celinus publikely: they wer thus pacified, & thou entertaind with Flauius the wastful gentleman. True, true, quoth Piers , now wil I proceed with that. During the three daies, the people were feasted, the Theaters were fild, celydon and celinus rid through the streets, mony was cast in euery corner, the straight laws of Hylenus for execution of iustice repealed, & liberty proclaimed to the people. At the three daies ende, the people were assembled, there celydon in an Oration opened how sorrowful Hylenus was that he had attempted to disinherit celinus his son, & howe in satisfaction, he had giuen him then liberty to take the possessio therof, betaking himself to solitary life, and committing Aemilius & Rhodope to celinus gouernement, & that it was Hylenus pleasure to haue them accept celinus for their king, & himself his Protector, vnder whom they should liue in that liberty, as for the three daies before they had done: if not, & that they would againe inforce the olde king to receiue his estate, they should bee as of late, subiect to those strict lawes by celinus abrogated. Then was the choyce put foorth: and such desire had they to liue at libertie, that all the multitude with one voyce cryed out, Liue long Celinus King of Thrace , & honored be Celydon the King and Realmes Protector. This maygame thus past, Celidon swaied Thrace, celinus had the kings name, he the state: for that which celinus coueted more than anie Kingdom, was to liue in licentious plesure, which now vncontrouled he greedely followed: celydon giuing him the reyne, in hope to raign himselfe when celinus had ouer-run himself. But in this frolicke Common-wealth, who flaunted it if Flauius were not fine? and if he farde well, I must needes say hee was no niggard to let others fast. My selfe was then mate with my olde master. Mate said I? nay I was quarter master with my new: for what I misliked I had libertie to reprooue, marry thys was one good helpe, it should be mended at leasure. Besides me (among other needlesse seruaunts) my master kept a Baylie, as sure a card as euer man trusted. He perswaded my master to be a non-resident on his lands, and a remainer at the Court: noting what he should spare in hous- keeping, seruants and such like. He (easely induced to follow still the worst) courted it so long, and sparde it so fast, that the tenaunts, woont to be forborne sometime a whole yere, now were forst to pay their yeres rent aforehand. Well, how euer they sighd to part with it and swet to get it, my master and his merie companions swild it in and swore it out, til the cat able to yeeld no more than her skin, we were faine to follow a new course. Our honest Bailie (liuing Lord-like on my Masters liuing) found meanes to borrowe for him of a freend some foure thousand poundes woorth of ware, vppon plaine pawne of all his Euidences: and withall thys kindnes he receiued, he paid not a penie interest more than was allowable, and the money should be returned by two thousand a yere, each halfe yere a paiment, onely a little consideration to the Broker: who was a pretie pale faced squire, halfe brother to our Baylie, that some two moneths before had set vp a shop in the Cities suburbes, of olde shooes, stockings, and swords, the totall summe of his standing scarce worth sixe shillings eight pence. This brogging Broker and broking Baily brought my master acquainted with the merchant forsooth (for so they called him) that had these commodities to sell. Hee was a man of meane stature, with a sulphurous face richly beset, his eyes sanguine, his breath strong, his gate stately: for he would scarcely haue gone his owne length in an hower he was so well timbered beneath. To this money merchant we come, (for other merchandise vsed he none, but such as his Broker on a sodaine tooke vp, to thrust into their hands that had need of money) sitting he was with a yong woman by hys side: his daughter she was, faire inough though hir father were ill fauoured, and proud inough I am sure she was, as I after prooued. At our first entrance we were entertained by the Broker, next saluted by hir, lastly by him, that after a score of rotten coughes, found leasure to bidde vs welcome. The matter was well knowen, the daughter was to deliuer her fathers minde, being to this effect: That he was verie sorie so worshipfull a Gentleman should want his helpe, and he not able to furnish him to his contentment wyth readie money: and so shutting it vp in few words, the Scriuener was sent for, my master past ouer his Deedes, and thought himselfe verie highly beholding to the Baylie, that had holpe him away with his lands. On the lenders Daughter hee bestowed a carcanet of golde, crauing with her to bee more acquainted. She that had often been the painted flie to angle for such trouts, gaue him kinde words, and offered hartie welcome, her father confirmd her speech, and the yong nouice my master was by his Baylie and the Broker perswaded to get her for his wife, beeing her Fathers onely heire, a beauteous Gentlewoman, and so forth. That verie day the principall of our ware was solde, some eight hundred pounds of monie made, and then my master was no small fellow agen: we had maskes reuels, and costly deuices, to frolike with his frends, & court mistres Vrsula (for so was the Usurers daughter named). Besides, Celinus was not then of my master altogether vnmindfull, but bestowed vpon him an Office of Customage, to see to the transporting of forbidden commodities: which he likewise tourned into Angels, and to Petrusio his Baylie made sodaine sale of it. While this money lasted, my master neuer minded the remnant of his ware, till the first daye of paiment drew on, and by that time the most part of it was welnigh worth nothing. Our figs (for we had some) were readie to runne about the fraile, our silkes had lost colour, yet had we by silkes small losse, for we had small store, our pins were rustie, the tags of our laces cankered, all our pedlerie ware being in a pitifull plight. On our negligence the Broker layde all the fault, hee could not vtter it (as by all his honestie he protested) to halfe so much as the tenth partes profite: and now to bolster vp Flauius prodigalitie, Piers Plainnes must be a Packman. Should I spend time to tell my trauels from faire to faire, my manie short meales, my shorter markets, my care to get, my willingnes to saue, my weekly account to my master, his slender reckoning at the quarter, you would thinke I went about to praise my selfe, and therefore I let it passe. But how euer my market went, as it came he spent it so that at the extreamest day, of a thousand pounds he had scarce ten to pay. Faire words of the father he had, fairer of the daughter: but all was nothing, when paiment failed, Flauius was as sure landlesse, as monilesse. celinus was sude vnto, but he spent so fast, that now his treasurie was drawen drie: and celydon by degrees growing greater than hee, curbd him from that wast which he was wont to vse. My master seeing such cold comfort, sued to Vlpians daughter to stand his frend, but shee was deafe on that side, she could not, nay she would not for al his intreatye, pitie one so wastfull. I was sent to Petrusio the old Bailie & new Customer: where I had good words my selfe, and praise for my honest care of him, that for himselfe tooke no care: offer to serue him if I wold, but for my master, no poynt pennie could be got. With this wofull newes returning backe, Flauius exclaimd against ingratitude, curst euerie cause of hys prodigalitie, cryde out on Fortune, and accusde her ficklenes. Comfort him I could not, bee pacified hee would not: to tel him of his passed riot, was but to aggrauate his greefe: to put him in hope of after good, was past hope, for he had no meanes left for releefe: only a few vaine sutes of apparell, with which I was sent to the Brokers, that scarce serued to satisfie a monthes bare commons. All pawnd and morgagde, I perswaded my master to trust to his pen, and become some Lawiers Clearke: that was too base, hee swore no small oathes, hee could neither beg nor worke, and longer want he would not. Such aduice as I could I gaue him, but all auailed not: for the Broker he sent, and selling him all his odde furniture, onely furnished himselfe with weapons, and to the wide world he would. The Broker mindfull of my paines when I was a chapman, earnestly desired him to part with my yeres: of which he intending neuer to make profit, easely consented. A new Master, a new, for thus Piers Plainnes hath parted with Prodigalitie, and meanes to learne thrift of Brokerie: a shrewd fall, from a Courtly waiter to be a Brokers booke-keeper. Well, what remedie? necessitie they say hath no law: and so it seemd by mee, for my neede droue mee to liue without lawe, if I had said with an outlaw, I had kept within compasse: for besides my master, a number of his mysterie, did not onely deale vnconscionably without law, but were indeed verie outlawes, banquerupts, what call ye them, or Brokers still let vs call them, for a fitter name I haue not for them. I saw Menalcas smile euen now, when I cald Brocage a mysterie: the terme was not much a misse, for there are more mysts vsed therein, than in anie Trade beside. They couer their craft with charitie, pietie, pitie, neighborhood, frendship, equitie, and what not that good is, although in it there be no one poynt of goodnes. But to the purpose, I proued a quick searcher into this mysterie, and made my master misse manie of his greedie prayes. Being set to his Book, and seeing the manner of his Bills, I had no other charge but to deale plainly. O tis a iuel to vse plain dealing among men of that trade. To note the deceit I saw there, as changing of pawns, letting other mens garments out to hyre, receiuing of goods by night closely, by day secretly, were a world to tell, and hardly to bee thought, there should bee in the world people liuing by pilfrie so publikely, and scape vnpunished. Came they with anie thing woorth money, why they were welcome men: welcome, I & encouraged to come againe, with promise of such secrete conueyance, as no suspition should arise. Once a day we likely had some poore wretches curse or other, for pawnes abusd, or forfets vniustly taken: one notable condition had my good master, among manie bad, and that was this, he pitied poore fellowes destitute of bayle, hee was cheefe pillar to the knights of the post for common bayle and euidence, a notable honest mate in those matters: he would haue suted a thred bare slaue in a frocke of damaske, his welted gowne, a seald ring on his thumbe, and euerie appendix able to make a bankrupt both of welth and honestie seeme like a Burgesse of twelue yeares standing. Neuer was Feates the Iugler like the iugling Broker my master, for he had legions of Familiars to commaund. What craft would ye haue that he had not? Wanted ye good fellowes to goe among Merchaunts and Gentlemen of account, that (for their pleasures) frequented game? Why he was excellent. Not so few as a dozen Dicemakers had he at his reuersion, that he would furnish in diuers fashions: some in the long stocke & little ruffe like Brabanters, some with standing capes and slyced breeches like Danes, some with their beards cut Alla Tusquesa , their hose hanging loose (like an emptie gut) after the Portugall manner, others Italionate in talk, others in all behauiours Courtlike, striuing to imitate the French. All these instructed by him, and strengthned by olde Vlpian , essence of Usurie it selfe, would haue seuered themselues into sundrie companies: and where euer they fell, they made manie light purses and heauye hearts: they had their barres, their flats, their fulmers, their hy-men, their low-men, themselues playing euen the hang-men among those men, whose idle time and hard misfortune made them their lucklesse companions. Lackt ye a smooth tungd hypocrite to intrap young Gentlemen newly come from the Uniuersitie? Hee was for ye. Hee had a swarme of slye companions, that shuld haue been attyred secundum formam , and not a word out of their mouths but pure Priscian . Were they merrie, were they sad, were they wise, were they wanton, he would be sure to fit their humors: and for I could not sweare, forsweare, lye deceiue, and cog, I lost my seruice in manner and forme folowing, and exalted my master to a high degree, as shall appeare by the sequele. The communitie of the bad indures neuer any long time: so betweene my broking master, and Vlpian the Usurer it fortuned, that he (like an ill Crowe, hauing hatcht a worse egge) compacted with a notable vnthrift the debter of Vlpian , to cousen the Usurer of foure thousand crownes, due vpon bonds, by what extortion I know not raisd, but sure I am approoued at that time a true debt. This Ruffler was arrested, first by my masters diligent paines, and at last released by his double dealing practise. For the youth beeing moneyed, (the onely meane to compasse matters aboue meane) gaue a hundred crownes to my master to procure him bayle. His odde shauers were so well knowen before the Iudge, that hardly in a matter of such import was he perswaded of their acceptance: therefore was he very earnest to put me in a sute of satten, compasse my necke with a chaine of golde, and giue mee a name I neuer knewe. being indeed the name of a worshipfull Gentleman: and with another confederate of the forenamed stamp, attyred and trimmed as a Merchant of good worth, we two forsooth must set a good face on it, and be this Unthrifts bayle. I desirde them to vncase me again, protesting I was vtterly out of league with the pillorie: and whether they would or no I dischargde my selfe of that deceyuing charge. But all was one with them, my refusall damped not their deceiptfull: and damned resolutions: for they were within an houre of another fitted: scapethrift scapde out of prison, Vlpian , followd the sute, the Gentleman and Merchant (whose names the craftye hyrelings had vsed) by my masters euidence were in law conuicted. Which iniurie comming to my eare, I plainly vttered, discouered the shifters, the innocent were releast, the periurde Broker and his forsworne companions promoted to the pillorie, their eares pared off, their heads crownd with paper, condemnd besides to restitution and imprisonment, their goods solde at open outcrie before all the people that openly cried out against their bad life and diuelish practises. Then scattered all those ill got goods abroad, that by collusion hee had raked together: there was not an old boot left (gotten by brocage) but it was solde to answere for his periurie and cousenage: nay my yeres were sold to satisfie old Vlpian , that commended my plaine dealing in opening his deceipt, to whom he had so manie waies been a deere frend. And now Piers hauing parted with Flatterie, Prodigalitie and Brokerie, is worshipfully entertained with Usurie. A seruice of good credite I assure ye, yet such was my destinie, that thinking to hold God by the hand, I tooke the diuell by the heele: & where before I euer serud one master, I was now made slaue vnto a mistres and a master, as farre different in nature as in yeares, he so miserable, that he could scarcely affoorde himselfe a meales meate: shee on the other side so delicate, that her curious taste could with no common diet be contented: small birds in precious gellyes concocted were hir ordinarie fare, Patridge was too grose, marie of a Pheasant (if intreated) shee would sometimes feede. Of her, him, and my selfe Plura sequuntur: but in this place lay a straw, all being scant worth a straw, and passing our estates, deale we with State matters. I remember wee left Aeliana rescude from the sauage: her Rescuer and she returnd to her traine, her Unckle sought and not yet founde, Hylenus in a Hermitage, Rhodope with a Fisher-man, whom we meddle not with till it be my desteny to be her fellow prentice: Celinus and his conspiring associate are equall Rulers in Thrace . The Cretan Queene, hauing recouered sight of Rhegius her Unckle (who after long search for, at last came with his arme wounded) caused him speedily to be drest, and then discoursed her daungers, her rescue by Aemilius , and euery such perticular, willing her Unkle to doo Aemilius all due honour for a seruice so excellent. As he was commaunded, he gaue him kind entertainement, though his thoughts farre differed from his words, enuying him as well for deliuerie of Aeliana from his hands, as the fresh wounds he then felt, giuen him by Aemilius : But he hid his hate with a smooth looke, making semblance of honourable vsage, and so toward the Court they ride. Aeliana noting the seemelines of Aemilius beeing mounted, and remembring his valour on foote, entertained newe fires in her vntainted thoughtes which neither moysture nor charmes nor prayers had power to quench: Aemilius on the other side, noting the beauty of the Princesse, her valour, vnwoonted in her sexe: her affabilitie not common in personages of such Estate, made fuell of his heart for the selfe same fier that inflamed her. Rhegius burning in wrath and lust, serued for a trouble betweene these twaine: and hauing giuen raynes to his desires, seeing his last intention tooke no effect, determined to be as desperate in his sute as he was dissolute in his desire: And thus these three seuerally passioned, helde on their iourney with small conference, till comming to the Court where a sumptuous feast was prouided, Aeliana befoor she intended any pleasure, either priuate or publike, in the presence of hir Nobles, gave Aemilius the order of knighthode, with offer of entertaignement into her seruice, if hee pleased to remaine in Crete: Which for a time he vowed. Then with various sounds of musique, the Pallace resounded and the tables were furnished with Princely seruice: to describe the feasts and bankets, were but to present ye with Tantalus foode, making show of that you feele no substance, inough to famish one that were fasting, or cause a full stomacke to surfet. Well suppose it such as beseemes a Princes State, the most table talke being of Aeliana hir Combate with the Boare, hir danger by the Sauage, and Aemilius fortunate rescue. Of Aemilius, Aeliana never heard inough. Supper ended, Maskes, playes, and other pastimes passed, the Princesse in hir priuate Closet, thus complaines of loue, and praiseth fortune. Aeliana what newe fires are these kindled in they bosome? What sodaine changes, what unwoonted passions? Hast thou thus long offered oliue boughs to Pallas , and wilt thou nowe present Venus with myrtle branches? Hast thou followed Diana ouer the Launds with exercise, and wilt thou proove the follower of hir adversary by idlenes? No Aeliana , extinguish these fond loues with minds labour, and nip thy affections in the bloome, that they may neuer bee of power to budde. I but Aeliana it is Aemilius thou likest, louely as Adonis , couragious as Peleus , vertuous (if the ey be the mindes true glasse) as Admetus , then why should not Aeliana desire to be his Venus , delight to be his Thetis , and die to doo him good as did Alceste ? Tush Aeliana , bridle these affections, remember thy estate and his staylesse course; suppose hee had infinite more perfections than possibly thou canst yet perceiue: yet hee is a stranger, to thee vnknowne, and as one ounce of Antimonium , corrupteth a vessell of the purest wine, so one defect may dimme the glory of all other his perfections: Aeneas was wise, Iason valiant, Demophon louely, but three infortunate Queens of Carthage, Thessaly, and Thrace , founde them as thou maist doo this, bereauers of their Honours, deceiuers of their hopes, and betrayers of their liues: But Aemilius is young, and hath not yet learned to deceiue: But hee is an Italian Aeliana , who sucke pollicie from the teate and learn beeing little ones to loue. Fie on this oyle that doth increase my fire. Aeliana loueth Aemilius woone by his desart, and cannot ende this affection but by hir owne death. But what will Rhegius and the Nobles of Crete say? that Aeliana shoulde so forget hirselfe, to affect a stranger, his parentage vnknown, vnacquainted with his behauiour, perhaps for some crime banished? Why if they shoulde, am not I sole Soueraigne of Crete , able to make him Lord of the free-borne, allye him to my kindred, and wype out the blemish of any conceited crime. But if they oppose themselues what then? Bannishing Aemilius from Crete , from Aelianaes company? Well may they bannish him from Crete , but woulde he vouchsafe of Aelianaes company, him would she follow to the vtmost India , to the burning Zone, to the frozen Pole, to the depth of death. But what if hee prooue Theseus , and leaue thee as Ariadne in some vnhaunted desert? Away with these fond doubts, Aemilius is not so obdurate, hee that in a a desert deliuered me from death, will neuer in a desert leaue mee desolate: The aforenamed forsakers neuer made show of affect but in wordes onely, this discouered his affection first by workes. Fie Aeliana , what madding passion possesseth thee? Suppose he were constant, Noble, and a Cretan , that thy Peeres and people loude him as thy selfe: what reason hast thou of his affection to bee perswaded? Perchaunce thou imaginest, seeing thy beauty hath caused the Rhodian Gouernour, the Kings of Sicilie and Cyprus to sollicite thee of loue, Aemilius will be easily intangled: or in regard of thy Princely seate, thinke himselfe happy to be thy kingly husband: No fond Princesse, the middle earth Iles seeme not so rich to Aemilius , for true vertue holdeth Kingdomes contemptible. Well, how euer loue deale tyrant- like, I will honour Fortune, that left not Aeliana in distresse, but sent Aemilius to be my deliuerer: Of whose loue were I assured, than were I more than fortunate. With such speeches passed Aeliana ouer her passion, resoluing to loue or not to liue. Aemilius likewise being solitary, thus participated his sorrowe to the silent night: Blacke shrowde of griefe (sayth he) the Outlawes day, Nurse of silence, secure shadow for the fearefull, let me acquaint thy stilnes with my hearts sting, being otherwise so haples as I haue no friend els, in whose bosome I may vnloade my griefe. Froward change onely to me, in ill changing forward, hindrer of my rest, bereauer of my hopes, when wilt thou leaue to obserue truth in my torment, and falshood in my felicitie? If my euill starres vrge these euents, sweete Night bee thou intreated neuer to giue place to day, till my vnlucky lights be pourd as gelly on the earth. Poore Aemilius , exilde from Thrace , in Crete captiude, my brother forcing the one, beauty constraining the other: By the first thou wert seperated from thy father and sister, by the last bereft of thy woonted senses. Winde, seas, saylers, conspirators of my sorrow, that haue brought Aemilius to this haples harbor, where hee beholdes with desperate soules the felicitie of Angels, and is desperate of the fruition. Aeliana center of all my ioy, diuinest beauties essence, light of my soule, my liues load-starre, how miserable am I to see thee placed in so high a spheare, my selfe deiected in so lowe a clyme: Thou most happy, I most haples, I a slaue, thou a soueraigne. Why exclaimst thou Aemilius thus against Fortune and Desteny? It is loue that makes thy case desperate: that robber of rest, bereauer of sense, hee hath conspired in thy extreamity to make thy misery more than extreame. What foole painted thee blinde, that art thus sharpe sighted, able to wound concealed harts? or rather what foole am I that confirme thee not blinde both of sense and sight, seeing thou seekst to vnite harts so farre different? So dealtst thou with thy mother, with Sapho , with Cornelia : But some comfort were it knewe I thou hadst assailed Aeliana so. Immortall powers why doate I so? Shee that hath refused all the Princes in the Ilands of the middle earth, can I thinke loue hath any such power to enforce hir to fancie mee. It is vnlikely, for shee Diana like leades loue fettered, and placing him as her vassaile where she please, darts from her eyes his fire. But comfort thy selfe Aemilius , she hath vouchsafed to be thy Princely Mistris, namde thee her Knight, enioind thee seruice in hir Court: these presumptions of farther fauour. I, that rises from hir Princely bounty to requite thy trauell in hir rescue, no colour of hope that as a louer shee will regard thee: but as shee hath beautified thy poore estate with rich ornaments and Honorable tytles, so for thy ouerdaring she wil cause thy Plumes to be puld, and thou maist appear naked like Aesops Crow. Therefore Aemilius be circumspect, thou art here a stranger, and on thy behauiour will each eye be fixt. Follow a while thy fortunes, if destenies haue ordained thee happines, nowe hope the best, if markt thee to miserie, ineuitable are their doomes, and better thou wert to dye where thou louest, than liue where thou art loathed. This while Rhegius tooke small rest, but was sundry waies perplexed in his minde, sometimes blaming his vnlawfull lust, another while exclaiming against his euill lucke: sometimes intreating heauens to giue him power to desist his sute, againe impetrating ayde of hell to persist in his enterprise. The last determination and the worst continued longest, and furnishing himselfe with sundry examples of most vnnaturall and prepostereus loues, he left his chamber, and euen when day beganne to chase nights cloudes from hindering the morninges beauty, Rhegius vnder colour of most vrgent and serious affaires, came towarde Aelianaes Chamber, that then was singing a Dittie whilst three of hir Ladies with rare musique both of voyce and Instrument, kept true time with their Empresse, Carroling an vndersong at each stanzoes ende. Rhegius rauished with this Angelique Harmonie, staide at the Chamber doore to heare the remaine of Aelianaes Dittie, for euen then all their voyces were like a Quiere of Nightingales chanting on this foote: Quickly striue the Boy to binde, Feare him not for hee is blinde: If hee get loose hee showes no pittie. Aeliana then beganne the last Stanzo alone (as shee had done all the rest) in this sort. Trust not his wanton teares, lest they beguile yee: Trust not his childish sight, he breatheth slilie. Trust not his tutch, his feeling may defile yee, Trust nothing that hee doth, the Wagge is wilie. If you suffer him to prate, You will rue it ouer late: Beware of him for hee is wittie. Quickly striue the Boy to binde, Feare him not for hee is blinde: If hee get loose hee showes no pittie. With this the musique ceast, and Aeliana was about to discourse somewhat of that subiect whereon her song was grounded; when sodainely Rhegius desired to enter the Chamber, whether when hee was admitted, hee certified the Queene that hee had serious affaires to conferre with her of, whereupon shee commaunded hir Ladies to auoyde: Attending when hir Unckle would beginne to speake, who three times offered, and three times was stroken silent, standing as it were in a traunce: vntill Aeliana had thus reuiued him. Deere Unckle, on whose weale consistes the welfare of our Person: and by whose wisedome our Estate is warely guided, tell me (for I long to knowe) what great important cause concerning the State or other affaires, vrgeth this early approach, and sodaine alteration. Why are ye thus silent, your looks deiected, your face bloodles? Are there confederacies to warde of forren Princes, or conspiracies of home-bred Traytors? Haue the Gods showen intentions of wrath by some prodigious signe, or haue our Priests opened any insuing euills by vnluckie Augurie: If either of the first, let power bee gathered to preuent, if any of the last, doubt not by prayer wee shall preuaile: Onely let your Honour showe the cause, and our dilligence shall indeuour for some good course. Rhegius reuiued by her sweete voyce, beganne to gather his spirites together, when shame companion of sinne tainted his pale cheekes with vermillion colour. Offring to speake hee sighd, and windy sighes giuing way to words, hee mingled his stormy speech with showres of teares, that fell not fruitles, but enforst from Aeliana such compassion, that when againe shee woulde haue vrgde him to proceede, the vttrance of hir wordes were stopped with the aboundant water that fell from hir eyes, vntill Rhegius thus brake foorth. Cease Princely Cousin these sadde teares, and sorrowe not for my lament, no way by griefe able to be lessened. Onely cleare this heauen of beauty, and let no diuine clowds of discontent obscure that brightnes, wherein consortes no small portion of the diuine essence, and abides the chiefe part of my earthly being. Aeliana, Cretes Empresse, Goddesse of my hart, if euer Rhegius merited of thee kinde fauour for his faithfull seruice, grant him one boone easie for thee to grant, which grant will giue thy wretched Unckle life, thy deniall marke him for the sonne of death. Woonder not faire Queene to see my countenance thus often chaunged, for nowe pale feare benummeth my feeble heart, anone redde shame tainteth my blushing cheekes: Lastly, Loue forces me thus to answere. Beasts entrailes haue shown our Priests no vnluckie signe, the heauens no prodigies, the Cretans are not rebellious, neither are the neighbring Kingdomes enuious: onely Rhegius inward soule is staind with conceipt of sinne, his thoughts prodigious, his hart rebellious, his minde enuious. Of which enuie, rebellion, preposterous and impure sinne, Loue is onely originall: whose fires haue kindled contrarie thoughts in wretched Rhegius , such as himselfe shames to vtter, such as I see your Highnes blush to conceiue. Herewith Aeliana stepped backe, and Phoebe -like (when Cadmus nephew beheld her naked in the fountaine) shee frownd on Rhegius , who taking her by the hand, intreated her a while to heare patiently, what Loue compeld him vtter. Cease, cease said Aeliana , let not the glorie of thy worthie gouernment, be dimd with this lustfull  & incestuous practise. Thy change of passion assures me this is not done to trie me: but too-too surely I perceiue by thy troubled lookes, thou hast giuen libertie to vnbrideled appetite: which on thy alleageaunce I charge thee to desist, or I will exterminate thy lawles loue, by vntimely death. At the name of death, Rhegius smiled, and saide, that is the period indeed of my lament. More haplesse is this life to me than anie death can be. Curst be those lawes that binde men from that which Nature denyeth not to beasts. The light foote Roe is conuersaunt with his Damme, the Birde billeth with those of the same neast, the Dolphin wantonneth with fish of the same spawne: but men haue imposed burthens on men which neither they themselues, nor their fathers before them could keepe. Myrrha loued hir father, Byblis hir brother: this in the worlds eye was preposterous, to Nature not abhorring, to loue agreeing: why shoulde not Loue and Nature then commaund Lawe, seeing from them Law onely holdes hir cheefe positions. Suppose it were not thus, but those bounds of Law, were from pure Loue, and vnspotted Nature deriued: what then? Affection blindly iudgeth, and will neyther bee by reason restrained, nor by extremitie bridled. Your Highnes threatens me with death: heere is my naked breast, make me blessed by that doome. I beseech you. Pierce this bosome, and let foorth my conspiring spirit: pull out these lasciuious eyes, betrayers of my yeelded heart: and sacrifice my lust-burning bodie, before the altare of your diuine beautie: other restraint for Rhegius or rest for your Excellence can none be found, my passions are so ouer-daring fond. Aeliana pitying his extreames, and seeing that her sharpe deniall made him almost desperate, shee tooke him vp from the ground (whereon he kneeled) and thus comforted him. Noble Unckle, seeing outragious lust hath clowded the precious vertues of your minde: and that I see yee so giuen ouer to your loose desires, that you neglect regard of honour, and feare of death, seeking to violate chastitie, whose royaltie you should defend: that I may giue some ease to your greefe, (standing with the pleasure of the heauens, our dignitie, and your account) I first pardon what in these cases hath passed, and vowe my selfe euer readie to minister you Princely comfort. My selfe will daylie visite you, walke with ye, conferre with ye, reason against your vnreasonable loue, perswade yee to honourable thoughts, disswade yee from these dissolute determinations. If you be sicke, I will be your Phisition: if faynt your comforter: if froward (as at this time ye seeme) your counseller: onely learne by degrees to curbe these humours, that (suffered) will with a head-long furie obscure the former brightnes of your vertues, and subuert our estate. Time will change (I doubt not) your dissolute intent, and make you (as of old) resolute in dooing well. Come sweete Unckle, be comforted, and in all things that modestie will permit, Aeliana that is borne thy Souereigne, will endeuour her selfe to bee thy Handmaid. Rhegius (ouercome with these sweete speeches) began to be more ashamed of his loose attempt, than hee was before earnest to prosecute it: but soone that motion fayled, and he returning to his vomit, tooke aduantage of the Princes offer, and intended if he once seazd on her againe, not to be preuented, resoluing that vi si non verbis she should be wonne. But he couered his hatefull intention with a smoothed brow, awayting his time till he could drawe the innocent Princesse within his power. And so with infinite thankes, promising to endeuour himselfe to bridle his passions, and crauing pardon for his undecent presumption, they parted, she to her meditation of Aemilius perfections, hee to practise some plot for their destructions. All this while we haue forgot the old King, liuing in his solitarie cell, whose proportion of rest to him was more pleasing in that solitude, than in the frequent copanies at his Court. And because we will not disturb his contemplation, we only cursorily passe by, for that we are forst to poast by, and seeke for passage ouer into Thrace , where all things (like an vnmundified vlcer) festred inwardly, though outwardly there appeared a cloaked shaddow and painted show of ciuill and honest gouernment. Celinus onely attends lasciuious companie. Celydon intends to appropriate to himselfe the dignitie and become soale Souereigne, awayting onely opportunitie to effect in act what he had long conceiud, euen the last scene of Celinus Tragedie. While thus the one priuely practised to win, the other publiquely endeuoured to lose, euerie mans feare foretold insuing mischiefe. And as the Ocean ceaseth not to boyle against a tempest, till high billowes make rough smooth waters: so the disturbed imaginations of mens brains, produced variable mutterings: some vttering their feares, others their affectation: euerie one like a Sphinx deliuering his opinion doubtfullye, fearfull least some Oedipus would expound it too plainly. During the time the Court and Common-wealth were thus troubled, I trust ye thinke not Piers Plainnes so ill a husband to be idle: for in my masters house we kept the essence of the one, and image of the other. For as in the Court were two Kings, so had wee two commaunders: videlicet Vlpian my miserable master, and Vrsula my lasciuious mistres. Wonder not to heare, that riot should keepe house with wretchednes: for such is the pleasure of the heauens, that one iniquitie should consume another, commonly ill-getting fathers hauing loose spending children, verifiing the olde approued prouerbe, Male part ae male delabuntur . If when I serud Flatterie my soule were afflicted to hear his soothing lyes: when Prodigalitie, my hart greeued to see his lasciuious waste: when Brokerie, my eyes mourned to be witnes to extreame extortion: here had I occasion all at once of eyes moning, harts greeuing, and soules affliction. O miserable condition of couetous parents, and desperate resolution of riotous children: the first wearying out it selfe immoderately to get: the last tyring out it selfe with insatiate desire to spend. But why digresse I? The swines declining bounds me in a limit: for with the day intend I to end my discourse. Vlpian my master (whose sparing lyfe not Niggardize her selfe can well expresse) albeit he vsed Vrsula his daughter as a propertie to inthrall yong Gentlemen, as hee had earst done Flauius : yet would grudge at anie money he parted with to maintaine her in fit estate, either for diet or apparell to entertain such, as in hope to bee heires of Vlpians treasure, dailye repaired to their destruction. She on the other side, I must needes say, (as such kinde creatures be) was kind harted inough, and when she could haue met wyth his coffers, she was no lesse lauish of his bags, than loose of her behauiour. For her part, shee was a right Ana-baptist, all things were with her, and shee with euerie one in common. When first she thus attempted by pilfrie to breake into his ill purchase, and hee espied the decrease of hys beloued crownes: Furie it selfe was not so furious. Me hee tormented to acknowledge my selfe an accessarie, and for her part (Ile be her witnes) she was handled as a principall. For when at my handes nothing could be gotten, (because I was ignorant of all) hee tooke vpon him to disple his Daughter, and neuer left scourging till she plaid one part of a true penitenciary, and made open confession, marrie restitution she could not otherwise make, but with promise to cousen for him as manie Gentlemen as she might. For want of other securitie, he was glad to take her word for a bond, and so for a month or two the case was wondrously altred, for while her woundes were healing, wee kept a long Lent. To describe our diet, were inough to fill all the Countrie with a dearth: with remembraunce thereof, Famine it self hath seazed on me, and except I here feed I can proceed no farther. Pitie it were (quoth Corydon ) thou shouldest now faint. Menalcas , reach hether thy scrip, my bag is emptie: heres wine inough, and theres a part of a roasted kid, either of power to reuiue thy fainting spirites, and refresh thy tyred senses. Menalcas drinke to him, and proue a better master than this vlpian , of whose seruice thy seruant now intreates. Here Piers said Menalcas drinke well, and after thy refreshing, goe forward. I marry quoth Piers , the Sailer and Souldier are happie, that in the quiet hauen or other secure harbour may discourse the escaped daungers on sea and in field: therefore (with a full stomacke) I will (as merely as I may) describe the daylie proportion of our hungrie fare. The day no sooner appeared, but Piers poasted to the Poticaries for oyntment to recouer Vrsulas sore skin to the wonted soundnes: and by then I returned, olde Vlpian my master was readie to rise, and read a lecture of thrift to me and her: other breakfast had wee none. At dinner my allowaunce was two Anchoues, sheere water my drinke: and at night drie ryce (or rather rye bread) my best repast: my master pretending a solemn Fast, till Vrsula were recouered, without whose helth he assured me our commons must needes faile, for that she was the common vpholder of the house: for praier indeede we had no Iniunction, yet made he daylie execrable Orizons honouring gold as the cheefest good, and one day it was my chance to heare the ground of his deuotion. Beeing entred his studie, and opening his coffers, he vttered the intention of his soule in these tearmes. O gold, adored gold, my soules cheefe soueraigne, my liues best Genius, for whom the needy vassaile toyles, the Souldier fightes, the Scholler studieth, howe doth thy diuine essence comfort my troubled spirite, against whose opulencie the enuious beggers of the earth repine. O bee thou resident with me in spite of all their rage: for where thou art there enuy cannot hurt. Close vp my senses from all other thoughts than of thy exelence: A little Grammer learning I haue, and were it no more than to holde thee fast it were sufficient: for what account are Schollers made of, or Friendes or Gods, without golden Oratorie, giuing frendship, or all-yeelding Deitie. Then my religion, frend, Art, all I haue, to thee I sacrifice my selfe: without whose presence I am not my selfe: in thee alone remaines Beatitude, without thee know I no blessednes. These and the like were my Masters daylie inuocations, his exercise was turning ouer money, and searching euerie corner of the house least some thinge wer hid. During Vrsulas sicknes, or rather sorenes we had no great resort, but vpon her recouerie wee had open proclimation for dayes of Iubile . She like a gratious Childe remembring her late greefe, in steede of sorrowe for her Fathers wrong, practisde of her owne iniurie to be wreakt: & mee she makes the instrument of her reuenge being altogether ignorant of hir course; My old Master Flauius driuen to the extreamest exigent of want she sends me too, protesting she would in some measure onely releeue his need, not accquainting me with any other intent. To be breefe they met, and thus conspirde, that Flauius should to Celinus , and accuse her Father for clipping of gold, which according to the law of Thrace was hie treason, her onely desire was to bee the happie possessor of his possessions and goods, of all which she would put Flauius in possession by her marriage. The first parte of her deuice tooke effect, Flauius accused Vlpian , our house was searcht, the clippings found, his iudgment followed, and Vlpians execution was not farre behinde, whereto with notable acclamation of the people he was brought. In steede of penitence hee died desperate hauing liued detestablie, cursing his daughter execrablie, and blessing the beholders with his goutie heeles, deliuered himselfe ouer to the hangmans mercie. Here ends the tragedie of true Auarice, a worde or two of Vrsula and Flauius . Contrarie to their expectation, the goods of Vlpian were seazd on to Celinus vse, and she nakedly tourned forth as the betraier of her father: whom (in distresse) Flauius refusde, the Court scorned, the Citie iested at. Being idly brought vp, she could no way indeuour her selfe to helpe her selfe, and so in fine miserably died. My selfe (as a moueable) was solde, and Flauius quondam Baylie the Customer became my master. A bodie would think I had been where deceit inough before had been: but to this all my passed life was sanctimonie. In euerie other place I saw deceipt, & shund it: but here I was a daily deceiuer, & could scarce see it. Well, ere I goe forward with what I there did, let vs see what hapned at Court. Celydon (as I before said) onely awaited occasion to quarrell with Celinus , and now vppon partition of olde Vlpians goods, the long hid fier brake into flame. Celinus had the goods in possession, and because they were of great worth was loath to leaue them. Celydon (on the other side) pretended to haue them deliuered into the Common Treasurie: but that was by Celinus to the publique officers denied. Whereupon Celydon armed himselfe, and with a multitude of souldiers beset the Pallaice and Counsell-house: whereinto entring, he thus inueighed against Celinus . Lords of Thrace , dismay not that Celydon enters armed amongst these reuerend Senators: for no slight cause hath hethertoo vrged me, but the preseruation of your ancient Honors, and the good of this wealpublike. I know it is not vnknowen to all of you, with what zealous care I haue laboured to vphold this misgouerned estate, of which Celinus hath endeuoured to work the downfall. If I should be silent, your selues are to me testimonies, hauing giuen me more honor, than either I deserue or expect. But neyther may my cares nor your endeuours preuaile, so long as this vnbrideled Gentleman Celinus is suffered to ouerrule what we determine. Should I but vrge a secrete long from your knowledge concealed, howe euer by your wisedomes suspected, I should giue you more occasion to detest his vnnaturall euill, than yet you haue had to inueigh against his vnbrideled life, wherein what ill hath not beene prosecuted, that corruption could inuent, or wickednes enact. I meane the trecherous exile of our Lord Hylenus and his children, whose vertues by how much they were greatly to our auaile, Celinus vices are to be held more vile: seeing the vertuous father by the vicious sonne, the harmles brother and sister by their hatefull and hurtfull brother, are banished we knowe not whether, or murdred we know not howe? But here it may bee to my selfe it will bee obiected, that long since Celinus had for vsurping been punished, had not Celydon supported him. I graunt graue fathers this is true, whereby it may be, some will inferre, I was a principall in this conspiracie. But that part I deny. For vtterly without my knowledge was our King and his children exiled, Celinus backt with riotous companies, the people tumultuously gathred on heapes, when fearefull of ciuill muteny, I yeelded to the times as likewise you all did, and swore to vphold Celinus lest in the contentio the whole people shoulde haue perished. Nowe that wee are of power, requisit it is to reuenge royall Hylenus wrogs, our owne wrongs, the peoples iniuries: seeing he hath not onely expulsed his father from his estate, but in a manner ruined the whole State. For which of your wiues or daughters are priuiledged from his lust? who of you are owners of your owne wealth, but subiect to his lasciuious deuastation? Now is the time, and here is the effect of the prescription drawne. Bee not abasht graue fathers, Nero, Phalaris , diuers Kings and Emperours, haue for misgouernement not onely beene deposed but also put to death: they beeing true Princes, Celinus an vsurper. He is now carowsing among his riotous Caualiers, or wantoning with his Concubines, if you will shew your selues worthy the name of Thracians , of Senators, of men, subscribe to this prescription, my bands of armed souldiers are ready to execute the vsurper: if you delay, my selfe will take vpon me the glory of this action to your perpetuall reproofe, and immortall indignities. When hee had thus spoken, with a frowning countenance hee awayted their answere: Who seeing into the drift of Celydon, and noting the power he had at that time, suppressed the fulnes of their conceite, and consented to subscribe to the prescription. Whereto they had no sooner signed, but Celydon with his power went into the market place, and there in the publique iudgement seate accused Celinus of the foresaid crimes, exasperating against him all malitious indignities done vnto his father, his brother, and sister, and all other his misdemeanors: Wherewith he drew forth the prescription signed with the Senates handes, and demaunded of them if they woulde giue their voyce. The people confusedly cryed out, let Celinus the traytor be drawen forth to death: Then ran the multitude hedlongly to Celinus Pallace, who being taken at vnawares, made head against them with such power as he had, but being a troup of loose persons, for no other attended his traine, hee and they were soone discomfited. The Assistaunts were in a manner numberlesse, theyr cryes confused and tumultuous, so that Celinus could neither speake to make excuse, nor had power to make resist. Wherefore withdrawing himselfe hee escaped thorough a vault into the wood ioyning to the Pallace, who was no sooner mist, but his followers yeelded to the mercie of celydon , who caused diuers to bee tormented, to confesse where celinus was: what was become of him there coulde not any tell, so the moates were dragde, thinking hee had desperately cast himselfe in, and then the secrete vaultes were founde, but celinus could not be found, neither shall yee heare anie more of him, till it bee my owne good hap to finde him. Returne to Celydon , who with the furious multitude vtterly raced the pallace of Celinus , and without pittie cruelly murdered and inhumanely massacred his concubines and associates, among whom fell both Thrasilio and Flauius : the one for an vnthrift, the other for a flatterer that had not their fellowes in all Thrace . While in this manner celydon insulted ouer celinus miserable estate, and breathed threatenings against all his other vntaken Fauourites, proclayming high meede to anie one that brought Celinus either quicke or dead, and threatning sharpe death, and confiscation of goods, to euerie one that succoured him: the Senatours by aduise of an eloquent Oratour, and reuerent Counseller named Licostenes , had thus decreed, that seeing celydon was culpable of selfe treason with celinus , as soone as his bandes of Souldiers were dissolued, he should bee publiquely executed in such manner as for celinus himselfe ordained, and that they would presently dispatch messengers to all neighbryng Nations, if happely they might heare of Hylenus and his children. This they determined with all possible speede to effect, while celydon (nothing of their intent suspecting) left not the ruinating of celinus Pallayce, and tormenting his seruants, till nightes darknesse denied them meanes to execute farther their mallice. But Celydon thinking himselfe nothing safe till Celinus wer surprised, dischargde not as yet his bands of soldiers, but sent speedy messengers to lay the Ports about Hebrus , and companies to search the forrest of Hemus and the waies to the next Prouinces adioyning: but especially the Ports hee suspected, and to the Hauen where my Master was Customer, at once came Proclamation and commission, that who so euer harbored Celinus shoulde immediately as traytors bee executed, and he that brought him foorth should receiue a thousand Crownes. Celinus destiny was such to happen to that Port, and for that he presumed he had some interest in my Master, as well for helping him to the Office, as also for smoothering many of his offences, in transporting forbidden commodities: and seeing wee are here, touch the faults we wil a litle that my Master the Customer vsed, and let slip the matter a while of Celinus handling. First, in the first part of this discourse you vnderstood he was Flauius Baily, a deceiuer of his Master, and now is Baily for the King, and dooth his best to vndoo the Countrey. Hee was a Usurer, a Broker, a Farmer, and what not in that place: Corne, leather, mettall, any forbidden commodities, might passe if he were paid, spices vngarbled, letters close packed, fugitiues, outlawes, any thing, powder, ordinance, artillery, so they paide him priuy custome. A sort of bankerupt Brokers wer his retainers, that at the landing of any merchant stranger, consedered either to comende others credite, thereby to take into their handes their whole commodities: And when daies of payment comes, the merchant hath no other helpe of them, but we are sory, and would haue sworne their credits had beene such and such. When like deceiuing cousoners they share quarters, and my Master for countenancing their knaueries had his halfe part. Among other deceites, for transporting of vittels, this plaine guile hee suffered, when vessels were bound foorthe, three times more than due proportion hee let passe, vnder colour to serue the voyage: but without hee were paid nothing could passe, and then they might passe and repasse without controll. What though the garbler cryed out, his vailes were wasted, the Commons the corne was transported, euery one of wrong, so he had the right he lookt for, all was well: for in all these wrongs celinus was his supporter. Now came the time of triall, whether the ill seruant wold proue true to his bad master. Celinus (in the dead of night) gets to our house, tells my master his estate, and requires to be transported. He was no sooner entred, but the towne was priuily raisd: yet Petrusio vsed great protestations for his assuraunce. Celinus (notwithstanding their manye oathes) liked not his lookes, and in the end by priuie whisprings, and rustling of armed men without, was sure of his deceit: but remembring Petrusio to be notably couetous, he thus dallyed with him. Petrusio , how I haue preferd thee thou knowst, and how thou louest me I am assured: yet that I may make thee more beholding, I will vtter one secrete ere I take shipping, that shall bind thee to me aboue all other kindnesses. How euer I haue seemed to liue secure, yet against this expected daye of my downefall haue I not been altogether improuident, but secretely haue hidden two hundred thousand crownes: one half I make thee master of, the other I intreate thee (as thou hast found me louing) to conuay me when I shall write to thee fro anie forren coast. Doo this Petrusio , and be now more enriched, and if againe Fortune fauour me, looke to bee most fortunate. Unworthie am I (quoth Petrusio ) to obtaine this fauor, and as I proue to your Highnes faithfull, let my fortunes bee succesfull: onely resolue your seruant where the treasure is. First said Celinus bring me to Ship, I am els in this case resolued to bee euer silent. Petrusio not willing to loose this pray, pretended to goe cleere the Key, and leauing him, went to the Officers, assuring them the prisner was safe, & for speciall matter concerning the State, must bee carried secretly aboord a Barke, that anchored before the Harbor: to bring him thether himself vndertooke the charge, and appointed a hundred well armed to goe before vnto the Barke, giuing them a watch-woord when they should apprehend Celinus : the rest of the People to auoyd tumult he discharged. They counting him the forman of the parish, brake vp the Watch, and obeyed his words: and Petrusio returning to Celinus , broght him to a Cocke boate, and me he appointed for the waterman. But here the case begins to alter. Wee were no sooner in the midst of the Riuer, but Celinus taking my master by the throate, vsed these terames. Petrusio , I know thee for a villaine, and am assured of thy notable intention to betray me. What thou hast, my gift hath holpe thee too, thy goods are mine borrowed, thy life to my seruice vowed: yet for all this, my misgiuing heart compels me to mistrust thy constancie. Use no words, for they are false like thy faultie life: no oathes, for they are more deceiuing than thy wordes: no teares, for they haue learned trecherie of either: only in death will I beleeue thee: and with that giuing him a mortal wound, he heaude him ouer boord, and stept to me saying, Pesant exclaime not, for if thou doo thy life is lost, and with this miserable wretch thou shalt in death consort. Be firme to me, and as I am a Gentleman, I wil preserue thy life, and vse thee well. I that was acquainted with Petrusioes trecherie, pitying his youth, remembring his royall progenie, & in plaine tearmes fearing my owne tragedie, quicklie resolud to prouide for his escape, and embracing certain danger to auoyd present feare, we put out into the deepest of the maine, yet not so secretly but they in the Barke espied vs, and setting out their owne and other vessells boates to bring vs vnder their lee, had surely taken vs, had not the Guider of the Windes (furthering our flight) let loose their ragefull breathings, that scattred the Men of warre, whose boates pursued vs: the billowes prowdly mounting their vpper deckes, made them more carefull to attend their owne safetie, than intend our pursute. And if they in vessels of great burden were distressed, we then that had onely a boate could not but be greatly endangered. Let vs shift with the storme awhile, and see what sorted that night to Celydon . Licosthenes (before named) hauing assembled al the chiefe Senators, sent for the Praetor of the Citie & hys Brethren: before whom he laid open the whole treasons of Celydon . As, that raised from meane estate to high dignitie by Hylenus their lawfull Souereign, he had consented to so great a treason, as the exile of him, Aemilius his Heire, and Rhodope their beauteous Princesse. In this he vrged reasons to proue Celydon principall: first the remisse life of Celinus (an argument in him of small ambition) by Celydon soothed in ill, by his counsell disinherited, then to this vnnaturall treson animated, and now at last either brought to desperate flight, or assured confusion. To this he added, the remembrance of those Citizens slaine the first day of the conspiracie, the feasting of the multitude for three daies following, the light passing ouer of Hylenus absence & his children, the abusing of Celinus youth, his owne ambition to be sole Protector, concluding with the barbarous murder of Celinus seruants. This he laid open with such effectiue woordes, mingling his speech with teares, and filling their harts with terror, aswell by old example of Usurpers tyrannies, as present instance of late performed Tragedies, that the Magistrates with one voice desired him not onely to aduise what should be done: but also to lead them, and what hee enioyned they would performe. Licosthenes then caused foure thousand to be armed, and with them went to the Pallace, where Celydon all fearlesse of that accident, was plotting which of the Senators first to murder after Celinus death: hauing sent the greatest number of his souldiers towards Petruosis house, wherein he heard he was kept prisoner. Licosthenes causing the Companies to bee placed on each side of the streete leading to the Pallace gate, was by the Captain of Celydons Gard demanded a reason for his armed approach? Who answered, it was onely to defend the Pallace and Treasurie: seeing a number of the Commons (by some turbulent person stirred vp) were gathered in the Market place, and would by no reasons bee allayed, till Celinus were deliuered them: wishing him to informe Celydon , that his Princelye presence was the only meane to allay the people, being gracious in their eyes: and therefore had he armed the better sort of citizens to be his strong gard, if he vouchsafed in person to prouide for the Cities safetie. Celydon hearing of this, hasted toward the Market place, of all other least fearing Licosthenes : who by the way arrested him of high treason, to which resisting, a smal skirmish began: which with Celydons death soone ended, who suppressed with many wounds, breathd forth his aspiring spirite from his blood-defiled trunke. Much adoo there was next morning to allay mutenies, but by the diligence of the Magistrates the People were appeased: and messengers were dispatched to euerie neighboring Kingdome, to enquire of Hylenus or his children: and the sea-bankes were all about the coast searched for the bodie of Celinus , whome of certaintie they thought the storme had wracked. It is long since I was in Crete , but when we come there, we will ende there. In the meane time, I will forward with the storme, wherein the Prince Celinus and I wer miserably distrest: for some while the mounting waues heavd vs to the clouds, another while sunk vs to the depth, which euerie moment wee accounted should be our sepulcher. Beside this sea- storme, heauens windows were opened, powring another sea vppon our heads: our oares were borne ouer boord, and we poore wretches (like condemned persons in the Sergeants hands) hurried whether violence it selfe would driue vs. Our chiefest powers were imployed, either to hold other fast, least the mercilesse waters shuld haue washt vs from the boate. And while we lay thus infolded, I yeelding my selfe to death, he lamenting his desperate life: I was not a little comforted, that these miseries made him remember his mischieuous courses, and seeke reconciliation with God, being vtterly hopeles to enioy anie more the companie of men. Nothing violent can bee permanent. This storme ere morning ceased, and some ease was giuen to our afflictions: the cloudie vapors were chased to the South, and the gray Morning blushingly saluted the Sunne, whose orient beames wantonned on the quiet waters. But these pleasures little comforted vs, who fainting with extreame labor, had no meanes to obtaine foode. He that had heard the penitent Prince exclaime on Celydons perswasion to that vnnaturall treason, ask pardon of his wronged father, iniurde brother, harmlesse sister: would haue relented into teares, in compassionating his greefe. Three nights and two daies we huld along the Mediterrane sea, oarelesse, foodlesse, and strengthlesse. About the mid-watch of the last night, a storme more furious than the first assailed vs, driuing our smal boate against a rocke, where splitting in sunder our wether-beaten bodies were with the parted sides of the boate seperated. My happie chance was such, euen when my vitall powers were past all sense, to bee preserued by a fisherman, with whom Rhodope the Thracian Princesse (calling herselfe Serena ) dwelt, of him and all the neighbors derely beloued. At his house (with warme broaths and other helpes) my benummed limbs found feeling of life: Serena more carefully attending me for that I was of Thrace , whose turmoyled estate when she heard of, teares fell from hir eyes: but when I discoursed my wretched parting with Celinus , shee sunke to the ground. The Fisherman, his wife, my selfe with much adoo recouered hir, who weakely lifting vp hir head, cryed, A haples brother, haue heauens so little pittie of thy life, that they permitted not thy penitent soule to be reconciled to thy exiled father? With that the Fisherman askt if shee were daughter to a king? No said shee, but I was a handmaid to that haples Princes, and Celinus often woulde in Courtlike discourses account me for his sister. The Fisherman replied that to Aeliana shee shoulde bee presented, if she were of so high a byrth. But Serena on hir knees besought shee might liue still in that meane estate, wherein as she had beene duetifull to him and hir, so she would continue: And further besought they woulde giue entertainement to hir sea-wrackt countriman. Both hir requests were granted, and I in a small boate was set to fish in the riuer, on which riuer about two miles from the sea, Rhegius had a sumptuous Castle, for pleasure and strength vnmatcheable in all Crete . And since we are in Crete : let vs see how the affaires goe there. Rhegius vnable to quench his vnnaturall lust to Aeliana his kinswoman and soueraigne: grew enuiously impatient at Aemilius fauour, for Aeliana the Queene graced him with all honors, and he by his demeanor obtained the frendship of each Courtier. A wicked Counsellour seruant to Rhegius , soother of his lust-burning loue, was one day drawen by Rhegius abroade, to whom in a groue not far from the sea, in a thicket seldome frequented, Rhegius discouered his grefe, and desired his aduise. There leaue we him a while, and see what shift celinus made to get the shore: being immediately after the splitting of the Boate cast into the hollowe of a rocke, in which by degrees ascending, he obtained the top of the crag, and the tyde going out continued there til morning, whose light gaue him no small comfort, for that he soone discouered the shore: being a thicke wood within two furlongs of the rocks discent. Faint though hee were, the sight of land gaue him vigor, what Coast it was he knew not, but intended to try, and casting himself into the calme water (for betweene the woode and the rocke there was a good lee, in short space he attained the shoare, entered the Wood, and finding certaine wilde fruit, refresht therewith his fainting lims. And tooke some small rest vppon the ground, hauing had no sleepe in three daies before. Hee was but newly awaked, when Rhegius with his wicked counseller were hard at hand conferring about the practise touching Aemilius and Aeliana : His seruant thus aduising; Aemilius said he, is this day a hunting neere your Castle, and as I vnderstand, intendeth in your absence to see the beautye thereof. There your Honorable custome giueth entertaignment as well to straungers as free-borne Cretans , and thither if you please will I poast, inuite him all night to stay, assure him and his company, the Queene within two daies will be there, and hath commanded him there to abide hir Graces comming: which graunted, in his bedde I will either murther him, or commit him prisoner (since I know your Honorable nature hateth murder) into the deepe vault of your Castle, where hee shall be kept till the Queene bee woon to yeelde to your intent. Her Grace you shall inuite to the same Castle, and in the dead of night enter hir chamber, be resolute, let not hir teares intreate ye, feare not we will attende ye, if once you seaze on hir, suffer hir not to escape, for though maydenly bashfulnes cause hir to be euer-coy, yet once entred she will euer yeelde. I, this is somewhat saide Rhegius , murder Aemilius I will not, but gladly would I remooue him, therefore his inthralment I consent vnto: For Aeliana my kinswoman, my soueraign, my soules chiefe health, faine would I vse her forceably, whome faire meanes cannot intreate, but that my feare to offend is almost equall to my loue. Ah tell me should she exclaime, in what case then were Rhegius? dishonored, pointed at, not only held a traytor, but esteemed incestuous? My Lord said Dolon , (for so was hee named) be not precise, if euer ye intend to effect the perfect fulnes of your affection. To you more than her is Crete beholding: she being lawfull heire hath onelie the title of Queene, you hold the Souereignitie: and would she not consent, I would compell her. If your affections bee setled as you say, you must vse force: if not, you may resolue otherwise as you please. Then as thou hast said (quoth Rhegius ) let vs conclude: my ouer-mastred reason hath no reason to resist thy aduice. Herewith they heard a heauie groane sent by Celinus , that now knew himselfe in Crete by the name of Aeliana , and had hope to finde his Brother when hee heard mention of Aemilius . With his sigh, Rhegius & Dolon looked backe, and sawe him faintly sitting vnder a Palme tree, neere the place they stood, and demaunded what he was? I am quoth he a miserable man, late sea-wrackt on this shore, pined welnere with famine, greeued to talke, yet desirous to aduise one of you, that of his owne nature seemeth not ill inclinde, to shun the perswasions of the other: for by like counsell & self conspiracie, am I cast downe from Princely dignitie vnto this extremitie. Hadst thou said Dolon been Monarch of the earth, yet thus shouldst thou perish for playing the eauesdropper: and therewith doubling wound on wound, left hym with his cut-stretcht limmes all senseles on the earth. Rhegius reprooued his bloodines, yet slightly past it, & leauing him without sepulcher, set forward with their detestable resolution. Dolon at Rhegius Castle finds Aemilius , intertains him, stayes him, betrayes him, and in a deepe dungeon imprisons him, where day equalled the night in darkenes, only a small glimmering through a cranny in the wall descended. Aemilius that knew no reson for this wrong, doubtlesse of Aelianaes fauor, assured of Rhegius honorable thoughts, could not but complaine in that disconsolate place. Often he remembers his Father, moanes his sister, blames his brother, exclaymes on destinie, that had reserued him to such distresse. This night it was my hap to be placing weeles in sundrie places of the riuer, and from a small loope hole to whose barre I fastned my boate, I heard the wofull accents of his sorrowfull voyce, and at my returne certified Serena of the accident: who with me deuised, that next night I should take a number of canes, that being hollow and ioynted, I might from my mouth question him, and he to the hollow of my eare returne answere. By which meanes being ascertained it was hee, I furnisht me with a long ladder of roapes, and engines to loosen the stone for his escape, which the third night wee effected. I suppose you thinke there was some ioy when hys sister and he met: three daies he there continued couertly, intending to heare the vulgar report about his absence, all which time hardly serud them for conference. We left Celinus mortally wounded in the Wood: whom olde Hylenus (as hee was walking to gather hearbes) found: who powring balme into his wounds and precious wine into his mouth, began a little to returne red blood to his ashie-coloured cheekes, and some weake moouing to his benumbed limmes. At length he opened the heauie windowes of his dimmed eyes, and staring Hylenus in the face, with a feeble voyce thus questiond him: O what art thou that recalst from death, the sonne of all mischaunce and miserie? Why should thy age be pittifull to my yong yeares, that haue to kingly age been cruell, and on Princely youth shewed no compassion? Hylenus better marking this discoloured man, knew him at these words to bee celinus : wherewith abundance of teares dewed his siluer hair, and true compassion toucht his princely heart: indeuoring both to recure him, and knowe what accident had brought him into that place and plight? celinus as he was lead to the Hermitage, vttered the conspiracie betweene Rhegius and Dolon , referring his owne wretchednesse till hee were more refresht. As soone as Hylenus had dressed celinus wounds, and giuen him precious restoratiues, with what speed he might hee went to the Court, and to the Queene vttred the whole conspiracie of Rhegius . Who obseruing his importunate loue, the Sauages assailment, the absence of Aemilius , and withall that next day she was inuited to hir vnkles Castle, called a Counsell, before whom the Hermit againe opened the whole plot: whereat Rhegius confounded, confessed the fault. The Castle was sercht, but Aemilius could not be found: wherupon Rhegius & Dolon wer condemned of traitrous conspiracie & murder, the third day following appointed for their execution. Aemilius hearing of this tooke Rhodope , my master, and my proper selfe with him, appointing to bee at Court against the day of execution. Hylenus the daye before had brought thether his reconciled Sonne, who opened before the Queene and States Rhegius vnwillingnes, and Dolons often tempting him: yet nothing
