 Sound and Ryme, can challenge no inclusion of the soule, without diuine inuention, iudgement & disposition; no more can the soule expect Eternitie on earth without such eternall writing. And to cast this with our vanities at our backs, it to beare the liues of beasts in our bosomes: in which base portage is euer borne contempt of fame, honor and loue of the best: which neuer hath accompanied any humaine, or lesse then barbarous condition. To you then (most abundant President of true Noblesse) in whose manifest actions all these sacred obiects are diuinely pursude, I most humblie and affectionatlie consecrate this President of all learning, vertue, valour, honor & societie: who (with his owne soule) hath eternizde Armies of Kings & Princes: whose imperiall Muse, the great Monarch of the world, would say, effected more of his Conquests, then his vniuersall power. And therefore at Achilles toombe (with most holy impression of fame, and the zeale of eternitie) pronouncst him most happie, to haue so firme an Eternizer as Homere. Most true Achilles (whom by sacred prophecie Homere did but prefigure in his admirable obiect) and in whose vnmatched vertues shyne the dignities of the soule, and the whole excellence of royall humanitie. Let not the Pessant- common polities of the world, that count all things seruile and simple: that pamper not their own priuate sensualities, burying quick in their filthie sepulchres of earth, the whole bodies and soules of honor, vertue and pietie: stirre your diuine temper from perseuerance in godlike pursute of Eternitie. We must assure our selues; that the soule hath vse, comfort, and benifite in her dissolution and second being of the fame, loue and example shee proposed here, since shee hath generall combination with blessed Eternitie: and fame, loue, and example being all eternall. Now if eternity be so victorious and triumphant a Goddesse, that with her adamantine foote, shee treades vppon scepters, riches, sences, sensualities, and all the safron-guilded pompe of ignorant braueries, onely knowledge hauing the assentfull spirite to treade vpon that foote, and be lifted to the height and sweetenes of her bosome: what place with the greatest, doth an eternizer merite? The foote and the backe parts? how to be accounted? according to his vnfashionable habite of pouertie, that like the poisoned mists of thawing mucpits smokes from the horded treasure of soulelesse goldwormes?. If the crowne of humanitie be the soule, and the soule an intellectual beam of God? The essence of her substance being intellection and intellection or vnderstanding the strength and eminence of her faculties?. The differencing of men in excellencie must be directed onelie by their proportions of true knowledge. Homericall writing then being the natiue deduction, image and true heire of true knowledge must needes in desert inherite his fathers dignitie. Helpe then renown'de Achilles , to preferre and defend your graue and blamelesse Prophet of Phebus from the doting and vitious furie of the two Atrides : Arrogancie,  & Detraction: be dreadlesse bulwarkes to bashfull and fainting vertue, against all those, whose faces Barbarisme and Fortune, haue congealde with standing Lakes of impudencie; who being damd vp with their muddie ignorance retaine no feeling of that, to which al their sences are dutifully consecrate: against our fiue witted censors, through whose braines all thinges exact and refinde, run to the earth in heapes: when nothing remaines but stones and vnseruiceable rubbish. And gratulate in english extraction with free and honorable encouragement, this poore assaye of Poesies greeke Nectar : which I durst not more liberally powre out, for feare of vulgar prophanation: if that diuine sweetenes and nourishment it hath wrought in diuinest tempers, should for want of pallat and constitution in others, want his due attribution. My hope of excuse therefore may be worthilie grounded, since this penurie being effected with such store of labor,  & so much quintessence to be drawne from so little a proiect: it will aske as much iudgement to peruse worthily, as whole volumes of more peruiall inuentions. Besides this enforced breach of the commandement, to liue without care of to morrow, (which euer carries his confounded punishment with it, distracts inuention necessarie euen in translation) interrupts the industry of conceipt, and the discourse of the soule, and then the too true consideration, that whatsoeuer is laborde in this kinde is esteemde but idlenes and vanitie: though of such sacred importance, that all wholesome lawes, and constitutions, haue heretofore beene exhalde, and the conceipte, direction, and highest wing of most graue soules, haue taken strength and inspiration from it: This I say (most excellent Earle) could not as yet admit more english to this most excellent Poet and Philosopher: the flood and variety of my natiue language, as it were with dumbnes feuered in my vnhappie bosome: and euery comfort that might dissolue, and encourage it, vtterlie bereft me, your honord countenance yet and vouchsafte reacknowledgement of one so vnworthy as my selfe (being the great obiects of al my labors in their first dedication) shal draw on the rest. And thus wishing for the worthy expence of my future life to follow by al oportunitie your honord attempts & admirde disposition, I doubt not my zeale to the truth of your rare vertues wil enable me (inferior to none) to turne my paper to Christall, from whence no time shall race the engrauen figures of your graces. In the meane time if your Lordship descend to acceptation of these few disordred Iliades, I shal recompence their defects in their next edition. Nor can it be reputed an vnworthy incitement, to propose the true image of all vertues and humaine gouernement; (euen in the hart of this tumultuous season) to your other serious affaires: especially since it contaynes the true portraite of ancient stratagems and disciplines of war; wherein it wilbe worthie little lesse then admiration of your apprehensiue iudgement: to note in many thinges the affinitie they haue with your present complementes of field: the orations, counsailes, attempts and exploits not to be exceeded by the freshest brains of this hote-spirited time; the horror of arms endlesly thudering: piety, iustice, valour, and royaltie, eternally shining, in his soule-infused verse. To which (honorably pardoning this tedious induction) turne and heare your diuine Homer , (according to Spondanus attraction) magnific e canentem . By him that first, and euer freely consecrates his whole faculties to the honor of your princelie vertues. George Chapman. I Suppose you to be no meare reader, since you intend to reade  Homer: and therefore wish I may walke free from their common obiections, that can onelie reade. When my disorder is seene, that fower bookes are skipped (as a man would say) and yet the Poem continued according to the Greeke alphabet: viz. that for Gamma which is Eta: & that for Delta which is Theta & c then comes my knowne condemnation more greeuously then charitie would wish: especially with those that hauing no eyes to peruse and iudge of the translation, and whatsoeuer the maine matter deserues, will be glad to shew, they see something, in finding fault with that forme; and peraduenture finde their queasie stomackes turnde at whatsoeuer is merited in the much laborde worke. But to him that is more then a reader, I write: and so consequentlie to him that will disdaine those easie obiections, which euery speller may put together. The worth of a skilfull and worthy translator, is to obserue the sentences, figures, and formes of speech, proposed in his author: his true sence and height, and to adorne them with figures and formes of oration fitted to the originall, in the same tongue to which they are translated: and these things I would gladlie haue made the questions of whatsoeuer my labors haue deserued: not slighted with the slight disorder of some bookes: which if I can put in as fit place hereafter without checke to your due vnderstanding and course of the Poet, then is their easie obiection answerde that I expect, wilbe drounde in the fome of their eager and emptie spleanes. For likelyhood of which habilitie; I haue good authoritie that the bookes were not set together by Homer himselfe: Licurgus first bringing them out of Ionia in
