 In conclusion, wheras in these bookes, I make often mention of my Comentaries vpon Persius, thou shalt vnderstad, that I haue had the ready together with a most easie Paraphrase in English and Latine to be printed aboue a tweluemoneth agoe, but for certain respects, I caused the to be closed in a case of delay & reiourneied, till I find better leasure to put the forth. For euen thus & thus must we take opportunity for ye publishing of our labours, howsoeuer they may chauce to please the curious sort but so and so . If I could promise my selfe kind  & gracious acceptace, I would promise our age the like Comentaries vpon a Satyrist of the like vaine, euen the learned luuenal , thereby to stirre vp other men, \--- --- quos equus amauit Iuppiter, aut arden's euexit ad ethera virtus to giue light to his gloomie and hidden excellency. In the meane time view ouer this Golden-groue seriously, and, if thou reapest any good thereby, glorifie the great Lord of Hierarchies, who for thy sake gaue mee grace to frame it. Farewell. Thine in the Lord W. V. Whether Stageplayes ought to be suffred in a Commonwealth? Chapt. 51\. Stageplaies fraught altogether with scurrilities and knauish pastimes, are intolerable in a wel gouerned commonwealth. And chiefly for six reasons. First,  1 all Stageplayes were dedicated vnto Bacchus the drunken God of the Heathen, and therefore damnable. Secondly,  2 they were forbidden by Christian parliaments . Thirdly, men spend their flourishing time ingloriously and without credit, in cotemplating of plaies. All other things being spent may be recouered againe, but time is like vnto the latter wheele of a coach, that followeth after the former, and yet can neuer attayne equally vnto it. Fourthly,  3 no foolish and idle talking, nor iesting should be once named amongst vs. Fiftly, stageplaies are nothing els, but pompes and showes, in which there is a declining fro our beleefe. For what is the promise of Christians at their Baptisme? namely, to renounce the Diuell and all his workes, pompes, and vanities. Sixtly,  4 Stageplayes are the very mockery of the word of God, and the toyes of our life . For while we be at the stage, wee are rauished with the loue thereof, according to the wise mans wordes: It is a pastime for a foole to do wickedly ; and  5 so in laughing at filthy things, we sinne. Of Grammar. Chap. 39\. Grammar is an Art that consisteth in speaking & enditing truly. It had the beginning, of noting what is more fit & vnfit in comunication; which thing men imitating in their speech, in processe of time inueted this Art. Although before Adams fall from Paradise, learning was natural, yet neuerthelesse no man can now of himselfe come to the knowledge of it, without practize, exercise, and other mens inuention. Charondas the lawgiuer extolled Grammar aboue all other Artes: and that iustly, for  6 by meanes of it the chiefest things in the world are written; as lawes, constitutions, willes, and testaments, and such like , as concerne mans life. Whereby we see that  7 Grammar is many wayes profitable to mans life. But alas, the vse thereof is in these dayes not perfectly knowen. Albeit we haue many that profes it, yet for al that, few there be that vnderstand it aright. The reason is, because nowadayes they thinke, that whosoeuer can prattle in Latine, make verses, or patch a declamation, is a substanciall Grammarian (or, as they terme him, an Humanitian) which, God wot, they know not what it meanes. For a  8 Gramarian is he, that can speake the vsuall tongues elegantly, and expoud the mysteries of Poets with their tropes and figures , and that hath some smack in Philosophy, because sundry places in Poets are quoted out of the quintessece of the Mathematikes. Of Logick. Chap. 40\. Like as they, that digge for metals, do strictly and diligently search the veines of the earth, and by earnest noting the nature thereof, attaine at last to the perfect knowledge of the mine: so they, that will enioy learning, aswell for the common good, as for their owne profit, must narrowly study this Art of Logike,  9 which is conuersant with vs in our daily conferences . And no doubt but hauing studied it well, they shall find it expedient three maner of wayes.  10 First, for exercise. Secondly, for disputations. And thirdly, for the knowledge of Philosophy . But thou wilt say, it is obscure, vnpleasant, and therefore in no wise profitable. Oh how weake is the connexion of this argument! Admit that it is at first rough and irksome: yet notwithstanding  11 whe thou shalt enter farther into it, an insatiable desire of learning it, foorthwith will cause thee to embrace it . For without doubt  12 God himselfe reuealed the knowledge of Logike vnto vs. And if we neglect this worthy and magnificent gift of his, he will also for our ingratitude withdraw not onely this Art, but all other Artes whatsoeuer from vs: though wee haue both wit and learning together, yet shall they litle auayle without Logicke. What maketh youths to speake so boldly  & roundly? Logike. What maketh atturneyes to go so fast away with their words and pursuites? Logick. In al Artes therefore Logick is praise worthy. Logick is defined to be an Art, that knitteth well together all discourses formed by speeches, and all positions in them, according as they depend one vpon another, & are grounded vpon good reason. And eue as gold by seuen fires is tried and purified: so in like maner  13 the truth in despight of errours is by logicall disputations found out , and restored to her former liberty. For  14 the end of Logick is to discerne in philosophy the truth from the false; as if a man should say, knowledge is the end of it . The duties of it are foure; namely, to define, to deuide, to compose true arguments, and to dissolue them that be false. The partes of Logick are two, to wit,  15 The first intentions, and 16 the second intentions . Howbeit for all this, the faigned Vtopians are reported  17 neuer to have been able to find out the second intentions: by reason that none of them all could see man himselfe in common, as they terme him, though he bee, as some know, bigger then euer was any Gyant, and pointed vnto vs euen with our finger . But I leaue the Vtopians to their nullibies. Of Rhetoricke, and the abuse thereof. Chap. 41\. Rhetorick is an Art, that teacheth a man to speake finely, smoothly, and eloquently. And whereas Logick formeth speech as it were a bare picture,  & hauing nothing but simple draughts, which serue to furnish it in respect of ech part and lineament thereof:  18 Rhetorick beyng the offspring of Logick shapeth it not onely as a picture well varnished, but also enriched and polished with glorious fields and medowes, and such like glozing shewes, that it may become faire to the eye,  & pleasant to the eare. Being well applied,  19 there is nothing so sacred to perswade as it . But nowadaies it is not much profitable, especially to preachers. For although Rhetorical speeches do delight their auditory; yet notwithstading, they make not much for ye soules health.  20 Simple & material speeches are best among frieds . Preachers therfore must labour to speak & vtter that, which the hearers vnderstand, & not go about the bush with their filing phrases. They must not (I say) come with excellency of wordes to show the testimony of God vnto the people. 21 Neyther must their preaching consist in the enticing speech of mans wisedome, but in the plaine euidence of the spirit and of power  . Moses, when God commaunded him to go downe to the Israelites, would have excused himselfe, saying,  22 O my Lord, I am not eloquent, neyther at any time haue beene: but I am slow of speech and slow of tongue. Then the Lord said vnto him, who hath giuen the mouth to man? or who hath made the dumme, or the deafe, or him th ae seeth, or the blind? haue not I the Lord? Therefore go now, and I will bee with thy mouth, and will teach thee, what thou shalt say . Caluine that zealous Preacher had, as many men know, an impediment in his speach, and in his sermons neuer vsed any painted or rhetoricall termes. What shall I write of our common lawyers, who with their glozing speeches do as it were lay an ambush for iustice, and  23 with their hired tongues think it not vnhonest to defend the guilty , and to patronize vnlawfull pleas? Why will not they imitate Anacharsis the Philosopher, who when the scholers of Athens laughed him to scorne, by reason hee could not pronounce Greeke distinctly, and eloquently, answered them, that a speach was not to bee termed bad, as long as it contayned good counsels, and as long as honest deeds did follow after his words? Constantine the Emperour deserueth great praise, in that  24 hee tooke away the forme of making deceitfull & fine phrazed libels ? In like sort we read, that  25 the elegant solemnities of stipulations, and such like trifling words were laid aside . In briefe, it was decreed among the Areopagites in Athes, that no Orator should vse any proheme or forespeech, and digression, nor perswade them eyther to mercy or to enuy. Of Poetry, and of the excellency thereof. Chap. 42\. When  26 the children of Isr aeel were enthralled in the land of bondage : then GOD, who is alway the helper of the friendlesse, raised vp Moses his seruaunt, made him ruler of his distressed people, and deliuered them with a strong & outstretched arme fro their miserable captiuity. Whereupon  27 Moses framed a song of thankesgiuing vnto the Lord in verse , which I take to be the most auncient of all. So that it is certaine, and (as they say) able to be felt with hands, that Poetry came first by inspiration from GOD. Likewise 28 Debora sung a Psalme of victory in meetre . Dauid also  & the Prophets were Poets. If wee prie into the liues of the heathen, we shall find that Poetrie was the chiefest cause of their ciulity. Whe  29 before they remained scattered lawlesse, and barbarous, like vnto sauage beasts , Amphion and Orpheus two Poets of the first ages assembled these rude nations, and  30 exhorted them to listen their eare vnto their wholesome counsels, and to lead their liues well and orderly . And as these two Poets, and Linus before them reclaimed the wildest sort of men: so by all likelihood mo Poets did the same in other places. Further, Poets were the first, that obserued the secrete operations of nature, and especially the celestial courses, by reason of the perpetuall motion of the heauens, searching after the first mouer, and from thence proceeding by degrees to consider of the substaunces separate and abstract. They were the first, that offred oblations, sacrifices, and praiers. They liued chast, and by their exceeding continence came to receyue visions and prophesies. So likewise  31 Samuel & the Prophets were named Seers. Now sithence Poetry is so sanctified, it will not bee amisse, if I anatomize her parts, and compare her with other faculties: which done, I doubt not but she wil deserue a more fauourable censure euen of the Momistes themselues. The Prince of Philosophers writeth, that  32 Rhetorick had her first beginning from Poetry . The chiefe of the late Philosophers doubted not to proue, that  33 Poetry was part of Logick, because it is wholy occupied in deliuering the vse of examples: I do not meane that kind of example, which is vsed in common conferences: but I meane the maners, affections, and actions of men which are brought as examples eyther to be imitated or shunned of the spectatours , or readers. In like maner, Poetry is more philosophicall and serious then history, because Poetry medleth with the generall consideration of all things: wheras history treateth onely of the particular. And not onely history, but also Philosophy, Law, and Phisicke are subiect to Poetry, for whatsoeuer nature or policy, case or medicine they rehearse, that may  þ Poet, if he please, with his forme or imitation make his owne. But, mee thinks, I see a rout of criticall Pharisees comming towards mee, and discharging whole volees of cannon shot against my breast, and exclayming without reason, that I falsely erre, for prouing Poetry to bee deriued from Moses. The Gentiles (say they) were the first founders of Poetry, and therefore it ought to be reiected. Well do I deny this argument, demaunding of the, whether philosophy be bad, because the Painims brought the knowlege thereof to light? whether Greeke letters be euill, because Cadmus inuented the? whether the bookes of Resolution bee blameworthy, for that R. P. a fugitiue papist wrote the? O mostrous absurdity! What? wil they with the foolish Donatists vtterly refuse the Sacraments, because the priests are vicious, that administer them? Or wil they with the Anabaptists forbid alsuites & going to law, because the lawyers, that comence the, are corrupt? The farewell quietnesse, farewel money, yea, farewell religion, & all: for each of them was, is, & will be abused for euermore. Othersome there be, that judge poetry vnlawfull, for that they themselues are not capable thereof. And againe there be some, that meane to kil the lion with a straw, and condemne Poetry for the fables that are contained therein. But if I should dash these enuious Sycophats with a blurre of inke for euery offence, which they commit against the truth, they would, I feare me, become blacker then Aethiopian Negroes. As for Poetical Fabies and Parables what els should I retort, but that, which one of the ancient Fathers hath written on their behalfe? to wit,  34 Poets do speake that which is most true, and by their mysticall fables do decipher profound matters . After which maner Dauid in his Psalmes saith,  35 Thou hast brought forth a vine out of Egypt: thou hast cast out the heathen, and planted it . What is vnderstood by this vine,  & the plating thereof, but the childre of Israel, whom God by his Diuine prouidence brought out of Egypt, & gaue the inheritance in the land of Chanaan? likewise we read of the steward, of the prodigall child, & such like in the new Testament. Whe Perseus, Dedalus, & Bellerophon are faigned to fly: what els is meant by their flying, but their speedy iourneying? what doth the trasformatio of Halcione into a bird signifie? namely, that shee, after the death of her husband Ceix, mourned & sorowed like vnto that same bird. When Lycaon is reported to be metamorphozed into a woolfe: what other sence is vnderstood by the wolfe, then that this king was a tyrant & a rauenous theefe? By the painful trauel of Vlisses is portrayed the liuely picture of mans miseries. Icarus had winges, and therewith mounted vp into the aire: but so soone as the sunne had melted his waxen wings, he fell downe into a riuer, and was drowned. Whereby is included that no man must rashly reach aboue his pitch. If men would speake & inueigh against niggards, what better instance ca they make, then in Danae, Tantalus, and Midas? To blaze prodigality, and such as were giue to pleasures, the Poets painted Acteon turned into a Hart, who was so much delighted in hunting, that in the end he was eaten up of his dogs; that is, he spent all his goods in feeding of hounds. For an exaple of whoredome they inferre Circe, who was so beautifull, that she rauished and enchaunted all such as beheld her. And so wee must iudge of the rest. Iupiter betokeneth the highest God: Phoebus the Sunne: Mars warre: Themis law: Minerua learning: Venus loue: Vulcan fire: Ceres corne: Bacchus wine: Neptune the sea: The Nymphes signifie riuers: and by destiny is declared the ineuitable will of God. There is no faculty of any account, but hath hard & obscure significations; as for example, naturall philosophy conprehendeth the first matter and the first mouer. Alchymy cotaineth dark words: as Saturne signifieth lead: Mercury quicksiluer: Sol gold: Luna siluer: Venus copper: Iupiter tinne: Mars iron; with diuers words of Art a hudred times more mysticall then these. I wil passe ouer the elixers, fixations, and such like names of the Chymists. Thus (gentle Reader) mayst thou see, that euery Science hath other significations, then the plaine names do declare. Why then wil Dunces vpbraid Poets with their intricated Fables, which none but Oedipus can interpret? Only sonnes of Art, to whome God hath imparted his blessing, must attaine to the right knowlege of the Muses. Hearken what another saith,  36 The faigned examples of the Poets are fit and conuenient for the amendement of maners . To bee short, I am verily of this opinion, that  37 all Poets are sworne enemies to lies, and do vtterly detest falsehood: and among the rest Homer was the searcher and louer of truth and verity . Sundry times haue I beene conuersant with such, as blasphemed Poetry, by calling it mincing and lying Poetry. But it is no maruel, that they thus deride Poetry, sith they sticke not in this outworne age to abuse the ministers of GOD, by terming them bookish fellowes and Puritanes, they themselues not knowing what they meane. What more shall I write? Poets at all times haue beene preferred before all Artists,  & highly esteemed of all Princes. Euripides was entertained of Amintas king of Macedon. Sophocles together with Pericles was costituted gouernour of Athens. Antimenides the Poet was Generall of an army. Likewise Tyrtaeus the Poet being lame on one legge, was by the oracle of Apollo chosen chieftaine of the Lacedemonians, & got the victory ouer his enemies. Lysander king of Lacedemon, in reward of a few verses, gaue vnto the Poet Antiochus his hat full of siluer. The Sicilians hauing ouercome the Athenians, spared many of them for Euripides his sake. And if they heard any verses like vnto his, they would haue the by heart, and one would present them to another with great ioy.  38 Alexander the great left his Tutour liuing Aristotle behind him, but tooke the workes of dead Homer with him ,  & euery night he caused them to be laid vnder his pillow. And not only Homer was thus honoured, but also for his sake all other meane Poets, insomuch as Cherilus a simple Poet had for euery good verse, which he composed, a Philip noble of gold, amounting to the value of an Angel English. Theocritus the Poet was in estimation with Ptolome king of Egypt, and with Queene Berenice his wife. Ennius was highly fauoured by that noble warriour Scipio: Virgil and Horace were aduaunced by Augustus the Emperour. To come neerer our owne time, Hiernus an excellent Poet, and yet of base linage, when Frotho K. of Denmark died without issue, and the Peeres of the realme had determined him to succeed, that best could honour the dead King: among the rest, hee knowing that Poetrie was the onely meanes to reuiue the memorial of the dead, made an Epitaph, which publikely repeated, hee was by generall consent elected King. Ieffery Chaucer, the English Poet, was in great account with King Richard the second, who gaue him in reward of his Poems, the Manour of Newelme in Oxford Shire. Neither will I passe ouer with silence, the fauor of the French Queene Anne, wife to Lewis the twelfe of France, extended to Poets. This Queen passing on a time from her lodging towards the Kings side, saw in a gallerie Allen Chartier a learned Poet, leaning on a tables end fast asleepe, which this Princesse espying, shee stouped downe to kisse him, vttering these words in all their hearings: Wee may not of Princely courtesie passe by, and not honour with our kisse the mouth, from whence so many golden poems haue issued. Frauncis the first, French King in the yeere of our Lord 1532. made those famous Poets, Dampetrus and Macrinus, of his priuie Counsell. King Henrie the eight, her maiesties Father, for a few Psalmes of Dauid turned into English meeter by Sternhold, made him Groome of his priuie chamber, and rewarded him with many great gifts besides. Moreouer, hee made Sir Thomas Moore Lord Chauncelour of this Realme, whose Poeticall works are as yet in great regard. Queene Marie for an Epithalamy composed by Verzoza a Spanish Poet, at her marriage with King Philip in Winchester, gaue him during his life two hundred crowns pension. Her Maiestie that now is, made Doctour Haddon being a Poet, master of the Requests. In former times, Princes themselues were not ashamed to studie Poetrie. As for example, Iulius Cesar was a very good Poet. Augustus likewise was a Poet, as by his edict touching Virgils bookes appeareth. Euax king of Arabia wrote a booke of pretious stones in verse. Cornelius Gallus treasurer of Egypt, was a singular good Poet. Neither is our owne age altogether to bee dispraysed. For the old Earle of Surrey composed bookes in verse. Sir Philip Sydney excelled all our English Poets, in rarenesse of stile and matter. King Iames the sixt of Scotland, that now raigneth, is a notable Poet, and daily setteth out most learned Poems, to the admiration of all his subiects. Gladly I could goe forward in this subiect, which in my stripling yeeres pleased mee beyond all others, were it not I delight to bee briefe: and that Sir Philip Sydney hath so sufficietly defended it in his Apologie of Poetrie; that if I should proceede further in the commendation thereof, whatsoeuer I write would bee eclipsed with the glorie of his golden eloquence. Wherefore I stay my selfe in this place, earnestly beseeching all Gentlemen, of what qualitie soeuer they bee, to aduaunce Poetrie, or at least to admire it, and not to bee so hastie shamefully to abuse that, which they may honestly and lawfully obtaine. The reading of Catullus, Propertius, Ouids loues, and the lasciuious rimes of our English Poets, doe discredite the Common-wealth, and are the chiefe occasions of corruptions, & the spurres of lecherie: therefore Poetrie is blameworthie. 39 In many things not the vse, but the abuse of him that vseth them, must bee blamed. The fault is not in the Art of Poetrie, but rather in the men that abuse it. Poets themselues may bee traitous and felons, and yet Poetrie honest and vnattainted. Take away the abuse, which is meerely accidental, and let the substance of Poetrie stand still. Euerie thing that bringeth pleasure, may bring displeasure.  40 Nothing yeeldes profit, but the same may yeeld disprofit. What is more profitable then fire? yet not withstanding wee may abuse fire, and burne houses, and men in their beds.  41 Phisicke is most commodious for mankind, yet wee may abuse it, by administring of poysoned potions. To end this solution, I conclude, that many of our English rimers and ballet-makers deserue for their baudy sonnets, and amorous allurements, to bee banished, or seuerely punished: and that Poetrie it selfe ought to bee honoured and made much of, as a precious Iewell, and a diuine gift. 
