 bodily health, and eternall happinesse. gleames shine good will,  & whose glory is made splendent with loyall loues onely grace. Sometime when Eagles haue tried their yong Birds with the Sun- beames, they wil direct their vndazeled eyes to gaze at the bright gleames of Poets, a lesse starre; whose twinkeling sparkelings may encrease their disports. And (generous hearts) if your eyes that haue viewd the glorious Sun- shine of Artes graces, deigne (after the natures of those mightie and magnanimous byrds) to beholde the dimme twinckeling of this vnperfect Load- starre; you shall not only hereafter giue life to my labors, but by your gentle acceptance, make me bold to aduenture the archtecture of some worthier worke. The subiect, which serues for the Zodiack to this wandring Starre (which cotinues the yeerly course of the Day-starre, through the twelue Astronomicall signes) is but meane; and therfore deserues no costly colours to make it seeme splendent: If the it please any, so much (I account it the better) reckon it you estimable, by how much it can displease none. It may be some Zoylist will barke (as doo Wolues against the Moone) following against it the humorous phrase of the base backbiter (all whose byrdes seeming to himselfe Swannes, and other winged foules but night Crowes) vomits forth to his owne shame, what hee supposeth should disgrace others credits: and wanting teeth (as dooth the infectious Serpent Porphyrius ) not being able to bite, is by his suscepted enuious conceit (ingendred of the supposition of his owne singularitie (himselfe mostly martyred. And what maisterdome is it to nip blossomes in their first spring? Can yoong byrdes flie till they proue and trie to plie their winges? Better kill Flies with a flap, than be idle; greater credit, to play small game with his owne charge, than great summes at a cast, to others cost; and more commendable, to accomplish plaine labors, than to be reckoned mongst his acquaintauce and friends for a sluggish loyterer. These weake reasons (Gentlemen) builded on a good ground, may not be denide to goe for currant, towards the free passe of this my pilgrim-like Starre, through the clymate of your acceptable eies: whose wandring course when you beholde, if you like it, loue it; if dislike it, I pray, leaue it; It hath tane arising by Astronomicall computation, at the first beginning of the gay Springtide, the 9. of March last past, in the 1599. yeare of the worldes redemption (noted by the vertue of an Easterne Starre to three Sages) and from the worldes first creation, and the dayes of olde Adam , 5562. when the Sunne tooke his direct entrance (following his accustomed progresse) towards the first minute of Aries: which signe Astronomers about that tide tearme Equinoctiall, because then (when the Sunne enters therein) the dayes which in length were before shorter than the nightes, become with them checke-mate in equall Longitude. The naturall heate  & moisture of which pleasant time, makes euery creature (as well vnreasonable as reasonable) to receiue comfort; and in their kinde, to encrease and multiply. When the chaunting birds eccho in the woods and fields, many a delectable kerelie; when the earth araide in her pride, and deckt with diuers colours, yeelds admiratio to those, that cotemplate on natures ornaments; which farre surpasse the reach of heauen- searching Art: And when, what pleasure may be obtained in Gardens (dyapred with sundry sorts of flourishing Roses and Flowers) or what solace, to see the springing meades and pastorall Countries; and what health may bee had by following Phisicke rules; is both sought and practised. The worst is, that the coniunction then of Iupiter and Saturne (noting a corruptnesse of the aire) may bee coniectured that many shall bee tormented with a chollericke  & melancholie frenzie; which disease if it chance to breed enmitie mongst the friends of mutuall Louers, may hap to increase their grieuous sorrowes. Thus much I thought most conuenient to haue noted, as a Preludium to the originall and first arising of this Load-starre, whose lustres (Gentles) I doubt not, but your kinde aspects beholding, will indeuour to make it seeme resplendent and rarely bountifull. Yours well-wishing, Rob. Kittowe . At what time (as the Historicall Records of auncient Anualls make mention) the King of Tunis , through the attempting brauados of some insulting Rebels, held the holde of his royall seate in hazard, as daily awaiting his downe-fall, drawne through ciuil warres, and warlike mutinies: There liued in Palermo , the chiefe Citie of Scicilia , two most renowned Families, by whose speedy helpes and strong supportes, both for men and Munition, prouided and sent forth both by sea  & land, the distressed Kings enemies were mightily discomfited, and farre discarded from his territories of Tunis , and he himselfe quietly repossessed his right: to the no smal comfort of the rebellious foe. For the Scicilian suffrages were so copious, and so correspondent to the Kings petition, wholy passionate for want of peace, as that the Rebels being conuinced and vtterly subiected, were so scattered here and there with the suddaine assault of flie, flie, as that some ranne to the matchlesse mountaines, and there wrought on themselues ruthfull massacres: Others sought out shelters in the wilde Forrests, and there for want of foode, and surprized with feare of wilde beastes, remained in the iawes of dreadful death: Others as extrauagant vagabods exiled themselues from their natiue homes into forraign lands: and fearing their owne Country would proue too hot for their rebellious hearts: Others became Gally-slaues, Rouers and Pyrates at sea, ventering the meane of their best liues, twixt Scilla & rauenous Charibdis : fewe submitting to their Liege, for feare of the penaltie of lawe: yet fewe or none through the iust decree of the dooming heauens escaping punishment. This inestimable benefite by the two Scicilian Nobles bestowed on this peace- minding King, wrought no small league of friendship and friendly amitie, both twixt Tunis and Scicilia : so farre forth, that whatsoeuer enemy seem'd repugnant to the one, was accounted rebellious to the other: both esteeming themselues most fortunate, that euer the tantaras of warres so raigned, as to make their perdurable and plighted peace on both parties so worthily royaliz'd mongst other nations, and their neighbour Countries. The two famous, honourable and renowned Scicilian Families, that were with all prosperities so maiestically fortified, were Seigniour Iacomin Pierro , and Don Alexander Bartolo ; whom Nature and Fortune seeking to inrich in the highest measure with prodigall gifts, straind themselues so far, as that Fortune could bestow no more wealth, for they raignd haile-copemates with kings; nor Nature any more worth, for that two sweete ofsprings brought to both parties more pleasure, than do the massie heapes of golden wealth comfort vnto the couetous. Seignior Pierra had a sonne, and Don Bartolo a daughter, the one as liuely, as the other was louely; both adornd and beautified with all exquisite perfections both of body & mind. And heere (Gentles) would I wil you to haue some worthie Pharus erected, for the better direction of your longing spirites, to viewe the variable motion of this wandring Loade-starre: eying whose course, your eyes wil be carried beyond ken of some credulitie: your eares be replenished with the diuers sounds of material varietie; and your hearts (I hope) be procurde to yeeld such materiall collusions some part of gratefull applauditie. On a winters night, when the Sunne had trauerst in the clymate of the West, and was instantly entering into Aquarius ; when brumall frosts and boystrous showres were most predominant, and men vse to expell the congealing colde with comfortable fires; About that season of the yeare, both these Families according to their high degrees, with diuers other Gentlemen and gallant dames of Palermo in their companies, attended on likewise by the cunningest Musitians, went to one Don Andrea Alizandras house to reuell: Where after their Maskes and Mummeries were shewed, their measures with commendation traced, and the worthy Reuellers were reuealed, they fell to banquettings, and heauing Bacchus bowles. None seeming melancholy, but all merry, the Musitians to grace their myrth the more, to the concordance of diuers siymphonying Instruments, sounded with harmonying voyces this Sonnet. Haue fram'd a Summum Bonum , To raigne abundantly on Earth: But wise men (for their part) Approue a Summum Malum , Oppositely raigning without dearth. And why? Say I, The contrary? For where that Vertue holds some store, Vile Vice hath alwaies ten times more. We ioy, we sport, we play, We eate, we drinke, we merrie make: We sing all care away, In wealth we chiefest pleasure take. Yet see the Fee Of this follie; When that Death Stopps our breath, We must leaue all behinde: When we go Our riches fro, In them small solace we shall finde. Whats then Arts glose, that makes A Summum Bonum so To raigne on Earth imperfectly? But euen a Net, that takes Fondlings all in gripes of wo; For following Errour wilfully. And then, Let men With reason ken What tis to trust to wordly wealth? Which is soone lost through Fortunes stealth? Whats Beautie, but a Flowre? Whom sicknes or decrepit Age Do soone bereaue of power? 'Tis but lende cheerfull youth in gage. And they, like May, Both fresh and gay, Hold a grace In their face. Till Nature takes away (as tis true) Her owne due; Then looke they like to clodds of clay. Vita, bulla . The Musitians hauing sung this Morrall Sonnet concerning mortalitie, were commended of the most part, dispraised by none, how soeuer contrary it seemde to their pleasaunt disposes: For it serued for sawce, among their Cates that pampred their bodies, to sharpen their mindes. So that Don Andrea Alizandra chearing his honourable guests, thus began soberly to expostulate. Not without good cause now I perceiue did the Thracians accustome in their banquettings, to serue forth at the Table dead mens Sculles, to restraine their guests from gluttonous appetites: For sith all worldly commodities are so momentary, all pleasures so changeable, all estates so inconstant, what more excellent meane to attaine perfection can mortall men vse, than to meditate on their ende, and to remember death, as the Vltima linea rerum? No doubt (answered Signior Pierro ) but that the remembrance of our latest home, is a most heauenly and Angelicall contemplation: For the renowned Philip of famous Macedonia , would euery morning be admonished by his Page before his vprising, of his mortalitie. And Plato (surnamed the Diuine) would alway sleepe holding a Ball of Brasse in his hand, directly ouer a Bason, to the intent that with the fall thereof, he might be recald from sluggishnesse and drowsie sloth: vsed argumentall propositions, concerning the chiefe perficies of Summum Bonum or the chiefest good. Some, (as that first of all I may remember our present pastimes) laide downe many groundes, touching pleasure, feastings, carowses, and such like, and therein to be containde a Summum Bonum: For what greater felicitie (according to mans carnall reason) may be enioyed on earth, than to liue merrily voyd of care, and free from perturbations? We reade, that there were diuers festiualls celebrated and seriously obserued, with the common consent of whole Countries, by the Bacchinalls : Diuers games accustomed, as some ordained by Apollo , after the downfall of the huge Serpent Pithon , which were titled Pithonia ; And far haue the games of Olimpus bin bruted, where all commers spent the time in myrth, iollitie, and abundant cheare. All which considered, it mou'd the Sect of the Epicures to aduaunce worldly pleasure vnto the height of Summum Bonum . Whilst Pierro thus reasoned, there came a suddain messenger, that informed, how his sonne young Iacomin was taken in a suddaine traunce, and had lost both his speech & sence, euen ready to yeeld vp the ghoast. No sooner was that message done, but that newes was brought to Bartolo , that if he would euer behold his daughter Katherina liuing, he should hasten home, for that she was falne into a suddaine consumption, and euen worne to skin and bone, as if she had bene ouer-looked by some outragious monster. These sorrowfull tydings so amazed these Parents, that (as impatient as olde Priam , that sawe his children all lie gasping, and the Citie on fire) they began on both sides to be euen through outrage at their wittes ende: Lifting cries vp to the heauens, tearing their haires, and raging gainst the Destenies, that had so cruelly concluded the period of all their future hopes in so short a circuite: cutting off those braunches, by whose fruites they expected to liue after their olde barkes were withered. Don Andrea comforted them, the whole assembly intreated them, nought auailed; for their hearts burned with fire, and their mindes with feare, vntil their longing eies visited their distressed ofsprings: And so with paces as swift as their distempered feete could support, they hasted both to their seuerall homes. Don Andrea Alizandra considering this vnexpected chaunge, through so vnfortunate a chaunce, set downe his censure as a principle that Omnia humana mutabilia . But what (saith he) should I, that from my infancie haue bene attendant on the buckelings of couragious Mars , now seeme to muster in sentences vnder the correction of graue Minerua? Victa est fortuna ferendo . I haue indurde, and so haue ouercome: They are but Fortunes nouices, that cannot with patience oppugne any inconuenience; A death is due to nature, and the sooner that we die, the sooner are our debtts satisfied. Men may not be mortall, then would the creature aduance him beyond the Creator: As Prometheus would, attempting to steale the fire of eternall life from heauen: for which cause Iupiter adiudged him to be tyed at colde Caucasus , and there eternally to haue his limmes deuoured by a Uulture. Contentus sua sorte, beatior Policrate . I, I, a contented minde is all in all. Did we not sometime taste the sowre, we should not well perceiue the sweet: were we not now and then crost with misfortunes, we could not know what it were to be fortunate. Peace is the mother of securitie, and securitie the nurse of pouertie, and pouertie the author of infamie: for, nil habet infoelix, paupertas durius in se, quam quod ridiculos homines facit . And yet must we gratefully welcome all, that the supernall Gods do send to worke our triall: and happie, yea thrice happy is that man that so may be purified. Hauing thus contemplated with himselfe on the foresaid accidents, to driue off that encreasing melancholy passion, he tooke in hand his Lute, and thereon recorded this Dittie. Men gainst Gods once did warre, Which should haue preheminence: But the end of their iarre, Bred mans fall for his offence. Men ought not to fall at oddes, In any case with th'immortall Gods. Aspiring minde, brought Pha eton . To all extreames of wretchednes: The like endur'd Bellerophon , Through his audacious venterousnes. The one would gouerne Phoebus carres; The other mount vp to the starres. Rest content in your estates, Be they high, or be they lowe; Shun you shall then debates. That on mindes distempered growe. Still take heed by others fall, A minde content, surpasseth all. Contentus esto, & esto foelix . By this time were Pierro and Bartolo come home, and made eye-witnesses of their former supposed mishappes: Iaconim sawe his sonne shiuering as it were, surprized with a quartane feuer: Bartolo beheld his daughter shaking and quaking, as though she were set on by the falling sicknesse: Both of these patients made shews, gaue signes and tokens, to the amazement of all that were present in their bed-chambers: and so much the more, because they spake no word, but were alwaies silent. Some said, this miraculous maladie of these yoonglings, was bred by ill sight; some said, they were Planet strooken: some againe saide, they were straungely bewitched: Scinditur incertum studia in contraria vulgus, &c. euery one vttered diuersly what their mindes gaue them to excogitate. But the wofull parents (hauing on both sides visited and reuisited these miserable Orphanes) had the skilfullest Doctors sent for with all speed possible: all preseruatiues prouided, that had vertue cureable; leauing nothing vnsought, nor meanes vnmade, that might be deuised auaileable. Yet nought released them of their extreame traunces, nor mitigated their perillous maladies: Which encreased the sharper sorrowes of the parents, the griefe of their noble kindred, the vexatio of their friends, and the discomfort of all the people of Palermo; Sic variat Fortuna vices . You that haue seene a Merchant standing on the hatefull shore, beholding the Uessell which on the seas remaineth fraught with his whole venture, in hazard of sincking; and lifting his eyes to the heauens, crieth out, O Gods! I am vndone, vtterly vndone; In the like passion, or a more vehement, may you suppose all present to remaine, for these two distressed and diseased members. For if men take heauily common contrary casualties, as the husbandman receiuing an vnfruitfull haruest; the craftsman deceiued of his substance by beguilefull debters: the shepheard hauing hss flocks pestered, though the infection of some scabiosum pecus ; and such like disparaging inconueniences: how may it happen otherwise, but that fathers take tenne times more grieuously the losse of their onely children? vnlesse they had the incomprehensible Faith of the auncient Patriarch; that obeying his makers commaund, was content to sacrifice his onely sonne, of whom (he had tryple promise from his God) there should proceed so many renowned Tribes, and nations, multiplied in such number, as incomparabilitie shuld equal the innumerable starres of the resplendent heauens. Now generous Readers must my pen shew the cunning of a Painters Pencil; as this, with shadowes and colours of varietie, so that, with some proper deciphering speeches to portraie a reuiuing noueltie. The Destenies had not yet cancelled the date of those Louers dayes, nor Atropos knife was yet preparde, to cut the twist, wheron hung the tenure of their liues: The scars which both of their brests had receiued (as impression of wanton Cupids shafts) stucke so neare their tender hearts, as for a while (till the stintie sting and pricking wound thereof was delaied) their whole bodies in euery ioynt continued distemperate, and their hearts panting, and disconsolate. For the euening before that nights regiment, when both their Parents (as is before rehearsed) were feasting with Don Andrea Alizandra , these two prittie peates meeting eache other at their Fathers doore (for the two dwelling places, the beauteous building of that flourishing Citie, were ioynde hard the one with the other) attended on both sides with hansome hand- maides and propper Pages (for their yeares had not yet brought them to the state of man and woman, for he was then but a youth, and she but a girle, both of some twice fiue yeares of age, as faire a couple, as were the two beauties of the Goddes Sapho and Phao ,) where after gentle salutations imparted, according to theyr kinde dispositions (bestowed on them by bountifull Nature at their births) they accorded (taking with them so many of their young followers as they thought conuenient) to walke into a groaue, which stood on the Westerne side of the Citie: accounting such sheltring vallies farre more pleasaunt in the winters season, than are the plaine fields. What parley they had (walking on the way) it were tedious to recite: onely thus much would I wish you to note, that euery step of theirs, traced now towards that company, whose presence they in manner reiected, because as vnbidden guests they came into their company vnexpected. As they were walking by the groaues side, listning to the murmurings of a bubling brooke, Katherina espied a Uermin, that with greedie gaping mouth was pursuing his praie: which she shewing to Iacomin , (for her name was Katherina , and he was calde Iacomin after his Father) and hee perceiuing it to hasten the beast the swifter to take his footing (as the common manner is) cried, So, ho, ho: which was answered by the tatling Eccho , (as if in presence and despight of Katherina , she minded to court young Iacomin , as she had heretofore that scornefull yonker Narcissus ) with an other So, ho, ho: which Katherina hearing, moued with suddaine mirth, brake out into a loude ha, ha, ha: and the Eccho as it were with the same semblance of laughture, replied againe with Ha, ha, ha: Iacomin hearing Katherinas voyce so merrily doubled, rauisht with pleasant conceit to heare such a pratling, bad come hither: come hither said the Eccho . Which speech infusing into Katherinas minde an amorous motion, calde with high voice, Away, away: which was in like maner so shrilly resounded by the Eccho . Hauing soone wearied their winde-pipes with hard hallowings, they past forward to enter the groaue, where presently Aboron and his faire Aurelia , with their troupes of Fairies and Syluane Satyres, (hauing taken Cupid captiue, for that he counterfeyted a Faierie, to winne the beauteous Psiches ) were dauncing in ringed rounds, and some with low voices warbled this Roundelaie. Venus eied Adonis flowre, And espied Cupids Bower: Bower sweete, Bower faire, Uenus feete Then tracst there. And there sawe Psiches walking, Then with her fell a talking, Nymph (said she) Of sweete hue, Tell you me, Tell me true: Why in wyldie Woods, that grow, Doest accompanie Bucke and Doe? If thou be of Dianas traine, Why alone here doest remaine? Psiches sad, Gan to say, How she had A Louer gay, Cupid fine, Cupid faire, That as mine Did repaire: But (which most did me spight) I beheld him nere with sight. Kisse I did Prittie lips, That were hid In eclipse Feele I might Daintie face, Which my sight Nere would grace. But when I would him see, In the night, fled from mee. Telst me so? Venus saide And frownd tho) Th'art the maide, On whose shrine Arcadia (Scorning mine And Cypria ) Haue oblations offred And vs wrongs haue proffred. And yet (dame) Not content To winne fame, Through euent, But must wedde Venus sonne, To thy bedde? As th'ast donne: Yet not pleasd (voyd of grace) Must presume to see his face? Uenus wrath Psiches mou'd, (Fearing scath Which she prou'd) Uenus frets, And with breath Thundred threats Of hard Death: Psiches kneeles, pardon askes, Uenus bindes her to do taskes. First she brings Many graines, And them flings On the plaines: Bids her then Well to winde Euery graine With his kinde. Cupid tendring Psiches wo, Sent two Doues to helpe her tho. Uenus sends To Lethe Lake, And intends The fierie Drake Should her slay, Should her spill: As that day Was Uenus will. But the Dragon sleeping soft, Psiches scopte, and water brought. Mothers rage Gainst his Loue, To asswadge Doth Cupid proue: But Cytheras Psiches sends To Proserpina , Mongst the Fiends: Thence to bring a Boxe of Beautie, This must needs be done in dutie: Psiches wept, Cupid mou'd, To her stept, (Whom he lou'd) Lasse (quoth he) Neuer doubt, Thou with glee Shalt bring't about. Hold that Coyne, pay the Ferrie, That Soppe for the Porter carrie. Psiches past Charons Boate, (Not agast) To Hell gote: There the Curre Had a soppe, And from her Well did cloppe Of Hells Queene a Boxe she had, And return'd passing glad. Cupid smilde, Uenus wrath, Waxing milde Did not loath Psiches state, State diuine: Thus did hate Loue combine. But Loues ioy breeds our hate, Cupid liues in captiues state. Uirtutem sequitur comes Inuidia . In midst of these Faieries sportings, Iacomin and Katherina came among them, not perceiuing them, and hearing melodie as it were made by the Antipodes vnder grounde, were surprised euen with an extasie of admiration: supposing that some of Dianas darlings frequented about these places, where none euer to their knowledge or hearing did abide. So were they Inchaunted with these inuisible Musitians cantazons, their watchfull sences waxt sleepie, and being orecome with drowsinesse (as was that many eyed Heardsman of the Goddesse Iuno , by the melody of bewitching Mercurie ) laie them downe all one by one, on a green bank of fragrant grasse: which yeelded so sweete a sauour to their smelles, as the vnmanured plots of the all-fruitfull garden of the Hesperide . How wanton the waggish Faieries were to behold these sluggards, especially the two Palermonian Scicilians, Iacomin  & Katherina , who imbraced one an other with inclosed armes, (as did the beauteous Venus , hugging ye gallant Adonis ) I leaue to your singular censures. Yet by the way, I would haue you consider, that Cupid amazed with this noueltie, thinking Katherina had bin his beloued Psiches , (for whose sake the amorous wagge had endured so many and sundry mishaps) stretching his fettred legges forward with all his power, euen vnawares let flie a golden headed arrow at Iacomins brest, wherwith hee being wounded, gaue midst his slumbers greeuous grones: wherby Cupid moued with pittie and compassion of his so rash a deed (procured through fonde suspition) sent an other at Katherinas stomache: mightie to worke the same effect in the one, as the former should in the other. And for amends of his folly, to mixe their corasiues with some prittie caueat: commaunding his attendant Syluanes to tune their Pipes, he recorded this pithie Madrigale . After the deluge, In vertuous Dencalions ventrous daies, Apollo fortunate in his assaies, Slewe the Serpent huge, With bowe and shaft: And therefore had: To make him glad, Great praises as he ought. Then the Lawrell Baie On browes of Conquerours was neuer set, For no such Tree e're growing was as yet: (So learned Poets saie) But the Iuie bowe, Or Oken branch (That harme can stanch) Did serue (I trowe) Guarded with a quiuer Of sharpe shafts that Loue bred passionate, Ph aebus met me, mustring by the Citie gate: (And as a scorner Deriding much my deitie) With words reuiling Then cald me fondling, And thus I made replie. Though gainst Python (Ph aebus) Thou hast gotten preheminence, Yet maist dearly chance t'abide this offence: Marke what I do discusse, And there with from bowe I did let flie A shaft fiercely, That bred Apollos woe. In the woods wandring P aeneas louely daughter he espide, And intreating her (to be his bride) Daphne ranne forth flying, He followed with swift course, Gainst winde and raine: (Vnto his paine) She shewed no remorse. As the fearefull Hare. From the speedie-senting hunting Hound, So fled Daphne Apollo in that stound: Marke this my compare. Th'one for feare fled fast, Th'other hasted And no time wasted To follow not agast. Daphne panting sore. Running eagerly through tearing brakes. Euen subdewde: Ph aebus breath her haire through-takes; Fainting more and more. Then she mainly praide, O Panea streames, Fence me from his claimes, Send a Virgin aide. Ph aebus had ore-tane her, (Hoping to enioy what he desirde) But the sacred Deitie conspirde, Safely to preserue her: For her haire became Branches of faire Baie, (That did flourishaie) And her corps were euen the same. So when he supposde, T'haue imbracst his louely Daphnes bodie, With a barke (that Lawrell bowes bare gently) It was all inclosde, And offring it to kisse, His branched loue Did from him moue, In whom he plac'st his blisse. Well (quoth Ph aebus ) since I may not now enioy thee, as my deare; Yet in tryumphs will I thy bowes weare: Thus loue did him conuince, And he numbd at the hart: Then sickly saide He was dismaide By my deepe wounding dart. Tantum male-sanus Amor obest . Cupid hauing thus recorded his powerfull Deitie, and imprinted (as it were with pressing stampes) his mightinesse in the stomackes of these Nouices, with slie wings stole from the frolick Faieries: whose vnexpected flight, moued Aboron and his Aurelia , to an infinite admiration. For Cupid suspecting the falshood of his bowerfull Loue (intending to see if all with her were well) in rurall sort counterfaited the shape of Coridon and in plaine Country speech neare his owne bower thus bluntly courted her. Waire Nymph (quoth he) zawst any Lambes grazing on these plaines? I haue mist a Yewe (ywis) and her young one; and it may be that some giddie Priapus (prying about my vieldes) hath droaue my vlocke from the vaire plaines, that (wandring by the by-waies of the woods and Fountaines here-about) liue vnsheerde, vngrazde, vncoated, without littering strawe, and voode to chawe, both within and without? Good friend (answered Psiches ) no such Cattle haue mine eyes behelde wandring on these plaines, and yet they might happe to passe for mee as vnseene: But hast thou chancst to see any Faieries vpon yonder Mountaines, leading a faire and beautifull youth (a God indeed) like a captiued prisoner? Whom in spight they haue made a bond slaue mongst them, moued through disdainfull and mercilesse enuie. For whose sake I spend the night in woe, and the day in lamentations. Cupid hearing his Loue inquiring after himselfe (as did Mercury vnderstand himselfe, bewraied vnto himselfe by a couetous Swain) tooke compassion on her passions, and shewed him vnto her eyes apparantly: saying, Diuine and approued Goddesse, (whom with glory, omnipotent Iupiter with all the powers celestiall haue deified, and the rusticke Semiegods and Satyres, for vertue and worthinesse, with Hymnes and commendable Roundelaies haue glorified, as well for this sacred beautie, as for thy admired fortunes) Behold, thou hast found him, whom thy wamenting words haue sought: behold, thine eyes see him for whom thy selfe hast made enquiry, therefore be cheerfull, enter my solemne bower: there are others greeued with our disease. And after such speeches vttered, he entred the Cabinet, comforted her, and kist her: and vnfolded his exployt performed towards the two tender Scicilians . In the meane time, the Faieries missing Cupid , (whose speedy flight had bid the adieu) being inraged, that he was so secretly escaped their fingers without any intreatie: with pace as swift as runs the light-footed Roe, forsooke that place, and trauerst too and fro, endeuouring to enquire him out. Thus they resting vncomfortable, lest the drowsie Scicilians comfortlesse: who not long after awaked of their slumbers, were as faint, as the faintest: as sicke, as the sickest: and for the time, as ill apaide, as he that ( sanus credict ) plaide for feare of arresting, least in sight: That scarce able to finde footing, or like yoong children to tappe and goe, were by their attendants (with much adoo) conducted and carried home to Palermo : where their Parents, kindred and friends (not knowing what chaunce had happened them) bewailed their suddaine sicknesse with multiplicitie of sorrowfull teares: endeuouring (as is before rehearsed) by all meanes inuented, to haue their maladies cured. But when all medicines performed for remedies, serued in small sort or in no value and efficacie at all to worke their ease, theyr worthy Parents were counsailed by the Scicilian Soothsayers, to send some, to aske the Oracles of Apollo at Delphos : both concerning theyr vnsearchable disease, as also, how long the Destenies had decreed they should breath on earth: For these Oracles did not onely vnfold thinges present, and things past, but also could expresse things to come, though euermore mysticallie. And this was their censure to the demaund of the Inquirers.  These grieued ones, whose bodies you suppose subiected to disease, As are the corps of common men (through many thousand waies) Shall be againe to health restorde: and eke behold with eies Their Parents houses changd from loue to hate, in wondrous wise. Whose hard dissentions shall their minds so mightily annoy, That whilst it lasteth, their poore hearts shall scarce haue earthly ioy. Great perrils are they to sustain, euen at the dint of death, And yet at length recure their ioyes before they loose their breath. Nay more, their only loue shall cause their Parents (being old) Againe to ioyne new leagues of friendly loue: So rest resolu'd. Which verdict pronounced by the Oracle, gaue them hope of their recoueries (the rest being not vnderstood, concerning what chaunges of their friendship in future time should fall through vnexpected chaunces) and the wofull Parents therby receiued comforte; which soone after, euen in the Aprill of their consolations, were scorched with blasts of boysterous confusions. All which (that my pen may sufficiently portraie) for the augmentation of your more wished pleasures, I will vnfolde first their generall agreements, and would especially haue you consider that, that their ciuil mutinies growne on suddaine, may (with the frownes of frowarde Fortune gainst those approued Louers) shewe them more apparant. For our Load-starre must continue a course for Decorams sake, in this proportioned Zodiacke: It hath now past Aries and Taurus , (signes fit for those, whose foreheads are forked) as (it may be) was petie Aborons mongst his Faieries: Or (as tis manifest) Vulcans browes haue bene (by the wantonnesse of his Venus ) and now is it entring louely Gemini , and descending towards crabbed Cancer , is euen inforced to turne his progresse an other way; shewing vs long dayes of sorrow to vexe Louers proceedings; but short nights of quiet, to driue off melancholies. So that when it shall returne home to the original Horizon, his course will seeme to procure causes of no small admiration. What frolicke feastings on furnisht Tables do swarme in Palermo , when the well willing Commons knewe of the recouered healths of these Noble branches before diseased, are to be extold and equallizde with those costly Cates and curious carowses, that Marke Anthony receiued of loue-sicke Cleopatra for a welcome: What reuellings were made, may seeme comparable to the games and gamboldes exploited by Meleager and his gallant companions, after the downfall of the feared and daungerous Boare of Calidon . And the better to maintaine their sportings, great summes of moneyes were most freely bestowed, by both these commaunding Potentates: who thought themselues wholy indebted to the assisting gods, for their childrens welfares. So that both Families feasted togither in one place, and kept holiday: as doo Commaunders with their Captaines and martiall Officers, in time of plighted peace togither in pitcht Pauilions. Yet was not all ye world made pleasaunt with these their pleasures, nor pleased with their pastimes: For the earth is Empresse Fortune, (whose wauering handes is alway turning the wheele of restlesse chance) pretended to plaie such a pranke, to sowre their sweets, as should set all Scicilia euen on fire, and put Palermo to the ouerthrow by the flames. Yet ere you heare how she wrought this warfare, I would will you to ponderate in minde, the louely sparkes of inspired affections, that fed on the fuell of young Iacomins and Katherinas hearts: whose stomackes in all these banqueting times, were not fed so much with the diuers dishes, as were their eies delighted with mutuall glaunces. Many a time, would they walke in Orchard Allies, hand in hand: many a time tread garden knots, following one an other mongst bankes of sauorie hearbes and flowers: many a time, to their noble Parents contentations, would they tread pacing measures, and daunce nimble Galliers, directing their footings with the set time of the Musitians: to the beholders eyes (that were somewhat dazeled with their beauties & braueries) like two resplendent starres: That had Iuno seene Katherina , she would euen haue bene beside her selfe, through iealousie of her suspected Iupiter , as shee was gainst Inactius daughter Io. And wanton Mars would be far dismaied, as fearing least his Venus would fancie Iacomin , for an other Adonis . What should I seeme tedious? they were louely, and loued liuely: and as their youthfull dayes were by Tymes prescription multiplied, so were their beauties togither with their affections, made most perfect: and their hearts (both vnited and setled in one sympathie) expected but Hymens rightes to be performed, with the enioying of their generous Parents halfe-accomplisht and willing consents. But Lady Fortune, that squint-eyed Goddesse, that on the Stage of this worlde loues Comicke merriments should bee mixed with Tragicke matter, bred dissentions twixt these two honourable and renowned Families, (first procured by some controuersies twixt their seruants) which by litle and litle grew so hot, that Enuies sparkes holding a furnace in their breasts, burst forth in fierie flames with such fury, as all the outcries of the Citizens for Clubbes, Clubbes, could not diminish: nor the moystning waters of the Commons entreaties pacifie the outragious wraths of those angry inkindled parties. They that before friendly feasted togither, now are daring to field one an other: They that before with inuented merriments sought to cheare themselues, now fretting with chafing melancholy, doo discontentedly disease themselues: both parties, in steed of banquetings, follow bucklings: and reuiling all conuersing peacemakers, pronounce their angrye commotions with Si non nobiscum, sis contra nos: neither respecting the good of the Common weale, to their gouernment committed: nor the welfare, either of themselues, their friends, or kinsfolke. Now all degenerous Cauelairos and swash-bucklers (that in time of concord durst not shewe their seditious countenances, nor open their mutinous mouthes that commonly bred despightfull iarres) flockt in troupes to be partakers of these alarmes. The Communaltie was diuided, adioyning to what partie best their minde regarded: and Palermo was made euen a Pharsalian Tent: for martiall Mauors with bowles of bloud, and banquets of dismal massacres to be made frolicke. Such brauing, such bandying, such buckeling was euery day on both sides with brawles and broyles bestowed, that I may wel say with the illustrious Poet, Fit via vi, &c. How should I compare Palermo , (whose streets are now guarded with crackling armours) but to the Roman Synode, at such time as Catilines rebellious troupes harnised throughout with coates of male, vncald and vnwelcome, came to destroy the Senates Councell? Or vnto that murmuring assembly that were present, when Brutus and Cassius treacherously stabd conquering Caesar , clad in his Parliament Robes, with murdering Bodkins? He that aboue all others was no medler in these hurly-burlies, was that valiant & euer vertuous minded man, Don Andrea Alizandra : who one day beholding Signior Iacomin Pierro , and Don Alexander Bartolo , bearding and bandying other, laught (with the Philosopher) at their outrage: and sayd within himselfe, that needs must the inferiour members (meaning the vulgar sort) fall at iarres, sith the heades (minding them) cannot gouerne them, but are become giddie. And thervpon prouiding all conuenient necessaries, left dissentious Palermo , and went to dwel in a goodly Farme of his owne in the country: and before he departed, gaue Palermo the like adieu, as did the wise Bias Boristhenes , towards sackt Priennium, viz. Now stand or fall, burne or quench, I care not: for Omnia mea mecum porto . But what griefe were these deadly controuersies, to the concordant mindes of our heartie Louers? what annoyance was it for them to beholde their Parents browes eclipst and clouded with gloomy menaces of reuenge and themselues with feare so seruilely subiected, as they durst not looke one another in the face? and yet could not this seperation of body (though they were ouerlookt with Argus eyes, by their hate-stomaking Syres) seperate the zealous coniunction of their louing minds. First when these broyles began, would they conuerse and parley (such Lynces eyes hath Loue) through a creuise twixt two walles; and so by talke euacuate the corasiues that opprest their tender stomackes, by vttering forth their mutuall sorrowes. Which being at length vnderstood by Bartolo , who on a time vnespied, listned a while to their conference, and not enduring it, taking Katherina by the gowne-sleeue from her stande (where she beholding her Father, shiuered as if in an agonie) he leading her in, thus gan to rebuke her sharply. And art thou (Girle) so led with fond affection, as to vse conference with thy Fathers enemy? who not only by raising ciuil iarres, and dreadful slaughters of our wel-willers and friends, seeke our ouerthrow? but also by all enuious meanes, seeke in pollicie to procure our disgrace? Do not thy eyes behold (fondling as thou art) how Palermo murmureth on our behalfe, to behold these mischeeuous hurly-burlies? Doth not all Scicilia admire at their hautie hatred taken against vs, raised by maintaining a sottish crewe of proude peacockes? Hath folly dazeled thine eyes, that voyd of considerate regard, thou seemest so Beetle-blinde? Huswife, I charge thee, not only refraine the company, but take heed (on my heauy displeasure) vse no conference with that impious brat, whose flattery tends to no other ende, but to worke thine infamy: Let not faire words (you weake foole) make you faine to follow his fancie, least it breed cause of repentance. Thy fresh wit cannot prie into mens wylie pollicies, and therefore take direction of thy Parents: For if thou hast not the whirrie to perceiue thine owne good, and discerne thy losse and disparagement, and yet will seeme so headie, as a friende, to make choyce of thy Fathers foe: Receiue counsaile (thou wert best) and be aduised better hereafter: else in running the race of a stubborne fondling, (without regard, not rulde by reason, nor taught by experience) thou maist chaunce tread on thornes, and being deeply prickt, cry woe: when none shall pittie thy distresse. Thou knowest my minde, amend this amisse, or runne headlong to mischiefe, and haue no helpe. Go to thy mother, go; vile Girle. And so he left her. This sharpe checke surprizde poore Katherinas passionate soule, with such vehement supposes, that halfe distracted of her sences, scarce able with her trembling feete to ascend the stairs craued her Closet, where when she entred, fetcht deepe and heartie-shiuering sighes, faintly drawing breath; fell into a suddaine sowne; and hauing againe recured her memorie, she vttered to her selfe this sorrowfull complaint. Ah Loue, (quoth she) the onely Lampe and Load-starre of life; how peruersly art thou burthened with Atlas loade? Ah life, the greatest light of the world; how art thou clowded with the counterfait of death? Ah death, the onely phisitian to cure a greeued heart: Why with drawest thou (mercilesse as thou remainest) thy piercing dart to cut off my woful dayes, lengthned too long by the spitefull Destenies? Ah Destenies, the continual consumers of mortal life, cut, ah cut off the twist of my daies: for I abhorre all my liuing daies prolonged by the lingring slacknesse of doating Tyme. Ah Tyme, the deuourer of all earthly things; suffer this hateful breath of mine to forsake my wretched breasts habitation, that my poore soule with the winges of a Doue may mount vnto the glorious heauens. Ah heauens, the predominant gouernours of mortal bodies, and blessed receptacles of deified soules; deliuer a wretched soule from a distressed bodies poyson, to haue some comfortable content with your sacred selues, amongst the glorious Seraphins. Heauens, Destenies, Tyme and Death, accord in one, to the end my miserable life, and with my life, my inspired, and yet discomfortable loue. Then she staide: from her wofull heart shooting footh volleys of sad sighes, and powring from the conduicts of her Christall eyes, streames of teares, that trilled downe her Lilly dide cheekes: and hauing by these meanes a little lightened her burthened stomacke, shee thus againe beganne to ruminate. And shall my Fathers browes furrowed with frownes, or his words, as sharpe as the blastes sent foorth by Boreas , turne or driue away my Loue, that ought to me his dearest life? No (by the Gods) no: whilst I liue, if his heart remaine loyall (as though his heart too, would remaine otherwise, that thus thou pleadest with Ifs) oh! whilest I liue (I say) will I loue my Iacomin . But (and then she shoote foorth salt teares) our Fathers, our froward and furious Fathers (ah! that Parentes should seeme crosses to the godly proceedings of their children) our Fathers, that should be our best helpes, are our most hinderers? our Fathers who (in furthering our choyce) should chiefly pleasure vs, doo chiefly displeasure vs: their enmitie, confuseth our amitie: their contentions, infrindge our contentations: their armours, our amours: their aggreuates, our agreements: their frownes, our affections: their hardie speeches, our heartie sportings. Ah hard, hard, hard happe: Goe to thy mother, vile Girle (quoth he) and so flung from his onely childe in anger. Should I tell my mother, what would she replie? I know what; I must not loue his ofspring, that Serpent-like intends my Parents downfall. As though the faulte of the Father, were rightly to be reputed to the sonne, who wisheth peace if it were possible: requireth quiet, if it might bee graunted requisite: commendeth concord, thereby to haue all reconciled: And yet is he (ah! he, my ioy and comfort, my Iacomin ) he is had as an Agent in these hurly-burlies. Therefore Katherina , wretched and miserable Katherina , sith thine eyes are debarred from beholding the light of thy vniuersall consolation, let thy Closette become a sollitarie Cell: which mantled all about with blacke sorrowe, may seeme (to thy best content) euen the shades of Cymmeria : for what more may excruciate a macerated soule (whose eyes abhorre the light) than to behold the lightsome day? Hauing thus said, abounding passions stopt the organons of her voice, and feeling her selfe faint, laid her feeble limmes on her woe-acceptable bed: there neither permitting her outward eyes, nor yet her inward minde to enioy any rest. Now turne we on the other side to yong Iacomin , whose eares hauing heard in some part howe shee was ratled and rated at by Bartolo , stealing sadly to his Chamber, with eyes ful of teares, brest swolne with sobbes, and hart burdened with passion, hee burst forth into these disconsolate clamours. O haplesse, helplesse, and hopelesse Caitiue: Haplesse, because voide of all good happe, and therefore vnfortunate: Helplesse, for that thou, wretched thou, wantst all comfortable help, and therefore accursed: And hopelesse, in that all hope of comfort hath fled thy company, and therefore desperate. And sith thou art so vnfortunate, so accurst and desperate, banne Fortune, curse the Fates, and so dispaire and die: for onely death may bring thee some happe to win helpe, or some helpe to enioy hope of future comfort, where now thou remainest wholly comfortlesse. Then he pawsed a space, and with milder moode thus went forward. And yet ( Iacomin ) remember thy selfe, be not driuen to dispaire through distrust: As thou hast lost thy ioyes, so may thy ioyes againe chaunce to be found. Policrates had a precious Iewel in the belly of a fish serued at his boord, which he let fall into the sea. This onely chaunce, hath made this chaunge. Thou hadst (not long since) libertie and leaue, not only to behold, but also to imbrace thy Loue in thy Parents presence. But that libertie is lost, that leaue is out of date, that freedome is past, and thou art made the bond-slaue of all miserie. And yet the caurse of time may restore them all: but when? And with that he stood as though he had beheld Medusas head, till after a while comming to himselfe, he proceeded with these exclaimes. O vnhappie estate of Princes: whose dignities placed on the whirling wheele of vnconstant Fortune, stand in such vncertaintie, as when they mount to the highest degree and loftiest altitude of honour & prosperitie, euen at an instant, they are topsie-turuie ouerturnd & tumbled downe to the lowe touch of the ground, with disgrace & beggery. Percutiunt fulmina montes, non valles infimos . Would I had bene of baser Parentage, so might I haue obtained more patience, to endure misfortunes: I, patience, perfect patience is a salue, to heale all the smartful scourges of Fortune. But yet it is a vertue for cowards and crauens, not for valiant  & venterous youth, whose minds (couragious minds) dare with the Gyants again in the Phlaegraean fields, Bellare cum dijs . to threaten and prenounce wars against great Ioue , and all the other Gods: climbing vp the heauens, as did braue Bellerophon on winged Pegasus : and breaking the infernal gates of hel, bind tryple-headed Cerberus in chaines, as did Hercules in his labors of wonders, to appease the wrath of angry Iuno . But why ( Iacomin ) ouercome with rage, like to blinde bayards doest thou obraid ye glorious Sun? or with the witlesse Wolues seem to bark against the Moone? hope wel,  & haue wel: intreat the gods ( Quid enim nisi vota supersunt? ) with praiers, to pacifie those Parents, whose bloudie broyles breede your disaster disparagements: that in ioyes (for Olim meminisse iuuabit ) abounding, your former penances in future memorie may support your pleasures with greater delights. But thine eyes, thy longing eyes may not view her beauteous eyes; nay, thine eares, thy wretched eares, now hencefoorth neuer shall againe receiue the melodious sounde of her sweete voyce: Ah wretch, ah wretch, of all others most miserable, confused, and accursed. Hauing so saide, as he would haue giuen more scope to his complaint, he was by a seruant cald to conuerse with his Father: which made him suspect some farther mishap: either fearing the checke, or at least the reproofe for awaiting counterbuffes for his loue-sicke sweats. But it was otherwise, for his Father Pierro (hauing not seene him many houres before) welcomming certaine friends of his, newly come to Palermo : caused young Iacomin to come in presence (who then for the absence of one, hated the presence of all) to keepe them conference, and beare them company. Who (after imparted salutations) as from a mind ouercloide with cares, vttered laconicall answeres to all their vaine questioning Items , with no, and I; without any other circumstances. So that these new-come straungers could finde by supposes, that this faire yong-lings tender minde was benummed by some agonizing maladie. Thus did these ciuil iarres, not only ruinate the Scicilian state, and authoritie of the Peeres (all which were left now to roaue at randome like a maisterlesse shippe without a Marryner, mongst the swallowing surges, either to sincke or swim) but also shake the healths and well-fares, both of these illusterous Families and their children. Whereby may seeme as apparant as in a Christall glasse, what daungerous discommodities accompany ciuil warres, like daily seruitors. For these broyles in these Countries, made such a straunge metamorphosis, as that where Scicilia before was had in chiefe regard of her neighbour Countries, for polliticke and peaceful gouernment, now ruled by common Democracie, it was had in as great disgrace, and contemptible and dishonourable. The crabbed clawes of Cancer , hath long detainde the course of our Load- starre , which now by the prescript rule of time, is entering Leo : which couragious signe, bringes our Louers some incouragement, to encounter Fortune face to face: and in despight of her power to worke their ioyes, by fearing no colours of disaster mishaps. They on both winges expected their safeguardes, to proceed through sounding a retreate to their Parents controuersies: but theyr enuious hatred was growne so rancke, that their maligne mindes woulde entertaine no perswasions to peace, but wholy imployed their humours how best to worke reuenge. Which young Iacomin pondring and considering with himselfe, thus began to expostulate. And wil it be no otherwise (quoth hee) can Eagles thirst be pacified by nothing else but bloud? Can men alwaies lyke Lyons, skirmish, possest with the heate and warmth of raging and furious wrath? I see that old ages angers, represent Torches flames; which the longer they burne, the fiercer waxeth their fire. Is it meete for youth to be shut vp in a continuall Labyrinth of displeasant crosses, daily indaungered by the monitaure dispaire? If Palermo (that was once accounted the glorious Scicilian Metropolis , shining in his ornaments like an illusterous Mycrocosmus ) now being metamorphosed from the Pallace of peace, to the Tent of tumultuous warre; can yeeld no quiet, yet, yet what? (And there hauing pawsde, replide) yet may thy abiding in other Countries, affoord such a sweete habitation, as neuer is likely to be enioyed in thy natiue home. Skilful Dedalus remaining in bondage vnder domynering Minus , by Art framed winges to flie from seruitude; and so got freedome. And shall not Loue lend me Eagles winges to claspe (as did Ioues Armour-bearer, the beauteous Nymph Ganimede ) my deare Katherina ; and beare her a matchlesse pitch, free from the frownes of her froward Syre and mine? C aelum non animum mutant qui trans mare currunt: If shee wil consent, weele trudge, and see Don Lorenzo , and the rest of our good friends in Spaine . And in this hastie resolue, with ynkie Penne on paper wrote as followeth to his louely Katherina . anothers countenance; yet dooth the coniunction of my vnmoueable minde, cause mee to contemplate on our generall welfare. And though we dare not on pain of parents frowns, displeasures  & rebukes (alreadie euen incurred) be once seen talkatiue, but alway toongtied, yet hath Loue taught me a slight, with you to haue in secrecie some desired conference. Know then (my dearest Katherina ) that my heart burthened with heauinesse, my minde ore-borne with melancholy, and my brest subued with passion, for our disquiets and life-sticking subiections: to auoid such slauish seruilitie, haue all within mee accorded to escape imprisonment: although they flie into straunge Countries, so that by the way they may enioy your company. Iacomin will to Spaine (Katherina) if your sweete selfe would bee copartner in his trauailes: and there, with his friends and yours, remaine, vntil he vnderstand that reconciled peace hath made a period to these common controuersies. I know (deare Loue) what sorrowes you sustaine for my sake, what heauie cares for my cause, to cure the which, you must practise with me to depart fro Palermo: For sweeter are the hony-sopps of content, than all the courtly iunckets and daintie cates, sauced with doubtfull  & double cares. This if your loyall heart can fancie, no doubt but our happinesse in the end will be multiplied, and all our former mishaps abolished. Herein then delaie not, for nothing may so much breed our daunger: Else if you like not this motion for feare of after-claps, I will not seeme to constraine your cowardise to the combat. No farewell Katherina , till death destroy my life, so I exspect a speedie answere. Yours, or not his owne: yong Iacomin . Hauing written these fewe lines: he stood studying how to haue them deliuered. He would not aduenture to trust any of his Fathers family, for feare to haue his secrets reuealed: what should he doo? It were but madnesse for him to cast it ouer the wall; for her Father sooner than his Katherina , might happe to take it vp. Standing a while in a maze, hauing twice or thrice walked too and fro in his Chamber, heard at the staire foote a poore woman begging an alms: to whom he went, and questioning with her of her parentage, vnderstood that Fortune had plaid an aduerse part, and bereft her, not only of her friendes, but bereaued her of all her earthly substance. The circumstance of whose case, were too troublesome to be rehearsed, and too tedious to be heard. But her he thought the fittest bearer of his counsailes that the earth could yeelde: Wherefore giuing her Golde to make her gladsome; Woman (quoth hee) thy distresse hath bredde my good will thus much towardes thee, in that thy griefes haue made mee compassionate; hie thee now to the nexte Gate, and there craue their beneuolence, and watch a time when conueniently thou canst present this Paper closely to a young Gentlewoman there, whose votion towardes the poore is neuer wanting: Tell her, I commende mee heartily vnto her, and doo intreate her to receiue on my behalfe this plaine Pasport, and thereto to returne a speedie answere, by thee my vnsuspected messenger. Be aduised in this enterprise, and thou shalt not depart vnrewarded. The aged woman (whose siluer haires were tokens of experiece taught by time, perceiuing a litle which way the wind blew, hoping it would turne to her aduantage) with a lowe curchie receiued the writ, (he telling her, how the message she went in, was to faire Katherina ) promising she would be circumspect in euery respect to accomplish his desires. Doo so good woman (quoth he) and if her answere breed me any pleasure, thou shalt not remaine without profit. And so shee past toward Bartolos doore: where she had not long vsed her accustomed ceremonies, but that Katherina's presence presented it self before the womans eyes: of whom, she begged an alms, being by her demanded whence she came, and what benefites her earnest praiers had procured her: she mildly in humble maner answered. Vertuous and faire mistresse (quoth shee) amongst the commons my paines haue bene recompenced with slender profit: but the liberall hand of the gallant yoong Gentleman (your next neighbour) hath farre beyond any deserts of mine, made me prosperous with his bountie. Hath he so? (quoth Katherina ) and for neighbourhoods amitie, thou shalt not be sent hence comfortlesse. And then being about to open her purse, the woman reacht her Iacomins Letter, with these words. Good mistresse, my silly selfe hath by him bene made so happy, as to be trusted with deliuering this message, before many of my betters; and I hope your gentle nature will with patience conceale my rude nurture. I promised, and in that I promised, I will performe my dutie what so ere betide. For I trust (and in that trust am throughly perswaded) that his noble heart herein towards you imparteth no harme. But how (replied the Princesse) couldst thou tell whether my selfe were the partie to whom he minded this message? I hope (mistresse) it is your selfe (said she) for my aged eyes obserue in you the phisiognominate tokens that the Gentleman willed me to consider. And thou hast hit the marke (good woman answered the Princesse. And yet not got the game (good mistresse) quoth the woman againe, vntill you vouchsafe to returne an answere. That shall not be awanting (said Katherina ) because (I knowe) it will bee best welcome. Stay a while and I will in some sort performe the Gentlemans pleasure. With that she entred her closet: where hauing ouerread the Letter; after a short studie, shee returned in writing, this answering Appeale. Carthages faire Queenes decay. Hero threw her selfe headlong into Hellespont for Leanders loue, whom she beheld dead, lying by the Riuers side. Iphis hanged her selfe, Procris slew her selfe, because they were forsaken of their dearest and best beloued friends. Then wende not away (my deare Iacomin ) and leaue me in the iawes of dispaire; least that on my selfe I worke the like massacre with meere disparagement. Medea hauing by powerfull spells, gotten Iason free libertie to gaine the Colckian golden fleece, beeing by him contemned, sought reuenge by his children and fathers murthering. And Scilla (renowned Nisus daughter) presenting to Minos her fathers purple haire, (which she had cut off as her father slumbred) on possession whereof, did fatally consist the safeguard of his Crowne and Kingdome; being by Minos for loue, repaide with hate, grew frantick and desperate. Then if you loue me, do not leaue me: ah, do not leaue me: for I will rather then be left behind thee, take warfare with thee. And because we will freely passe watch and all vnespied: I will prouide me such apparell as did Minerua , when like an aged woman, shee would perswade Arachne from presumption. I am thine (sweete heart) or not mine owne: whose onely life is maintained by thy loue: whose health is strengthned by thy happinesse: and estate consisting on all thy fortune. If the land haue thy sweete selfe in hold, it also shall haue me: if the seas be thy habitation, the seas likewise shall serue for my home: if you liue, I enioy life: and if you die, my heart dyeth also. Therefore I will not say farewell (though from the faire well of thy wel-fare, doth flowe all poore Katherinas happinesse) till death end my life-dayes, and leauing to liue, must leaue mortally to loue. If not yours, no bodies. Katherina . Hauing framed this Appeale to her Loue, shee folded it closely vp: and comming to the old woman (who was busied in saying her Creede) told her she had framed an answere to the Gentleman; and (said she) for thy trustinesse, there (annointing her hand with the precious oyle of Angels) is somewhat for to helpe thy want: and take good heed safely to redeliuer backe this Letter. The poore woman humbly thanked her for her bountie, and stirring her aged stumps back againe toward Signeor Iacomins Pierro's doore, met gentle Iacomin,: who awaighted her returne. To whom she imparted Katherinas courtesie extended towards her, deliuering him her answerable Letter: whose superscription when he had beheld: rauished with admirable conceit, he flung the poore woman some more crownes, and so she merily departed: blessing the houre, time, and place of her so lucky arriuall thither, happie for her owne behoofe, aduanced by the liberall gifts of these yoonglings. Iacomin reading Katherinas exampled propositions, admiring at her feruent loue, and famous learning: (for she was as much addicted to the one, as adioynd in mind to the other) after some silent meditation, breathed forth these speeches. Fire trieth gold, and I see that aduersitie can make best triall of friends. I am thine (saith she) and not mine owne; (Oh words of a louing heart!) and therefore if you loue me do not leaue me. No ( Katherina ) thy Iacomin list not leaue thee, till life leaue him: for if he would, he need not to incurre (onely for thy sweete sake) all other his friends displeasures: which likewise thy louely selfe for his sake hast sustaind. Ah sacred Deities, the maintainers of Loues destinie: whose essence is immortall, and accidence fatall; be now propitious to our proceedings, aid our enterprise, and support vs against perills: then shall your Altars be couered all ouer with our gratefull offrings: and the sweetest perfumes of Myrrhe and Frankencense shall purifie your temples. Ah sacred Iuno , with thy power protect our pretences: and Hymen , lighten those lamps of thine, to consecrate our liues to Loues obeysance. Is not Loue the hand-maid of the immortall soule? the purified superficies of celestial motion, secretly inspired into the Cordials, the eyes prospectatiue contemplation of beauties Idaea ? wherby the Creator is made to admire at the obiectiue creature? Is it not a vertue metaphisicall, containing the perfect substance, both of Art and nature? O diuine loue! and therefore diuine, because sent from aboue. O immortall beautie! and therefore immortall, because therein is insetled the summarie glory of the heauens. Damned then bee their raylings, and condemned their forgeries, that barke at Loue, calling it lustfull and intemperate: and title it vaine, wauering, and windie. Can a celestiall vertue haue incontinencie? then what incontinencie is contained in Loue, whose vertue is celestiall? Can that effect proue inconstant that is decreed by the Deities? Then how can Loue become light and inconstant, which is the immutable and vnchaungeable decree of the immortall Deities? I speake not of fained loue, whose impression is not made perfect in the inmost roomes of the heart; but standing without such entring, is seated for a while on the outward eye-lids: whose societie is warie with a looke, and lost with a winke: whose appendix is lust, and index leaudnesse. No, no, (quoth hee) such, all such doo I defie, not deifie: such doth my breast abhorre, and not vpholde; yea, such doth my very soule loathe, and neuer loue: because it is no loue. For euen as Ixion in stead of Iuno embraced a cloud, of which he begate monsters; So they that followe that shadow of loue, in seate thereof (for want of infusde substance from aboue) persist with lustfull sin: whose contagion is shames nurse, and confusion the ofspring. Here he breathed a while, and then thus proceeded. But whither away ( Iacomin ) that thou runnest so swift a pace in thy discourse? Then canst sooner number the starres, then reckon the diuersities of loue. Some are Saturnists, and loue solitary conceits: Some are Martialists, and admire at the Tantaras of warres: Some Bacchinalls, and are wholly addicted to pamper their stomacks: Some Midas mates, that will haue all they touch to turne to Gold: Some are like Mineruas Owle, that delight to praise themselues, and disdaine others. And let them (said he) so wallow through and through in their humourous loues, guided onely by their sensuall appetites. Perseuere thou in that heauenly affect, which through infused loyaltie thou hast delighted: continue that course, which is through inspiration in thee begun: whose perfection, not all the power of the earth can make imperfect: whose perdurance, no battle-axe of violent passion can infrindge, nor the wide world by any meane disioyne the band thereof, nor diminish the vertue. Hauing made a stoppe to his speech, he vsed endeuour for their departure: and hauing prouided a Barke, and Marriners to conduct the vessell through Oceanus watry regiment: giuing a watch-word at a time well appointed by the parties, for their conueyance aboorde, fardling such necessaries vp as were thought requisite, Katherina and himselfe at once were shipt: and the Marriners launcht forth into the deepe. I should haue giuen you (kind Gentles) to vnderstand, that at the very instant, that the poore woman (as is before recited) was their vnsuspected messenger, Virgo was predominant: whose vertue containd betwixt these Louers such authoritie, as that neither thought of perillous dangers to come, nor the plagues (if their drifts had bene espied) then present, could confront them, or reuoke them from their enterprise. So were their thoughts connected in chaste resolue, and their brests coupled in firme fortitude. Now are you to consider, how Libra tooke his raigne, as they entred the ballanced barke: and was to them during the time that they remained vnder his dominion) both luckie and gladsome. For now the sailes were spread in quiet: whilest a pleasant calme made the billowes still milde, and gentle: the Seasurges were deprest, not once striuing to beate against th'opposite vessell: Neptune was banqueting with Amphitrite and Trytons trumpe summond the water-Nimphes, the Syrenes, and Doris , and her darlings, and al the Ocean Deities, to appeare vnder their Commmaunders tryple Scepter: to reuell, and ride on Dolphins, accompanying him at his royall Court, whose arriuall was there awaighted by the demie Gods of the lakes and riuers. The heauens were cleare, and the skie as brightsome to behold, as the peerelesse shells on the Libian shore. So that the Marryners past ken of the land, crying aloft boone fortune , and bidding Iacomin and Catherina be of good cheere; roundly rung out this Rowly by. Braue luslie laddes, hoyse vp the Sayles, A gallant gale blowes at the Poope: Nere feare you stormes till Anchor failes, And windes and waues euen force vs loope. Now East, North-east: from Helme nere sturre a, Good cheere my hearts: why there a (boy) there a. Bright shines the Sunne, cleare are the skies, Faire is the weather, calme the winde: No swallowing waues do surge or rise, Our mast and tacklings stand in binde. By East, North-east: from Helme nere stirre a: Be blithe my hearts; why there a (boy) there a. Then maisters come, and maisters mate, Make merrie with good Biske and Beere: And who so doth his licquor hate, Shall rue the roast whilest he rests heere. Keepe East, &c. Let euery man a Caroll sing, In Eolus and Neptunes praise: The one, to caues doth tempests swing. The other doth the flouds appease. Hold East, &c. Sit on the Deck, and view the Seas; See how the Sea-nimphes swiftly swimme; Looke where the Fishes sporte with ease; And Maire-maides their faire traces kimme. Goe East, &c. As loud as Tritons Trumpe doth sound, (Whose voice is heard by waters all, And by grim Pluto neath the ground) Rowe well yee Marriners, now call. So, East, North-east; from helme nere stirre a; Good cheere my hearts; why, there a (boy) there a.  \------Dum vela secundat,------ Parat Fortuna procellas. Thus they made merrily for Spaine , crost with no misfortune; till Scorpio (stretching forth his fierie clees) seemed to stoppe the peaceable course of our Lead-starre: enforcing it to take his abode in the other Equinoctiall point, quite opposite to that pleasant place, where it was resplendant at the beginning of the Spring. And hating to behold it in beautie, seemes violently to driue it thence, farther forth vnto Sagitarie ; as if the monster ment by some meteor or eclipticke cloude to haue it terrified, or at the least shadowed. Threatning it to haue winter-like weather, (in stead of a faire haruest season) and to be molested in some respects with foggy inclosures, and bitter cold, mixed with very cold and windie moistures. What need I vse ambages? the sequell of our Louers euents will shewe, how there was some signe of chaungeable weather. For they had not sailed three dayes from Palermo , but that some Gallies appertaining to certain Pyrates, that were whilome competitors in the conspiracie and rebellion (before in the beginning mentioned) gainst the King of Tunise , had espied them scowting: and being led with hope of getting some purchase or pettie prize, made hastily towards them. Whom when the Barksmen had descried, not able (by reason of the calme) to make away from them, mistrusting they should bee set on, prouided their shot in readinesse, as resolued to vse their best endeuors to saue their own. Soone had the Gallies ouertane them, and fiercely chased them: that the Barke at last was fetcht vp, and by them being boorded, yet valiantly resisted with hardie fight. Especially Iacomin , who (euen desperate, carelesse whether he liued or died, so that his Katherina might be saued harmlesse) fought against the enemie with hartie courage, and valiantly (defending the distressed vessell) laid on loade round about him: till that he was sore wounded, through encountring so many at their first entrances. At last through much bleeding he became faint: and then the pyrates (driuing the wearied and maimed Marriners to corners) rifeled the Barke: And hauing found Katherina in the cabin (as they were searching for wealth), euen all amort and woe begone, for this extreame misfortune; hauing neither remorse of her laments, nor respect of her vowes, nor pittie of her plaints, nor any compassion of her praiers, pluckt her forth the cabin, carrying her perforce, conueyed her into their Gallies: And thus hauing taken all that was worth bearing away, turned towards Tunise . Iacomin with wofull eyes (scarce able through faintnesse to lift vp his head) beholding his Katherina violently taken from him, vext so much in minde, as did Piramus (when hee sawe a part of Thisbes kertle, torne by the gripes of a greedie Beare) determined at that present (had he not bene preuented) with mortall blade to end his miseries. But vsing patience perforce, through the Marriners helping meanes, as the winde and tide would afford, made after their enemies: hoping that way, sooner then on any other coast, to come a shore, and obtaine succour. Was not this a shaking tempest (trowe yee) to breed anew their torments? It was Scorpio that incensed these Rouers to fiercenesse, but Sagitarius that made them so mightie and magnificent in their attempts. Which now hauing gotten the spoiles, wende with as great triumph towards Tunise (though they had bene rebells) with beautious Katherina ; as did Paris with the Grecian Dame, towards Troy . For these Pyrates hopes were laid (as you shall heare) on this foundation. The lustie Tunisian Prince, being made frolicke (euer sithence the time that the two Scicilian families wrought meanes to beate downe his enemies) by continued peace, was become as wanton and effeminate, as Sardanapalus : placing all his felicitie in gallant womens beautie. And because he would not lacke what his lustfull minde best liked: at one end of the Citie (where he held his royall Court) had he built a stately Castle: where whose walls were of perdurable bricke, and couerings brasse, verie fairely flourisht with carued Images on the outmost lymites. But the artificiall diuisions and partitions, with glorious Galleries, and decked Chambers within, were by the skill of a cunning hand, made superexcellent. All the walls were garnished with cloath of Arras, curiously wrought with rich knots of Gold, and spangled euer with Carbuncles, Rubies, and precious Pearles: glozed in and out with singular shadowes and pictures, passing curiously proportioned. There also had Art with needle-worke portraied the Histories of the Gods: Iupiter counterfeiting the shape of Amphitrio , to gaine the loue of Alcmena ; like a Swan, to winne Laeda ; like a golden Showre, to gaine Danae ; and like a Bull, bearing on his backe Pasyphae . There was portrayed Apollo , pursuing with speedy pace the Nymph Daphne: Luna shooting forth her hornes, to imbrace Endimion drowsily slumbring: Diana and her spotlesse darlings bathing in the brooke, holding in their hands Cypresse boughes, to shadow their beauties from the Sun-beames, ouer-pried by the gazing Forrester Actaeon , whom she chaunged by (let flying at him a shaft) into a horned Harte. There might you haue seene a woman wooing a man ( viz.) Venus courting Adonis: Eccho following Narcissus: and Narcissus seeming to follow his owne shadowe in the brooke. There was horned Pan portraied, intreating Sirinx: whom at once he beheld metamorphosed into an Oaten Reede. There was starr-eyed Poliphemus , passionate through loue of the Nymph Galathea . There was Orpheus seene playing (on his Tree-and- stone-mouing Harpe) at the gates of Limbo , to bring backe his lost Euricide . There Pluto , riding on a Coach of Ebonie, lying in ambush to steale away Proserpina gathering flowers, was with his blacke Lordes fitly deciphered. And not onely these of the Goddes, but also an infinit number of amorous counterfeits of loue-sicke men. There was imblazoned the Citie of Troy , and the glorious Pallaces of king Pryam: with all his valiant sons and daughters. There was Paris portraid, marching in pomp, with a troupe of gallants attending, through Troy , leading towards Ilium , the peerlesse Dame of Greece , hand in hand: whilest the princely Prophetesse Cassandra , with hands raisde to heauen, and haire hanging downe ouer her shoulders, cried out, Graia iuuenco venit, &c. Such as these seemed common in that bowerly Paradise: for euery Chamber seemed a myrrour of delight. But that glorious edifice, which exceeded all the rest, was a Garret, which the king himselfe commonly at his pleasure would make his resting Pauilion. The side walles were ouerlaide with rich cloth of gold, ouer-diapred with admirable bright Margarites, and glorious Pirops: that in the night lightned with splendor the whole Chamber ouer with such cleare shine, as in continuance it seemed, the burnisht Sunne neuer was falne in the occident. The vaulted couering was shadowed with a gorgious Canapie, branched about with Angelicall features and glistering flowers. In the midst (directly vnder the Canapie) was placed a Chaire, imbost with silke, and costly knobbes of gold, so highly lifted as a stately Throne. Ouer the head thereof, araied in liuely colours, was a Parliament of the Gods depainted, with gorgious roabes: Aboue all the troupe of which glorious Synode, was portrayd a beauteous seate, whereon sate Cupid and his Loue ouerlooking them all, and treading on great Ioue and Iunos Dyadems. Cupid held in his hand a faire Scepter, wherewith (it seemed) he beckened to all the rest, as if he commaunded them: and his Loues browes were garnisht with a tryple Crowne, whereon Fortune laie figured bound in Fetters, and her wheele shiuered in peeces: On his Scepter was drawne in golden Letters this Poesie, Amor imperat astris: On her Crowne was this Motto, Sic forma, Diuos , fairly ingrauen. The frames of the faire windows made all with Adamantine stone and Christall, beautified throughout with blazures of honourable Armes, would oppose Apelles pencyll to portraie, much more my pen: for all was as admirable, as the Pallace of the radiant Sunne: describing the which, as Ouid did conclude the one, so may I likewise end the other (leaning the rest to your coniectures) and say, Artificem superabat opus . This so glorious Castle, supplied the place of an Academy, for beauteous dames: for therein were inclosed the choice dainties of the Country, for the kings onely taste. They had all ease enough, but little libertie: fed and feasted sumptuously, but were neuer suffered to walke without doores: euery one had a seuerall Chamber for her owne commoditie, but could welcome none but the king their Louer: many wisht (it may be) to haue chaunge of meates beyond commons: yet scarce any durst on deaths penaltie let enter other dishe, than such as with allowance came from their Liege. So that, these sweetes were crost, with some sowres: these dainties were constrainde from chaunge of delicates, and all remained mewed for one mans diet. So that their happinesse seemed not much more pleasant, than do their pleasures, that are imprisoned in courtly Towers, or mannacled with golden Fetters, or drinke Cyrcen drugges in a guilted Cup,  &c. This while (courteous Reader) had our Load-starre escaped with much adoo the fierce Sagitarie , (though somewhat to the annoyance of his suscepted course) and had entred in the nineteene degree of Capricornus , which signe is very predominant ouer al those horned heads that simply sing Cuckoe. At whose shaggie forme, it halfe seemd afraid, though his milde (which with him was not vsuall) aspect now, did import, that for a season he had shaken off his natural qualitie, as vnaccustomed to any patience. For from his Goatish beard, in his rage would he shake, not only extreame winterly showres; but also heart-cutting frosts and tempests; as that Sol himselfe is inforced for auoydance of his boysterous stormings, to forsake that house with haste (standing on his farthest limit in the South) and to drawe for his better quiet, neare vnto our clymate: yet notwithstanding he now seemed milde and vnwilde, like comfortable Zephirus . Whether it were (also) for pretence of some mishap to happen to our Load-starre , or whether to shewe signe of a prosperous voyage, (it is farther to be doubted) but his moystned hoarie haire now distild faire dropping deawes: (as the Crocadile sheads teares) and it may be, it was signe of some lamentable waylings. But to haue all resolued, I wil search through the whole progresse of our Load-starre , and what I finde hapning, shall be vnfolded accordingly. Now had the Pyrates (setting their Gallies to ride safely by casting Anchor within the harbour) brought Katherina on shoare: and intending to present her to the king, thereby to get pardon for their misdemeanours forepast, spake her fairely, willing her to be frolicke. And to depresse her sorrowes made merrie at an Inne, taking wholesome carowses both of Beere and Wine, in quaffing bowles: yet could not their licour of life ingender any solace in subiected Katherina . Yet at last was she brought to the court, and presented before the wanto Prince: whose hart was straight set on fire by the lustres (though now dimd with watry deawes) that sparkeled from her eyes: that the Pyrates were not only forgiuen their amisse, but also were recompenced with royall rewards. So that they accounted the time and houre most lucky and fortunate, when their eyes held in ken, and their hands beganne to incounter with those that had the carriage of such a worthie prize. The king had great compassion on the discomfort of his newe Saint, vnto whose shrine he offered his perswasiue Orison. Beauteous (quoth he) clowdie lookes (the messengers of careful mindes) are for rusticke Clownes of the Countrey, not companions for the lookes of courtly Dames. Be blithe (beauteous) be blithe: bannish melancholy from thy delicate breast: let mirth hold holiday in thy cheekes, and let pinching melancholy be driuen vnto extreame exile: Be thy minde iocund, thine heart frolicke, and thy thoughts light. Where as before thou wert Chaunces bondslaue, now shalt thou raigne in the happie fauour of a King: whose smiles shal support thee, whose lookes shall comfort thee, and sweete words delight thee. Thou shalt haue pleasure, without penance: thou shalt reioyce, without any annoyance: and in thine owne handes holde sweete content, voide of all crossing and discontenting greeuances. Whilest thine yeares are tender, thy selfe youthful, and thy face flourishing with fragrant feature, follow the ioyes, that belong vnto thy yeares: seeke the pleasures, that Nature hath allowed thine youth to possesse: and be partaker of these delightes, as are comparable to thy springing beautie. Let the auucient (whose haires old age hath made frostie, in whose browes time hath painted furrowes, and whose backes the waightes of many colde winters haue bowde) seeme chollericke, because they are crustie: and disconsolate, because their blouds are become colde, their limmes weake and chillie. Be bliue and wanton (Girle) for seuen yeares longer liues a merrie minde, than a heauie heart. Let thine Alabaster breast be a Bower, for Venus Doues, that Cupid attending them, may with disport rent thine Aperne-strings. What sweeter conceyt, what fitter humour, what prittier dispose, than for youth to be lustie, and liuely to entertaine and welcome loue? Then cleare (sweete beautie) the Christal couerture of thy eclipsed eyes; and thou shalt be brought into a bower, which to thy sight shall seeme no lesse pleasaunt, than portly: where thou shalt beholde seates, that euen exceed Ioues siluer foote-stoole; and treade in walkes, that in compare blemish not a little the milke-white way. There shall diuers braue Dames and faire Damzels (whose features dashe with disgrace the beauteous Goddesses that strewe before Paris for the golden Ball) shal bidde thee welcome with kinde salutes. The Girles, that shall awayt on thee (attendant both at becke and call) shall for gracious aspect, driue coy Campaspe out of countenance. The meate which thou shalt taste, shall farre surpasse the dainties that were serued before Damocles: or set before the cruel Belides , or presented euen to the very lippes of hungrie Tantalus . Thy drinke shal be sweeter than the iuice of those precious Apples that growe in the Gardens of the Hesperides: and rest more licorice in the receptacles, than the life-lengthning Nectar and Ambrosia. The mirth, which the curious and well strooken Instruments shall yeelde foorth to glad thy pensiue minde, shall be as delightsome as the soundes of Apollos Lute, or as the tunes of the Heliconides . The bedde whereon thou at thine owne pleasure shalt take rest, shal be more soft then Downe, and more glorious than that Cubile where angrie Vulcan insnared amorous Mars , and his amiable Venus: the whole Synode of the Gods to their shame beholding both the louely captiues. All this receiue as truth (faire creature) for thine eyes & eares, and all thine other indued sences, shal witnesse it for truth. Onely would I wish thee, be merry; cast away all actoying care; looke liuely and louely; and thou shalt be as fortunate as Pirrha, Deucalions Pheere: and liue as auncient as Sibilla, Apollos Loue. There he made a period to his oblatiue Antheme, the whole summe whereof, seemed as acceptable to woful Katherinas eares, as the talke of Will Summers , to a minde male-content: or the Tales of Mother Redde-cappe , to an heart- sicke Patient: or Scoggins Jeasts related to one meditating on the seuen Sobbes of a sorrowful Soule. This Oblation beeing offered, hee calls for a siluer Bowle of Muscadine: which beeing brought him, hee vttered this Saluie. Now (beauteous) bannish these deadly dumpes, the king himselfe deignes to salute thee with the pure liquor of the Grape: heere's a health to thee (and therewithal dranke a heartie draught) to driue off thy agonies: Holde, take; I haue taken halfe, and therefore doo me right, and drinke vp the remnant. Katherina wiping her wayling eyes, as hauing tane some smal heart-agrace, framed modestly this reply. Although (egregious Prince) it fits not Fortunes meacocks, to seem courtly with kings; nor Captiues, to cry checkmate with their keepers: yet sith your highnesse is so graciously bent towarde the welfare of me worthlesse and vnworthie wretch, I wil not deny to pledge your highnesse. And hauing so saide, tooke a good wholesome draught of the Wine. The king then (pleasantly conceyted) asked her what bedfellow she would desire to haue? And she answered, she desired such a one, as would for dishonour (like Lybidinous Tereus ) seeke neyther to defile her, nor like a lewde Priapus to defame her: For it is better be kild than liue with crackt credit. Whose so chaste answere, gaue a memorandum to the wanton demaunders meaning: and yet because he would not seeme to be rubd on the gall, bolted forth this insinuation. But yet (beauteous) quoth he, if a louely wight would beare you company in bed, I deeme you not so disdainful, as to depel him with deniall? Why, and it please your royaltie (said she) vnbidden guests are neuer best welcome at a banquet; neither vnto a woman is acceptable any vnknowne bedfellowe. Which dry buffet made him euen dumbe; for shame would not suffer him to reueale his owne lauishnesse, and therefore with the Lapwing, he thus cried farre from his neast. Wel (prettie peate) quoth he, thy mind as yet disagreeth within it selfe, because it is not partaker of any pleasant good. To change which appalling and oppressing propertie, thou shalt be conducted to that place of pleasure, whence doth remaine exilde all melancholy passions. I cannot imagine thee greater good, neither wil I doo thee a lesse commoditie. And so prouided attendants to conduct Katherina to the Castle. As the glorious Sunne beganne to drench his fire-breathing Steeds in the colde Ocean, and the gladsome daylight was shadowed by the nights gloomy clouds: Iacomin (almost made deaths Captiue through weakenesse) with his other sickly Companions, had gotten land, euen on the shoare of this same Cittie, where Katherina was brought for a present to the Prince. And hauing obtained lodging for himselfe and the rest of his heartlesse followers, was taken in cure by a cunning Surgian: all the company at the Inne (where he laie) bewayling the heartilesse downefal and distresse of so faire a person. Katherina in the meane time being come to the Castle, beholding it without, somewhat wondred: but when she beheld within the gresses and steppes guiding them vnto seueral Inclosures (whose imblazures were no lesse resplendent, than the glorious Iasper, or a multitude of goodly Emeraldes) shee was ouercome with incredible admiration. Some salutes being imparted towards her by many of the Dames there resident: she was placed by those of the Kings Guard (according to his Maiesties commaund) in a most prettie Closette, all about garnished with flowers so liuely portrayed, as that Arte seemed to goe beyonde Nature in her workes: For there were Roses so depaynted and framed, as if they were but then plucked and brought from the Garden: bearing so varnished a die, as did Zeuxes Artificiall Grapes, which the Byrdes beguilde, did often pricke at with reaching beakes. There was a square Table, by the nimble Seruitors straight couered ouer with delicious dainties: To eate whereof Katherina was inuited, both by some Damzels, that at poynt-deuise awaited on her: and intreated by the other Dames, that welcommed her, as best allowed for that purpose. Little was it, that Katherina tasted; lesse, that her passionate stomacke digested: and least of all, that her greeued minde delighted. Only her wandring eyes euen fedde on diuers sightes, so farre foorth, that they seemed neuer satisfied sufficiently. As shee satte at meate, shee helde in ken, portrayed with a most perfect plotforme in cloath of Arras, the proportion of the famous Cittie Athens: to haue preheminence whereof, Minerua accompanied with all the Muses (whose fourmes were rarely pollisht, holding in theyr handes diuers Instruments, but Minerua bearing a Booke) helde a controuersie with Neptune (who helde in her hand a threefolde Mace) and all his Demie Gods. In the middest of which contention, there seemed to appeare vnto them an admirable water-Nymph, euen faire Thetis: whose admyrable lookes (lyke the Sunnes austers) so piercest Neptunes cordyalls, that to winne fauour, hee graunted to yeelde vp the dominion of all his lande-Citties vnto the handes of the contending Goddesse. Taking hold on whose promise, Minerua for him wonne the Nymph, and gaind the free gouernment of Athens . Underneath that Portrayture was set this Poesie: Arma qu ae violant, vinciunt amores . What Table-talke the wanton Wagtailes (that were her copesmates) to increase merriment, and decrease melancholy, for recreation their mindes then vsed, it skilles not to repeate: and therefore shal be omitted, to auoyd troublesome prolixitie. For no man is so dunsticall, that cannot coniecture follie in the smiles, and vanitie in the speeches, of suche vyle Huswiues. The Table taken vp, they walked a while to behold the varietie of Arts ornaments, spred round about this metropolitane house. And when Katherina had throughly viewde and reviewde all, shee sette downe her censure for a Principle, that Omnia vanitas . When time gaue Morpheus libertie, with his inchaunting noates, to bedull mens vigilant sences, summoning all humane bodies to recreating rest: (the skie being maskt with a duskie vaile, and onely made brightsome by the glimmering appearaunce of some set Starres) Katherina , by the company beeing brought againe vnto her setteled Chamber, (the place that was appoynted her to solace in) all bidding her good night, and the Keeper locking fast the Chamber doore (as he commonly vsed and was accustomed euerye Night, to shut, locke, and bolte faste the reste) in place of slumbering, shee waxed againe sorrowfull: in stead (on that sumptuous bed) to take quiet, she stood at the windowe with eyes most carefull: in place of sweete content, entertaining within her breast sharpe discontent: reckoning all proffered pleasure, as perill: all dilicates, but dregges: all courting, but counterfeit: and all the pleasant Uyands, but plaine vanitie. And from the aboundance of striuing thoughts, her voyce (the mindes enterpreter) vttered this Homilie. Is it worthy the title of beautie, or blemish, to haue the body purpled, and the soule polluted? The Serpent (that in Paradice beguilde Eua ) knew not how to entice her to eate the forbidden Apple, but by bidding her behold the beautie thereof, (for the rinde seemed sweete, and the taste to see the coare, bred a sowre infection) whose wittinesse ouerwinning their wits to agree vnto that pleasure, procured an vnrecitable punishment. The King ( Katherina ) hath placed thee in a semblable delightsome Eden , promising thee pleasure, without paine: mirth, without moane: ioy, without annoy: solace without sorrow: and all delight, without any dolours: whose allurements, if thou reiect not: whose blandishments, if thou banne not: and templations, if thou temperate not: thy mind wil be blemished, thy conscience stained, thy thoughts polluted, and thy heart infected. What is it to view the glorious architecture of this depainted house? but (as it were) to looke on the Apple with Eua ? And what will it be to taste the pleasures that this place presents, but euen to swallowe morsells of procuring penaltie with Eua ? So that as that on the one side, so this on the other, imparts a mappe of horred miserie. But more literately to define, what is this pollished place, but (like a painted Sepulchre) an habitation for rotten bones? What are these pretie couerings, but representments of shadowed euills? what are these drawne flowers, but species of follies? these pictures, but the genus of vices? these golden spangling knobs, but the accident of il happes? to conclude, what is the cloath of Arras and all, but euen the proprium of all perills, the subiect of all pollutions, and the continent of all calamities? Some Humerists in their Similies, compare women to Syrens: their faces to the fauor of Medusa: their speeches to the laughtures of Hyena: and their wailings to Crocadiles teares. Al which slaunderous compares, are to be obiected to their Authors enuie, not to womens deserts: that (poore soules, being weaker vessels) are borne by the prouocations of men, vnto a thousand mischiefes. Though Medea were a sorceresse, yet could not her drugs (though mightie to worke miraculous metamorphoses) constraine men to keepe their affections within the lists of continencie. For in fiercenesse, they exceed the angry Tyger: in wilinesse, equallize the subtill Fox: in wantonnesse, accompany the toyish Ape: in lust and leaudnesse, surpasse the libidynous Goate: in crueltie, goe beyond the rauenous Wolfe: aud in anger, wax more wrathfull than the roaring Lyon: and onely through them, are women brought to wretchednesse. Now doth the prospectiue of this contemplation present before my thoughts, a double genus contained mongst men ( viz. ) a good and bad. On the one side stands (and then shaking her head, shee fetcht a grieuous sigh) my deare, ah! (and then groand) my dearest loue and life, estraunged Iacomin . On the other side sits the wanton King (ah! that these should seeme to protect and gouerne others, that cannot direct nor guide themselues) who seeketh the spoile of my chastitie. The one haue the vniust Deities throwne downe to distresse, the other haue they extold with partiall dignitie. The one was alway the Disciple of Uertue: the other remaines a seruitor vnto vice. The one directed and obedient to diuine loue, the other subiected and attendant on diuellish lust. And yet are they both men: and yet the one liues orderly like a reasonable creature: and the other without good order, euen like a brutum quoddam . Ah! now I see that the blinde Goddesse (whom men commonly call Fortune ) holdeth highest dominion on the earth (whose partiall hand (through her buzzardly blindnesse) deales gifts to the vndeserued, and bestowes small benefites on good deserts) else am I surely perswaded, the vertuous should neuer be so continually crossed, and the vicious so pleasantly and maiestically supported. Shall the faithfull and honest wight be thrust on thornes of tribulations? and shall dishonest and leaud venerists tread on Roses? Shall the good eate Cole-worts with the Cynicke ? and the badde feed on dainties with the Courtier ? Are the one constrained to drinke the Worme-wood water, and the other suffered freely to carowse bowles of Wine? Ah heauens! Ah Deities! What is the earth then, but the vpholder of iniquitie, and destroyer of iustice? And how may that be, when the Gods theron haue constituted mortall members, (till they are by death all called thence) with vprightnesse to remaine? and spend their mortallitie with such Angelicall integritie, as that when their liues leaue the earth, they may be immortalized in the glorious heauens? Ah how blinde is the earth, that can be content to be mapt with the vaile of vanitie? Uertue bandieth daily against Uice, but Uice is had in such regard, as though the mightinesse of those vile multitudes (that Champion-like braue it, maugre Uertues worthy martialists, whose honours haue beene atchieued by sheading and sustaining the losse of their liuely bloud) that seeme to saueguard that deceitfull Strumpet: the world is ledde captiue, to bee obseruant to all most wretched and villainous misdemeanours. And therefore, by how much the company of Uertues Souldiers are the scarcer, by so much more worthy are their famous Uictories to bee registred in the Records of eternall Remembrance. The renowned Virginius of Rome , rather respected his daughters virgin-like martyring death, than to saue her life, to liue in leaudnesse with dishonour. Chaste Lucrece grieuing at her violent rape, to eschew the disgrace of her inforced offence, would by no meanes be perswaded to liue, but cut off her dayes (to auoyd discredit) with a deadly knife. Daphne the Nymph, to saue her honestie, wished rather to remaine for euer in the Barke of a Bay tree: than for leaudnesse to bee made a Beare, as was the Trull that afterwarde beeing in daunger (whilest shee wandred in the woods with Lycaon, Actaeon, Priapus , and such leaudenes, like a beast) to be slaine by the shaft of her owne sonne: was by Iupiter taken vp in a cloude, and made the Starre Vrsa Maior , and her sonne, Vrsa Minor . Biblis lamenting her misdemeanour with continuall and vncessant teares, neuer remitted her heart from sighes, and her breast from swelling sobbes, nor her minde from wofull thoughts, vntill shee became euen a watrie Fountaine. Hast thou read all these ( Katherina ) or at leastwise heard these and many more? and yet doest thou refraine to follow any of their famous examples? Wilt thou be content to a be Kings Concubine, and spot thy soule with sinnes (that is now as white as the driuen Snowe) as blacke and vgly as pitch? Be mindfull (vile caitiffe) of thy birth: the sinceritie of thy parents, and vertues of thy friends: and wilt thou then become the onely blemish of thy kinred through vile folly? Then she raged, and thus abandoned her ill haps. Auaunt (quoth she) you infernall Furies, and hellish hagges, that tempt a wofull Soule after the sufferance of disanulling miseries, to taste of sugred mischiefes. Why seeke you to ensnare me with your poysoning baites, on guilded hookes? I am not yet prouided for the draught of your perditious nettes. My good Genius guide mee in these extreames, and helpe to vnloose me from their entangling snares: for if I rightly consider mine owne cause, I was neuer in such daungerous case. I am shut vp in a glorious prison, to serue sinne like a Iaile whelpe: and there is no man that friends mee so much, as in my behalfe to set in baile, to free me from this seruitude. But my noble minde (that tooke life from the loines of Princes) will neuer (I hope) debase it selfe so lowe, as to yeeld it selfe a seruile bondslaue to the greatest Monarch in the world, to serue his lust. How are all comforts exilde ( Katherina ) from this Cabine? The spangled imblazures glister like Silkwormes in the darke, as if they meant to sporte thine eyes with sparklings, as full of fairenesse, as the purple-coloured Topace . But by these art thou driuen to behold thine owne ruth: looke on the Starres, and contemplate with the Moone-shine, (both which shut forth their raies against the Glasse-windowes) and in their glory see thine owne griefe: in their feature, thy deformitie: in their speculation, the respect of thy estimation, which not long sithence seemed as glorious, as their radiant graces. Better had it bene, thou hadst with the setting Sunne, bene drenched in the Ocean deepes, than followe this course to thy confusion. Worthier of renowne mightest thou haue bene reckoned; by the mercilesse blades of the butcherly Pyrates to haue lost thy life, than thus to lose the libertie of thy chast liuing. Better to haue endured the outragious rebukes of thine angry Parents at Palermo , then here to be banqueted in a straunge land, with infecting and sinne-saluing blandishments. O times! O dayes! O intemperable manners! O times, of vicious liuing! O dayes, of vertuous abolishing! O intemperate manners, of abhominations engendring! The first to be hated, the other to bee reiected: and the third to be annihilated. Ah wretched Katherina ! distressed Katherina ! molested and amazed Katherina ! Thou escapest all the Monsters on Seas, and yet wert made a spoile vnto men: and by them, art made a pray for a cursed humane monster: as mightie as the Dragon that was to deuoure Andromeda , whom stout Theseus rescued: but there is no Theseus to rescue thee from expected scath. Couldest thou frame such a webbe for resistance as did the constant Dame of Ithica , the good Penelope ; or inuent such a clewe to bring thee out of this Laborinth, as did Ariadne ; then, ah! then, couldest thou hope to auoyd this daunger, and be requited of all dammage. And yet dispaire not ( Katherina ) in these extreames: Daienera found a shert, to wreake her wrongs on Hercules: Medea a Garland of poysoning flowers, to reuenge her quietly on faithlesse Iason: and the Gods may grace thee with the gift of some drift inuented, to stoppe the lustfull pretence of this leacherous Tunisian . Doo not endure (O sacred Iuno ) a modest maiden (that hath vowed vnto her Pheere the obseruance of nuptiall rights) to be defilde; rather giue her courage to cut her breast (like the Carthaginian Dido ) and end her life with chaste desire, than liue to be polluted, by the embracings of beastly lust. Which hauing said, she fell flat on the floore, with her face towards the ground: and with heartie compunction of a passionate soule, prayed and called on all the blessed and deified powers of the Olympicke Regions, to be propitious vnto her plaints, and by one good meane or other, in some good time to end her woes. With these disquiet motions (oh that any modest maiden should haue such cause of disquiet) spent she the long and wearie winters night, till Aurora opened her purple doores in the East, strewing the places (there about her dwelling) with faire coloured Roses, and sweete Uiolets. About which time, her eyes dulled with heauinesse, began to inclose, as if then they would not seeme to behold the glorious arising of Phoebus raies: nor see his horses breathe from their nosthrills flakes and fierce flames on the hugie mountaines: for the Chamber windowes lay directly by South-East: on which climate, the Sunne in winter season appeareth commonly twelue minutes after the eight houre in the fore noone. And then it seemed she fell into a slumber, and in her sleepe beheld a Uision, which I shall plainely versifie in this manner. Iuno with Phoebe (who no great whiles gone, Had kist the cheekes of slowe Endimion ) Walkt hand in hand: them followed Morpheus , Playing on golden Lute, like Orpheus . After him, Aboron and his Faierie Dame, With troupes of iocond Faieries dauncing came. Then did appeare the crew of Phoebes traine, All clad in white aray (like flower Dumaine .) And in their feitures faire (as Sommers Queene) At girdle bare quiuers of arrowes keene. Following them (off a pretie measurd space) A troupe of Satyres entred into place: Leading Dame Fortune , fettred fast in chaines, (So Fates decreed, for breeding Louers paines) All these lookt pleasant; none were seene to lowre, Saue Fortune , that in thraldome had small powre. They neare the place where Katherina lay: Thus then gan Iuno to faire Phoebe say. Long time (too long) this wight endu'd with graces Through Fortunes spite (that thwarteth with disgraces All vertuous creatures, that on earth remaine: Extolling Vices crew in Court to raigne) Hauing endurde great grieuances and crosses, Is robd of friends, that should redresse her losses. Now time requires she haue some comfort giuen, For wounding woes her soule haue ouergrieuen. No Nimph of all my traine (then Phoebe said) Hath liu'd more chaste and vertuous than this maid: And for that cause ( Ioues Queene) none more than I , With helping hand would guard her chastitie. Thus then spake Aboron with haughtie voice; The Faierie King (dread Beauties) doth reioyce That Morpheus summond hath this Parliament, T'enact a fit concluding consequent. When waggish Cupid chauncst to wound her hart, At first vnwares with golden pointed Dart. (As Fortune now liues) liu'd then seruilely To please his mother, in my custody. Wherefore my minde is willing, forward prest, To haue her woes and miseries redrest. My nimble Faieries shall direct her make, That neare these walles he shall his passage take. And stirr'd by loyall Loue, shall giue consent That night to lie with her, through due euent. And from their breasts Ile driue all feare and care, ( Morpheus replide whil'st they together are. And she (quoth Phoebe ) meane while shall not lacke My helpe, to bring her enuious foes to wracke Then Iuno said (whilste Fortune to her selfe) Auowde to thwart them, and the Faierie Elfe,) After tis knowne they both are man and wife, Ile graunt them happinesse all dayes of life. Happie, happie, happie (then did they call): Shall these true Louers liue: And vanisht all. By that time that the Sunne was mounted neare (by the cariage of his swift flying horses) vnto the Meridian , had Katherina cast off slumbring; and with receiued comfort, began to consider on her (foresaid) Dreame, and to contemplate on the Uision. And may it be (said shee) that the iust Deities will deigne a wretch such fauour, as propitiously to rescue her in midst of hard extreames! Then (poore soule) prostrate thy selfe, and powre forth gratefull prayers, to their diuine powers. Then she vttered a thankfull Hymne of praises and gratefull thankes, ledde with good hope that her ioyes should againe be replenished: which fell out indifferently, as I will specifie by these accidents, and first concerning our Load-starre . Our Load-starre continuing vncessantly his course, will appeare this euening in Vespers place, at his appearance, somewhat beautifull, till Aquarius seeme to dash him out of countenance, with inclosures of mystie cloudes, and watrie showres: which for a time shall raigne in multitudes. Iacomin had not long soiournied at the Inne, (hauing kept his bed a day or two, more to get ease in minde, than for trouble of any daungerous disease in body: marrie his wounds were somewhat greene) but that his hurts were cured, and his body currant; yet in his minde continued such a corasiue, as made his colour chaunge, his complexion alter, and his strong composition extentiate. And all these disparagements were engendred by dispairing thoughts for Katherina , his dearest loue and delight: whom he accounted vtterly lost. With vacant steppes he treads through and through the streetes of the Citie, enquiring of many (whom in his walkes he met) for a woman lately taken on the Seas by certain Gallies, but could neither be enformed of the one, nor heare of the other. Which made him in minde so outragious, as the furious Palatine , when he suspected, Medor had plaid false with his Angelica , abandoned all lawes of reasonable consideration, and cried out, woe, woe, woe, accursed caytiffe. I will (quoth he) walke henceforth poorely (as fits my fortunes) in Pilgrimage: and will with heartie deuotions offer oblations of peace, and Orysons to possesse quiet at the shrines of all Saints, as my wandring steppes shall conduct me to their Tombes and Temples. And when I chaunce to looke on any Louers mishaps, I will adioyne as a note marginal, Sic Iacomin cum Katherina . In which impenitrable resolution, discharging and discarding his followers, acquiting their costs, and contenting his Hostesse, hauing paide all dues to all (sauing to Nature) with fardle at his backe (like a Trauayler) poasted out of Towne, and kept his course that way, where his Katherina was inclosed. Pacing by the Castle (at which he wondred, it seemed in shewe so flourishing) he staied his steppes a litle, gazing at the ingrauen and carued Images with earnest lookes, imagining it to be some worthie Monasterie. Hauing sufficiently satisfied his sight, as he began in his waie to foote it forward, Katherina (hauing before espied him) eying him from a Casement of the wide window, calde Iacomin by name, twice or thrice aloud: vnto the which voice, after that a while he had listned, inquired, who calleth Iacomin ? And therewithal lifting his eyes aloft at the windowe, sawe her face, whom his heart so highly honoured. What Catherina (quoth he?) I, I, thy Katherina (my deare Iacomin ) saide shee: And then for exceeding ioy both euen remained surprised with a sowning trance, hauing their sences euen ingaged by an extasie: But remembring themselues, Iacomin began to enquire how she happened into that hold, and to whom the house that held her so seuerely was belonging? Shee repeated the whole summe and substance briefly vnto him: which Iacomin hauing heard, And pittie tis, I trow (said he) that so faire a place, should serue for so fowle a purpose. But what remedie (sweete heart) replied Katherina : heere standes mine honour in hazard, and my credite in suspence: euery houre awayt I, when he wil offer (shamelesse tyrant as he is) to giue an assault to cracke my chastitie: all which yet remaine sound and perfect, wholy dedicated and deuoted vnto thee, as vnto their worthiest possessor and onely Patron. Protect them then (deare Iacomin ) and enioy them: whilst thou liuest leaue them not, in the handes of others, if thou loue them: For as the Bird Atagen , is saide neuer to sing after she is taken: no more can a modest maide reioyce, if once shee chaunce by lusts insnarings to be ouertaken. Then as we loue one another, so let vs liue togither: or if the date of our dayes hasten towards an end, let vs ende our liues at once togither. Returne til soone at night (good Loue) from whence you came, and when you behold the night beginnes to couer the Easterne clymate with pitchie cloudes: repaire againe to this place, and bring with thee some strong cordes, by whose helpe thou maist hauing once climbed that braunched Tree (for a troupe of Cedars, as loftie as those of Libarus , stood prying with their stately toppe- boughes neare the windowes) by my helpe winding thee vp, maist come into this open Casement. Or if thou fearest to aduenture thy selfe to ascende so high, for feare thou shouldst misse both thy footing and holdfast, and so sustaine a fall (which the heauens forebid, that thou in Katherinas sight shouldst suffer) yet wil thy countenance comfort me, whilest I remaine comforted by thy reclaiming conference. Then answered Iacomin (his heart dauncing the while within his reconciled breast) vnto her motion mentioned with these feruent speeches. By the immortall Gods (faire and faithful Loue) saide hee, who with my good Angel haue gouerned my feete directly to finde this place (by following with prosperous pace a happie path) I solemnely here in the sight of heauen, and aspect of the heauenly powers, avow, euen anon in the twilight, to returne hither againe with all speed conuenient: At which time ( Katherina ) see that thou set the Casement wide open, in signe thou doest expect my comming. By that loue which loyallie I owe thee, (saide Katherina ) I promise it: And performe it too, I trust (quoth Iacomin: ) I, and I liue (saide shee) til that appoynted time: as sure as I kisse this hand in stead of your delicious lippes, I wil. And (quoth hee) as certainly as I busse this fist, wishing I might as easily touch your faire cheekes, for requital of your tryed friendshippe, I will not faile to bee heere at that presenc. Which speeches by both parties, with many more protestations being breathed foorth, and sundry beckenings made, after that they were silent: Iacomin repaired againe to his former Lodging. His honest Hoste and Hostesse were exceeding glad to beholde their Guest, and so were the rest, for that they perceiued his outrage was now quelled by reason. Hee tolde them, hee had bene comforted by a Friend, and that hee would not trouble them to make any prouision for his Supper, because he was in a manner fore-sped, because fore-bidden to feaste that night abroad. But yet wil I drinke (quoth he) a cuppe of Canarie in my Chamber, if you please. With a very good will saide his Hoste. And so the one went to his Chamber, and the other went to the Wine. After that Katherina had lost the sight of her Loue, thinking euery minute a moneth, and euery houre a yeare, til he should returne: her minde beeing mooued with exceedyng admyration, shee feely lycenced her tongue thus to be talkatiue as followeth. What glorie, is comparable to gracious good will? or what life, equall to loue? Courtly pompe decayeth through pestiferous dissentions, as can my Parents broyles make manifest in Palermo: And life is alway in hazard to be lost: witnesse the miseries of the maimed, and mishappes of the mightiest: and the fall of these Kings and Emperours, can testifie, certifie and certificate thus commonly specified. Hector, Hanno, Hanniball dead; and Pompey, Pirrhus spild, Scipio, Cyrus, Caesar slaine; and Alexander kild. And yet good will (quoth shee) continueth after death; else had not Achilles so cruelly reuenged the fall of his deare friend (slaine by Hectors Launce) againe on valiaunt Hector . Nor Hercules with his Clubbe on shoulder, and cladde in his Lyons Case, woulde haue so striued to reuoke his deare Pirethous from the shades of Limbo: Oh, the surpassing vertue of friendly good-will, (which conioynes a Pelides with Orestes , and a Damon in firme league with Pitheas ) is continuall, perdurable, and eternall. And as for loue, more delicious, than ye sweet kernel of ye Nut; more comfortable, than the sugred iuice of the Grape; more sauory, than the wholsom smel of Myrrhe: indureth long, long after life is ended; else would not Orpheus stirred on through the essence of loue, haue sought by sounding musicke to pacifie the angrie powers of Hell: and to require of blacke Pluto , the restoring to life againe of his lost Loue, lately made his Bride. O the admirable and vnrehearseable power of good wil! O the glorious and gracious vertue of soueraigne loue! Without the which, light, is but like darknesse: life, but death: gold, but drosse: health, but sicknesse: might, but miserie: ioy, but annoyance: ease, but disease: and in fine, the whole Earth, but a confused Chaos . If all the precepts of the Sages, al the principles of Philosophers, and al the praises that haue tooke proceedings from Poets braines, were setled on this subiect: yet could not the foresight of the one, the wisedome of that, nor the wit of the other, comprise a period , the efficacie, essence, & vertue therof. Then much lesse maist thou Katherina expresse the summarie effect, of so exquisite a quintescence: or shewe but the representing shadow, of such a rare superficies: Thy tongue faulters, though thy thoughts faile not: feeding on such an excellent substance, whose fulnesse seemes to satisfie thee, and yet in no respect remaineth lessened. Hauing so said, she waxt silent, and had her minde exercised with muses: which rauisht her sences with such supernal conceits, as that her heart euen reckoned it selfe deified. Iacomin in the meane time at his lodging rested careful, bearing an eye to the maine chance, and the dayes chaunge: that now was euen ouertaken by the fresh Horses of the night. High time was it now for him, to hasten, and loue so suffered him not to be slacke, that he was at the Castle, had climbde the Tree, and nimbly by agilitie, ascended and entred the Casement (which his Loue had set wide open) before that Katherina thought him halfe towardes her. For he minded not to call vnto her, vntil he had past the daunger of climbing, least that his downful (if so it chanced) should breed her dolour. When she beheld her Loue creeping in at the Casement (driuen with his suddaine presence from her momento ) she ranne and receiued him in her armes with an heartie Saluie . And when they had imparted mutual congies , (their eyes courting each other with amorous glances and steadie lookes) they fel to louely imbracings: and thus questioned Iacomin whilst he held her about the middle with folding armes. Katherina (said he) feruent loue hath made me light, to gaine thy company: and now suddaine doubt giues the onset against my brest, and suspect of afterclaps assaults my heart with hard battery, to make me yeeld vnto dispaire. But the heauens and all the celestiall Godheads know, the vndaunted fortitude of my zealous affections, and the constant motion of my loue-hallowing minde. For though seuen-mouthed Nilus should waxe drie, and that I should endure the thirst of Tantalus ; or if my bread should turn to stones, and I abide more toyle than Sisiphus: If the earth should be turnd to steele, the sea be set a fire, and the starres forsake the skie and become barres of brasse to affright me, to the intent I should change the motion of my life, or forsake loue; yet would I rather endure ten thousand deaths, than be found for my mindes mutation, faithlesse, faultring fickle and so faultie. And therefore (sweete Katherina ) I coniure thee by the diuine essence of that loue, wherewith through the infusion of heauenly graces thou art inspired, towards me, tel me if the lewde king hath appointed any time to visit thee? By heauens innumerable ioyes (said she) possest by all the blessed Senate there, (deare Loue) I avow, thy Katherina neuer gaue consent that at any time the kings presence should repaire hither; neither haue I heard by any, that he mindes to visit me. Haue all bidden thee good night then (quoth Iacomin ) and hath the Keeper fast lockt the doores, or is not yet departed the Castle? Long since (said she) and therefore you need not doubt (I hope) of any danger: For no theefe on earth I protest whist I haue breath, shal rob you of your right and interest. These Lampes had not long possest the oyle of their parley, to lighten their thoughts, but that (after they had both together made them vnreadie, and were laide in bed) dimme sleepe drowsily eclipsed their eye beames, with clowdie slumbers. So that their mindes, ere while the mappes of cares, and entertainers of watchful woes, were now ( Endimion -like) growne carelesse; respecting neyther feareful Cautions, nor doubtful Caueats. This while was the King with his Guard come to the Castle, to court with louely Rhetoricke his new-come Goddesse, deeming, that now her moodie minde, was by the pleasure of the place, become mirthfull; and her heart, erst harned with sorrow, to be now softned with solace. And causing the Keeper to vnlocke the gates, ascended the gresses, and came to Katherinas Chamber doore, willing him to open it: wherein when he entred, and beheld other lying there in bed, imbracing his Venus ; not able to endure that sight, he flung forth the chamber, giuing them straight charge and command, that when these sleepers should awake, they should both be bound backe to backe to a stake, and end their liues (as traitors ought) in flames of fire: and hauing pronounced that wrathfull doome, with rage departed. Here (Gentles) should I tell you, how Iuno being incensed with anger for this accident, committed through Fortunes spite, (descending downe from Olympus in her glorious Chariot, drawn by her byrds, whose starr-eied prauncing plumes present before their mistresse eyes, so many prettie colours, as doth the Rain-bow in the heauens) checkt her presumption with an Egregiam vero laudem ; and blamed the Faieries and Satyres for their slacknesse; bidding them to binde fast her hands straighter, that she might not turne so thwartfully her maligning wheele. But that must I needs cut off to auoyd tediousnesse: yet will I giue you to knowe, that after shee had rung a peale of scolding at Fortune (on the one side) and hadde gently (on the other side) chastised the negligence of her leaders; shee entreated Morpheus to obserue his part yet in any case: avowing by all her Deitie, rather then this faire couple should endure any wracke, shee would her selfe at the instance brandish foorth with Maiestie, to withstand all those that should performe theyr executions. Flames? (said shee) shall scorching flames consume my worthy subiects? No, Ile send Boreas , both with windes and showers to quench the fires: Whilest with Hymenaeus helpe, Ile hide them, as erst I did neas and Dido , in some vaultie Caue. And so commaunded her glorious Foules (whose wings and taile-plumes stood proudly spread) in haste to carrie her vnto the highest heauens, from whence shee entred to behold the consequent: minding wholly to conserue them both in safetie, although she should see them bound at stake, and stand in extreamest peril of kindeling flames. Soundly yet rested these slumberings friends (little thinking what sowre sawce the King had ordained, minding it should bee mingled mongst their sweetes) til the trauayling Sunne was gone well onwarde in the East: All which time did the Kings Guard attend them. Assoone as their eyes awaking opened, they were informed of the Kings being there, and of his bloudie sentence, pronounced against them. Whereat first they mourned, but afterward well resolued to endure their menaced death, made themselues readie to take the end of their liues on earth. Now (my Loue) quoth Katherina , shall the world beholde in vs, a spectacle, presenting fidelitie. In thee, loue; in mee, loyaltie; in thee, constancie: in mee, chastitie: in both, firme affection and sure confidence. As shee would proceed, the Executioners came, and bounde their armes, which both indured with admired patience: the punishers pittying their distresse with some kinde remorse, and would haue spared them, had not they all bene bound on paine of death, to doo the Kings commaund. This while were some busied in putting vp the stake, some prouiding Faggots, Pitch-bales, Strawe, and all other Fuell: Which breeding a rumour with suddaine admiration, in vulgar eares, multitudes came in heapes vnto the place of execution, expecting the performance of a wofull stratagem. Foorth at last were brought these wofull Louers, guarded on each side with Billes and Holbards, like rebellious Traytors: and bound they were to the stake, backe to backe, contrary to their mindes: who earnestly intreated the araigners, to suffer them end their liues face to face. But the cruel King had otherwise giuen in charge, and that bred their greatest griefe. Yet patience preuailed with them in this their too seuere handling. What, my deare, (quoth Iacomin ) they may by this seperation robbe vs, of comfortable countenance in this fraile and transitorie life: but their crueltie cannot bereaue vs of sight in the glorious Sphere on hie, when our immortal ghoastes going towards Ioues Pallace, shal meete in the milke-white way. Which words (vttered with gastly voice) moued at the beholders to bewaile the downfall (with deawie teares) of so faire a couple. Then were remorslesse brandes of fire brought to enkindle the Fuel: and Iuno had in readinesse placed watrie Iris directly ouer that clymate to shoote forth showres: When, loe (as pleased the iust dooming Deities, that at their good pleasures can preserue the vertuous from vniust persecutions, and vndeserued punishments) the Lorde high Admyrall (drawne in a costly Coache of Ebonie) rode by, and of the people inquired what the prisoners were: but was not resolued by any, but was told by all, they were straungers that were to die. His honour therefore standing on his saddle-cloth, questioned (comming neare vnto the stake) their names? He answered, Iacomin mine: and mine Katherina said shee. Of what Countrey (replied the Admirall) are ye? Of Scicilia (saide they). Of what place in Scicilia ? (quoth the Admirall) Both of Palermo answered Iacomin . Of what Parents in Palermo are you sprung? (saide hee) I am the haplesse sonne of Signior Iacomin Pierro , (answered the one.) And I the daughter of Don Alexander Bartolo (saide the other.) Dooth the King, who hath condemned ye (quoth he then hastily) know either of you? Neither of vs, and it shall please you, (answered they) neither skils it much that our extreame fortunes and perils indured should be knowne to his maiestie: for these flames shall ende our liues, and with our wretched liues, our extreame miseries. Yet be not driuen to dispaire (replied the Admirall) I wil to the Court, and conferre with the King concerning you: And then giuing in charge on paine of death that they should deferre a while (til they had word againe from him) to kindle the fires, he caused his Coachman to yerke onwarde his light-hoofed Iennets to the Court: where when he was arriued, and dismist from his Coache, was come into the Kings presence: after some salute, he thus with bold stomacke breathed forth speeches. Can they (quoth he) that place Kings, pull downe Kings? then looke thou once again to be beaten out of Tunise: For Scicilia , once our chiefe aide, will become our cruellest enemie: and thou be enforced to seeke a new Kingdome. The King hauing heard these cracking thunders, strooken with feare of some scorching lightnings to follow, mildly answered the Admirall with these words. Why, what is the cause my good Lord (said he) of these sudden threatnings? how haue I giuen occasion to make our friends foes? or Scicilia our enemies? Thou seekest (replied the Admirall) to burne the flourishing braunches of those fruitefull stocks, which in thy greatest extreams stood as strongest supporters to hold thy feet from falling vnder Rebells yoake. Doest thou not remember how scarce thrice seuen yeares sithens, Seigneor Iacomin Pierro , and Don Alexander Bartolo , the two egregious Uiceroyes of Scicilia (did by sending thee assistant Forces) seate thee (subduing valiantly thy insulting foes) safely in thy Kingdome? and now for requitall, doest thou seeme to burne the onely issue of them both? for that the two faithfull Louers seeke the fruition of their loues? why, the younge Gentleman that is yonder (like a Traytor) at the stake, is the sonne of Iacomin: and she, the daughter off Bartolo ; both euen destroyed through thy vnknowne ignorance. Oh heauens! (quoth the King, breaking off this Dreery tale ere it was ended) I would not for my Crowne and Kingdome haue proued so tyrannous. So tyrannous? (replied the Admirall) I well know not, whether they are not yet tortured and turned to ashes or no: the executioners were by thee so straightly charged, to hasten on their torments, and inkindle the fires. By Iupiter (then inraged said he) I am then vndone, vtterly vndone, vndone for euer. Ho whose there, ho? come hither one. Gallope to the stake yonder on a Courser, that can outrunne Pegasus in swift set race: and see if the prisoners there standing, do yet breathe aliue: what not there yet? Oh how my heart houers for heauinesse in my breast, as though it would get forth, and run thither before my posting seruant? had I ouer-carowst my selfe, and ouerdrenched my braines with wine, as would the great golbing Alexander ? that so drunkenly I condemned these straungers, enquiring neither what they were, whence they came, nor whither they would? Oh infortunate chaunce! Oh synister chaunge! By the Gods, if they suruiue, I will excommunicate from my breast this ill humour of lustfull venerie (engendred in me through wanton sloath) and will banish from my bosome all those Curtezanlike Dames: whose blandishments and insnaring flatteries haue so liuely vpheld my youthes leaud lust: For now, and neuer till now, did I conceiue what was true Loue: with which improper tytle, my subtle Concubines (queanish and whorish drabs as they are) haue mantled my vnbridled lust. And so long, as that my behauiour hath beene more brutish than the vnreasonable beasts. I now see the vanitie thereof, for hereby was I ledde to worke this vnmercifull mischiefe on the liues of these two constant Louers, whose setled mindes may bee made subiect to no exchaunge. My amendment shall be my best repentance, for now I remember that, which long since I read, Optima p aenitentia, vita noua ; and yet doo I repent my franticke follies with heartie griefe, and by the propitious helpes of the Gods, my modest liuing hereafter, shall wipe cleane away the blemishes of my former life, so viciously and vily ledde. By this time were the two Louers (to the admirable applause of all the beholders) redeemed from fierie death, walking ( Magna comitante caterua ) with great iollitie towards the Court. Newes was brought to the woful King, that they were aliue, by some of the Guard, that posted apace before the rest for that purpose. And hauing heard that they were neare arriued, the Admirall went forth, and fairely saluted them at the Gates, conducting them vnto the King: who kindly receiued them they both imparting due obeysance vnto his grace,) with these conforming speeches. Faire Princes (said he) I doubt not but the Deities haue determined the long lengthening of your dated dayes; and well may your liues endure with happinesse. For by the lusters of your wel-willing and wel-liuing, doo I behold the leaudnesse of mine ill led life: by your vertues, my vices: by your loue, my lust: by your constancies, my incontinencies. And ioy I doo with incredible gladnesse, that by the bright beames of (now praised be Gods) your liuely lookes, I am put to wit of both your royall Parents: And therefore (Princes) now freely be frolicke: for we will feast away all perils forepast. And what pleasures I can wish or your selues will, do but (in token that you forgiue my intended iniuries vnwittingly minded against you) deigne to require or request: and commaund, rather than demaund: and I will performe it to the vttermost Ace. Then replied Iacomin , saying: Dread Prince, our verie soules abhorre the sparkes of vnhumaine reuenge: and our minds (alway debonaire towarde our friendes) indure not to thinke on intended or inacted iniuries. All the recompence that we would haue, is the hope, that our agreements shall amend all amisses: and our loue, exile all loosenesse, (as you haue plighted by promise) for euer heereafter from your royall person: which will not only lift your honor (lost) vnto the highest altitude: but driue all into an admiration by so luckie a chaunge. Which being saide, the King taking his seate, willing also the rest so to take their ease: holding Iacomin by the hande (who then was placed nexte to his person) thus replied as followeth. Uertuous Scicilian , mine owne motion for my amendment was much, but thy Princely words haue incensed me tenne times more. For proofe therefore that I am perfectly mooued with penitent compunction, behold what my minde wills me in your presence, and before all these my honourable Lordes to haue performed, though it portray mine highly deserued shame. Then calling foorthe the Keeper of his Castle, hee commaunded him, to bring before him, all these impudent dames, whose dishonesties had so mightily disgraced his honours and dignities. And whilest the Keeper went to accomplish his highnesse pleasure, he thus progressed in his speech. My Castle, where you, most chaste and modest Katherina (said he, turning toward the place where she sate) were inclosed, containes in holde a hundred lauish and licentious Dames, whose wanton dispositions, haue (like pitch) defiled the glory of my youth. These will I bannish farre from my Court, willing them to recall themselues: for (they say commonly) take away the cause, and the effect will die. I haue heard that Israels King, who before in the name of Iehoua his God, slew with a stone (which he sent from a sling) the huge Giant Goliath , consenting afterward to wanton sinne (that assaulted him whilest in a Gallerie he subiected him to idle sloath) wrought the murther of one of his dearest Lords: therby inkindling against him, both the wrath of his God, and incurring dishonor vnto his name. The like had I (vile wretch) offensiuely against you almost committed: but that some good Angell guided our Admirall, to withstand such a mischiefe. Sith therefore so viciously to followe wantonnesse, is vily to be a bond-slaue to all villainies: to shun the deadly seruitude of the one, I will vndoo the diuellish instigation of the other. And with that entred the virgins into place: wherefore hee commaunded his Treasuror, to bestowe on them seuerally an hundred markes: and so to conuey them from the Court, to leade the remnant of their liues in their natiue homes. Whose liberalitie bestowed towards them for their mainteinance, was by all there present much commended. And then the King to driue away melancholy from all (that seemed to maruell at the lookes of his halfe-discontent darlings, and choise minions) caused Tables and dice to be brought forth, to breed disporte: and Cardes in packs to be throwne on boord, to passe away the time, till the Cooke and Cator were prouided to serue in dinner. Himselfe at the Chesse-boord stood as a Chalenger; and younge Iacomin to shewe himselfe a champion, vndertooke the combat at that wittie weapon: alway with caution (after he had to trie, entred the lists) keeping him free from annoying checke. And when their gaming was ended, they feasted, and were frolicke. After this maner past these nobles the time together, for the space of some three or foure dayes: in which time, the king had prouided a gallant Fleete to guide these Scicilians safely home to Palermo . And the Admirall made him ready to beare them company in that conduct. Now hath our Load-starre (Gentlemen) past Aquarius , and paceth like Athlantas Coursers, towards the exaltation of Pisces: whose scales shewing and shining bright and cleare, gaue him libertie now at last freely to prognosticate happy successe. And therfore with the prosperous running of this wandring Starres race, am I in briefe to shut vp the Catostrophe of all the Scenes. Our yoong Scicilians , giuing the Tunisian King abundant thankes for their gracious entertainments; with the Lord Admirall, departed from Tunise ; and manned with a faire Fleete, shipt themselues, and crost the Seas; cutting through the Ocean, till peaceably they attained the Port of Palermo . Fame resounding through common eares report of their safe arriuall, moued the dissentious Peeres, Pierro and Bartolo , with seueral ioies, and yet could they not mittigate their rancord enuies, nor asswage their minds, from seeking mutual reuenge: in so much that they scarce deigned to bid welcome their owne children. Which being noised in the eares of Don Andrea Alizandra (then dwelling in the countrey) in regard of his countreys weale, and Scicilians well-fare, with all conuenient speed repaired to Palermo ; and informing the Tunisian Admirall how disorderly euery thing stood in hap-hazard; caused him by sound of Trumpet to summon the Citizens to the Parliament house. Wherevpon the Aldermen and Elders presented themselues peaceably before the Admirall and Alizandra . Whilest they were imployed there in consultation, came Pierro with his troupe: and a litle after, Bartolo with a great traine. Who then at each other most wilfully shoote darts of sharpe reuilings, and with bitter raylings, make repetitions of their wrongs mutually sustained by other: not content to rest satisfied till they were reuenged; so that had they not by pollicie bene preuented, there would haue bene wrought a bloudy massacre on both parties. But the Admirall and Alizandra causing silence, mongst all the assembly to be proclaimed by sound of Trumpet, on paine of death, to euery common man; and present imprisonment to euery noble man: whilest they were all silent, the wise Admirall thus vsed his Oration . Is it possible (ye Scicilians ) that men should be so possest with brutish rancour, as that their minds may be directed by no regard of humaine reason? May not the daily sheading of bloud, the murthering of the Commons, the dammages of your natiue countrey, continually proffered procure your hearts to agreements, and perswade your thoughts from hammering on furious reuenge? Shall the suckling waile, the child weepe, the innocent lament, the maiden moane, and the oppressed widow mourne, to behold these deadly discentions? Nay, shall the murthered Ghoasts, of those, that by these intestine hurliburlies haue traiterously bene brought to vntimely deathes, with outcries prouoke the dooming heauens, to powre downe plaguie vengeance on your seditious heads? Behold, the Gods in mercie haue wrought myraculous meanes to vnite your discentious Families againe togither, and to settle them in one concordant sympathy. See your honourable issues, (euen driuen through your discords into deadly dispaire to haue any happie day, for condeigning of their loues) are beyond hope safely returned home to amend your tyrannous liues. May not you ioy at the vertuous amitie of your children (whose indissoluble league is concluded both by the powers of heauen and earth) and abashed with shame, blush at your brutishnesse? Hath Tunise King, your friendly wel-wisher, and I, your present wel-willer, manned them hither with a gallant nauie, to haue this welcome? What shall we say, but as it is bruted of you in other countreys? that your two peace-freezing heads, seeme to enforce the quiet of all the members of Scicilia , through cold choller to congeale? Is it not dishonour to hold such discord? is it not reproach to be accounted so rash? is it not infamous, without sufficient cause to persist so enuious? then for shame chaunge your outragious angers, and entertaine chearefully these couragious Louers: I meane not one without the other, (for they both are one) but both in one, and one in both. Then shall your ruinous estate be corroborated, your honours standing (in hazard) remaine fortified; and your countreys commodities decaying, abundantly multiplied. As he would haue said farther, the whole multitude gaue
