 aut in hoc . I must needes say while this was in dooing, to put and keepe mee in hart like a captived Canniball fattend against my death, you often cryed Coraggio , and called รง a รงa, and applauded as I passt, and if not set mee in, yet set mee on, even  9 with a Syrens o tres-loutable Vlisse . O Madame who then spake faire? As for mee,  10 I onely say, as this mans embossed Hart out of hart, I sweat, I wept, and I went-on, til now I stand at bay: howsoever, I hope that may yet save me, which from others strangles others, I meane the coller you have put about my neck with your inscription, Noli me c aedere, nam sum Dianae . Yet nor can you denie, nor I dissemble, how at first I pleaded this Authors tedious difficultie, my selfe-knowne insufficiencie, and others more leisurefull abilitie. But no excuse would serve him, that must serve without excuse. Little power had I to performe, but lesse to refuse what you impos'de: for his length you gave time: for his hardnesse you advised help: my weaknesse you might bidde doe it's best: others strength you would not seeke-for further. Yet did your honoured name r'ally to my succour the forces of two deare friends, both devoted to your service, both obliged to your vertues: The one Maister Theodoro Diodati , as in name, so indeede Gods-gift to me, my bonus genius , and sent me as the good Angel to Raimond in Tasso for my assistant to combat this great  11 Argante : Who as he is happy in you, and you in him, that like Aristotle to Alexander , he may in all good learning, and doeth with all industrious attention instruct, direct, adorne that noble, hopefull, and much-promising spirit of your beloved brother and house-heire Maister Iohn Harrington : So was he to me in this inextricable laberinth like Ariadnaes threed; in this rockie-rough Ocean, a guidefish to the Whale; in these darke-vncouth wayes, a cleare relucent light. Had not he beene, I had not bin able to wade through: and had not he dissolved these knottes, none had, few could. The other (my onelie dearest and in love-sympathising friend, Maister Doctor Guinne , of whome I may justly say what my Authour saieth of his second-selfe Steven de la Boetie : for, he could not better pourtray him for him  12 selfe, then hee hath lively delineated him for me) willing to doe me ease, and as  13 willing to doe your Honour service, as you know him a scholler (and pitty is it the World knowes not his worth better; for as the Prince of Italian Poets saide of Valerius Corvinus, Non so se miglior Duce o Cavalliero , so may I truely say of him. Non so 14 Semeglior Oratore e Poeta, o Philosopho e Medico ) So Scholler-like did he vndertake  15 what Latine prose; Greeke, Latine, Italian or French Poesie should crosse my way (which as Bugge-beares affrighted my vnacquaintance with them) to ridde them all afore mee, and for the most part drawne them from their dennes: Wherein what indefatigable paines he hath vndergone, and how successefully overgone, I referre to your Honor, I remit to the learned; for, who but he could have quoted so divers Authors, and noted so severall places? So was hee to mee in this bundle of riddles an vnderstanding Oedipus , in this perilous-crook't passage a monster-quelling Theseus or Hercules : With these two supporters of knowledge and friendship, if I vpheld and armed have passt the pikes, the honor be all yours, since all by yours was done for your Honor. That all this is thus, the reply of that friend vpon my answer to your Ho: invitation in a sonet of the like, (but not same) terminations may signifie and testifie to all the world. Then let none say I flatter, when I forbeare not to tell all. Yet more I must needs say, if Poets be inspired by their muse, if souldiers take corage by the eie or memory of their mistrisses (as both have made some long believe) having already said, as Petrark to his mistris, In questo stato son Donna per vui, 16 By you, or for you, Madame thus am I. I now rather averre as the Lyricke to his Melpomene. Quod spiro, & placeo, si placeo, tuum est. That I doe breath and please, if please I doe, It is your grace, such grace proceed's from you. For, besides your owne inexplicable bounty first-mover of my good, La quale 17 ritogli me peregrino errante, e fra gli scoglii el'onde agitato, al furor di Fortuna, e benignamente 18 guidi in porto di salute e pace , Your noblest Earles beneficence, fore- running all as farre in curtesie as pedegree, and bearing not onely in his heart or hand, but even in aspect and due respect the native magnanimity of Bedford , and magnificent francke-Nature of the Rvssels , hath so kindely bedewed my earth when it was sunburnt, so gently thawed it when it was frost-bound, as (were there anie good in me) I were more sencelesse then earth, if I returned not some fruite in good measure. This may be thought too much for no better a deserver than I am: Yet more must I acknowlege joyned to this: for as to all, that professe any learning,  & do you (but small) steade therein, you and your husbands hand (most bounteous Ladie Harrington ) have beene stil open,  & your hospitable house, my retreate in storms, my reliefe in neede, Yea your hearts ever enlarged: so for an instance, in doing wel by me (the meanest)as if honorable father and mother with their noblest sonne and daughter should contend in that onely praise-worthy emulation of wel doing, you seemed even to strive, who should excel ech other, who should best entertaine, cherish and foster mee: And as if this river of benignitie did runne in a blood, your worthie Sonne in-Law, and vertuous Daughter Chichester with like-sweete liquor have supplied my drie cesterns. So as to the name and house of Bedford and Harrington , without prophanenesse, let me vow but one worde of the Pastorall, Illivs Aram, and with that word my selfe Your Honorable Ladishipsin humble hartie service, Iohn Florio. Shall I apologize translation? Why but some holde (as for their free-hold) that such conversion is the subversion of Universities. God holde with them, and withholde them from impeach or empaire. It were an ill turne, the turning of Bookes should be the overturning of Libraries. Yea but my olde fellow Nolano tolde me, and taught publikely, that from translation all Science had it's of-spring. Likely, since even Philosophie, Grammar, Rhethorike, Logike, Arithmetike, Geometrie, Astronomy, Musike, and all the Mathematikes yet holde their name of the Greekes: and the Greekes drew their baptizing water from the conduit-pipes of the Egiptians, and they from the well-springs of the Hebrews or Chaldees. And can the wel-springs be so sweete and deep; and will the well- drawne water be so sower and smell? And were their Countries so ennobled, advantaged, and embellished by such deriving; and doth it drive our noblest Colonies vpon the rockes of ruine? And did they well? and prooved they well? and must we proove ill that doe so? Why but Learning would not be made common. Yea but Learning cannot be too common, and the commoner the better. Why but who is not iealous, his Mistresse should be so prostitute? Yea but this Mistresse is like ayre, fire, water, the more breathed the clearer; the more extended the warmer; the more drawne the sweeter. It were inhumanitie to coope her vp, and worthy forfeiture close to conceale her. Why but Schollers should have some privilege of preheminence. So have they: they onely are worthy Translators. Why but the vulgar should not knowe all. No, they can not for all this; nor even Schollers for much more: I would, both could and knew much more than either doth or can.Why but all would not be knowne of all. No nor can: much more we know not than we know: all know something, none know all: would all know all? they must breake ere they be so bigge. God only; men farre from God. Why but pearles should not be cast to swine: yet are rings put in their noses; and a swine should know his stie, and will know his meate and his medicine, and as much beside, as any swine doth suppose it to be Marioram. Why, but it is not wel Divinitie should be a childes or olde wives, a coblers, or clothiers tale or table-talke. There is vse, and abuse: vse none too much: abuse none too little. Why but let Learning be wrapt in a learned mantle. Yea but to be vnwrapt by a learned nurse: yea, to be lapt vp againe. Yea, and vnlapt againe. Else, hold we ignorance the mother of devotion; praying and preaching in an vnknowne tongue: as sory a mother; as a seely daughter: a good minde perhaps, but surely an ill manner. If the best be meete for vs, why should the best be barrd? Why but the best wrote best in a tongue more vnknowne: Nay in a tongue more knowne to them that wrote, and not vnknowne of them to whome they wrote. Why but more honour to him that speakes more learned. Yea such perhaps, as Quintilians Orator; a learned man I warrant him, for I vnderstand him never a word. Why but let men write for the most honour of the Writer. Nay, for most profit of the Reader: and so haply, most honour. If to write obscurely be perplexedly offensive, as Augustus welliudged: for our owne not to write in our owne but vnintelligible, is haply to fewer and more criticall, but surely without honor, without profit, if he goe not, or send not an interpreter; who else what is he but a Translator? Obscure be he that loves obscuritie. And therefore willingly I take his worde, though wittingly I doe mistake it , Translata proficit. Why but who ever did well in its Nay, who did ever well without it? If nothing can be now sayd, but hath beene sayde before (as hee sayde well) if there be no new thing vnder the Sunne. What is that that hath beene? That that shall be: (as he sayde that was wisest) what doe the best then, but gleane after others harvest? borrow their colours, inherite their possessions? What doe they but translate? perhaps, vsurpe? at least, collect? if with acknowledgement, it is well; if by stealth, it is too bad: in this, our conscience is our accuser; posteritie our iudge: in that our studie is our advocate, and you Readers our iurie. Why but whom can I name, that bare a great name for it? Nay who great else, but either in parte, as Plato and Aristotle out of many ; Tullie, Plutarch, Plinie out of Plato, Aristotle and many; or of purpose, as all that since have made most know the Greeke, and almost the Latine, even translated their whole treatises? Why Cardan maintaineth, neither Homers verse can be well exprest in Latine, nor Virgils in Greeke, nor Petrarchs in either. Suppose Homer tooke nothing out of any, for we heare of none good before him, and there must be a first; yet Homer by Virgil is often so translated as Scaliger conceives there is the armour of Hercules most puissant put on the backe of Bacchus most delicate: and Petrarch, if well tracked, would be found in their footesteps, whose verie garbage lesse Poets are noted to have gathered. Why but that Scaliger thinkes that Ficinus by his rusticall simplicitie translated Plato, as if an Owle should represent an Eagle, or some tara-rag Player should act the princely Telephus with a voyce, as rag' das his clothes, a grace as bad as his voyce. If the famous Ficinus were so faulty, who may hope to scape scot-free? But for him and vs all let me confesse, as he heere censureth; and let confession make halfe amends, that every language hath it's Genius and inseparable forme; without Pythagoras his Metempsychosis it can not rightly be translated. The Tuscan altiloquence, the Venus of the French, the sharpe state of the Spanish, the strong significancy of the Dutch cannot from heere be drawne to life. The sense may keepe forme; the sentence is disfigured; the finenesse, fitnesse, featenesse diminished: as much as artes nature is short of natures arte, a picture of a body, a shadow of a substance. Why then belike I have done by Montaigne, as Terence by Menander, made of good French no good English. If I have done no worse, and it be no worse taken, it is well. As he, if no Poet, yet am I no theefe, since I say of whom I had it, rather to imitate his and his authors negligence, then any backebiters obscure diligence. His horse I set before you; perhaps without his trappings; and his meate without sause. Indeede in this specially finde I fault with my maister, that as Craslus and Antonius in Tullie, the one seemed to contemne, the other not to know the Greekes, whereas the one so spake Greeke as he seemed to know no other tongue; the other in his travells to Athens and Rhodes had long conversed with the learnedst Gr aecians: So he, most writing of himselfe, and the worst rather then the best, disclaimeth all memorie, authorities, or borrowing of the ancient or moderne; whereas in course of his discourse he seemes acquainted not onely with all, but no other but authours; and could out of question like Cyrus or C aesar call any of his armie by his name and condition. And I would for vs all he had in this whole body done as much, as much, as in most of that of other languages my peerelesse deere-deerest and never sufficiently commended friend hath done for mine and your ease and inteligence. Why then againe, as Terence, I have had helpe. Yea, and thanke them for it, and thinke you neede not be displeased by them that may please you in a better matter. Why but Essayes are but mens school-themes pieced together; you might as wel say, several texts. Alis in the choise & handling. Yea mary; but Montaigne, had he wit, it was but a French wit ferdillant, legier, and extravagant. Now say you English wits by the staydest censure of as learned a wit as is among you. The counsel of that iudicious worthy Counsellor (honorable Sir Edward Wotton) would not have embarked me to this discovery, had not his wisedome knowne it worth my paines, and your perusing. And should or would any dog-tooth de' Criticke, or adder-tongu'd Satirist scoff or finde fault, that in the course of his discourses, or webbe of his Essayes, or entitling of his chapters, he holdeth a disioynted, broken and gadding stile; and that many times they answere not his titles, and have no coherence together, to such I will say little, for they deserve but little; but if they list, else let them chuse, I send them to the ninth chapter of the third booke, folio 596, where himselfe preventeth their carping, and foreseeing their critikisme answereth them for me at full. Yet are there herein errors. If of matter, the Authours; if of omission, the printers: him I would not amend, but send him to you as I found him: this I could not attend, but where I now finde faults, let me pray and entreate you for your owne sake to correct as you reade; to amend as you list. But some errors are mine, and mine by more then translation. Are they in Grammar, or Ortographie? as easie for you to right, as me to be wrong; or in construction, as mis-attributing him, her, or it, to things alive, or dead, or newter; you may soone know my meaning, and eftsoones vse your mending: or are they in some vncouth termes; as entraine, conscientious, endeare, tarnish, comporte, efface, facilitate, ammusing, debauching, regret, effort, emotion, and such like, if you like them not, take others most commonly set by them to expound them, since there they were set to make such likely French words familiar with our English, which well may beare them. If any be capitall in sense mistaking, be I admonished, and they shall be recanted: Howsoever, the falsenesse of the French prints, the diversities of copies, editions and volumes (some whereof have more or lesse then others, and I in London having followed some, and in the countries others; now those in folio, now those in octavo, yet in this last survay reconciled all; therefore or blame not rashly, or condemne not fondly the multitude of them set for your further ease in a Table (at the end of the booke) which ere you beginne to reade, I entreate you to pervse: this Printers wanting a diligent Corrector, my many employments, and the distance betweene me and my friends I should conferre with, may extenuate, if not excuse, even more errors. In summe, if any thinke be could do better, let him trie; then will he better thinke of what is done. Seven or eight of great wit and worth have assayed, but found these Essayes no attempt for French apprentises or Littletonians. If thus doone it may please you, as I wish it may, and I hope it shall, I with you shall be pleased: though not, yet still I am the same resolute Montaigne Bookes the amasse of humors, swolne with ease, The Griefe of peace, the maladie of rest, So stuffe the world, falne into this disease, As it receiues more then it can digest; And doe so ouercharge, as they confound The apetite of skill with idle store : There being no end of words, nor any bound Set to conceipt, the Ocean without shore. As if man labo'rd with himselfe to be As infinite in words, as in intents, And drawe his manifold incertaintie In eu'ry figure, passion represents; That these innumerable visages, And strange shapes of opinions and discourse Shadowed in leaues, may be the witnesses Rather of our defects, then of our force. And this proud frame of our presumption, This Babel of our skill, this Towre of wit, Seemes onely cheekt with the confusion Of our mistakings, that dissolueth it. And well may make vs of our knowledge doubt, Seeing what vncertainties we build vpon, To be as weake within booke as without; Or els that truth hath other shapes then one. But yet although we labor with this store. And with the presse of writings seeme opprest, And haue too many bookes, yet want we more, Feeling great dearth and scar senesse of the best; Which cast in choiser shapes haue bin produc'd, To giue the best proportions to the minde Of our confusion, and haue introduc'd The likeliest images frailtie can finde. And wherein most the skill-desiring soule Takes her delight, the best of all delight, And where her motions evenest come to rowle About this doubtfull center of the right. Which to discouer this great Potentate, This Prince Montaigne ( if he be not more) Hath more aduentur'd of his owne estate Then euer man did of himselfe before : And hath made such bolde sallies out vpon Custome, the mightie tyrant of the earth, In whose Seraglio of subiection We all seeme bred-vp, from our tender birth; As I admire his powres, and out of loue, Here at his gate do stand, and glad I stand So neere to him whom I do so much loue, T' applaude his happie setling in our land : And safe transpassage by his studious care Who both of him and vs doth merit much, Having as sumptuously, as he is rare Plac'd him in the best lodging of our speach. And made him now as free, as if borne here, And as well ours as theirs, who may be proud That he is theirs, though he be every where To haue the franchise of his worth allow'd It be'ing the portion of a happie Pen, Not to b'invassald to one Monarchie, But dwell with all the better world of men Whose spirits are all of one communitie. Whom neither Ocean, Desarts, Rockes nor Sands Can keepe from th'inter traffique of the minde, But that it vents her treasure in all lands, And doth a most secure commercement finde. Wrap Excellencie vp neuer so much, In Hierogliphicques, Ciphers, Caracters, And let her speake neuer so strange a speach, Her Genius yet finds apt discipherers : And neuer was she borne to dye obscure, But guided by the Starres of her owne grace, Makes her owne fortune, and is ever sure In mans best hold, to hold the strongest place. And let the Critic say the worst he can, He cannot say but that Montaigne yet, Yeeldes most rich pieces and extracts of man; Though in a troubled frame confus'dly set. Which yet h'is blest that he hath euer seene, And therefore as a guest in gratefulnesse, For the great good the house yeelds him within Might spare to taxe th'vnapt conuayances. But this breath hurts not, for both worke and frame, Whilst England English speakes, is of that store And that choyse stuffe, as that without the same The richest librarie can be but poore. And they vnblest who letters do professe And have him not: whose owne fate beates their want With more sound blowes, then Alcibiades Did his Pedante that did Homer want. 
