 sayes another. Read, then iudge, I confesse it may seeme to a number, a bold attempt, to set out a forme of wit, considering the witty discourses of such fine wits as haue deserued such commendation, as may driue this meane peece of worke of mine into vtter disgrace, were it not that perfect courtesie doth beare with imperfect knowledge, regarding more the good minde in the Writer, then the matter written: and therefore the best will giue good wordes, whatsoeuer they thinke, to encourage a forward will to doo better, when indeede, it were a fantasticall head that could doo worse. Well, when Wit is a wol-gathering, and VVill wandring, the world without guide, what a case that man is in, that is in such a taking, I referre you to madde folkes, of whom you may see examples sufficient: and so I being in a certaine melancholy moode, past all Gods forbode, tooke my Pen and Inke and Paper, and somewhat I would goe doo, whatsoeuer it were, to put out one conceit, and bring in another, at last, and at first, of a suddaine wars, and at aduentures, by Gods good helpe, and good fortune, the little Wit that I had, meeting with good Will, I knewe not how, but hauing written a while, I made somewhat of it, which though litle to any great purpose, yet, if it please the Readers, I am contented, and if any man thinke it well done, then Wit shall thinke Will a good boy, and Will shall thinke he tooke Wit in a good vaine, and Will and Wit shall haue the more heart hereafter, to fall to further woorke, but if I haue bin more wilfull then wise, to trouble your wittes, with a witlesse peece of worke, pardon me for this once, ye shall see I will please you better hereafter: in the meane time, desiring your courtesies to commend what you thinke worthy, and not to disdain without desert, I rest, wishing your content in what you wish well, as I pray you wish me as I do you. Your friend Nicholas Breton Gentleman . Or what is Wit , without good Will? The one the other doth so fit: As each one can be but ill. But when they once be well agreed, Their worke is likely well to speede. For proofe, behold good Bretons will, By helpe of Wit , what it hath writ: A worke, not of the meanest skill, Nor such as shewes a simple Wit . But such a Wit , and such a Will , As hath done well, and hateth ill. I neede not to commend the Man, Whom none can iustly discommend: But doe the best, the best that can, Yet some will spite, and so I end. What I haue said, I say so still, I must commende this Wit and Will . FINIS. Or call the Diamond, more then precious? Or praise the man with praises manifold, When of himselfe, himselfe is vertuous? Wit is but Wit , yet such his Wit and Will , As proues ill good, or makes good to be ill. Why? whats his Wit ? proceed and aske his Will , Why? whats his Will ? reade on, and learne of Wit : Both good I gesse, yet each a seuerall ill; This may seeme strange, to those that heare of it. Nay, nere a whit, for vertue many waies, Is made a vice, yet vertue hath her praise. Wherefore O Breton , worthy is thy worke, Of commendations worthy to the worth: Sith captious Wittes, in euery corner lurke, A bold attempt it is, to set them forth. A forme of Wit, and that in such a sort, As none offends, for all is said in sport. And such a sport, as serues for other kinds, Both young and old, for learning, armes, and loue: For Ladies humors, mirth with mone he findes, With some extreames, their patient mindes to proue. Well Breton , write in hand, thou hast the thing, As when it comes, loue, wealth, and fame, will bring. W. S. The Miseries of Mauillia. The most vnfortunate Ladie, that euer liued. First found by the said Author, N. Breton , Gentleman. LONDON Printed by Thomas Creede. 1606. eares with Miseries? Why? our eyes are full ynough alreadie: tell vs some merry Tale, if thou wilt haue any money of vs. Such I answere, a Christmasse Song is worth a Cup of Ale: I am no hyreling for halfepence. And this I will tell you, it will do you do harme, but keepe you from worse exercises. It may be, you may think it well done, if not, I wish it better, and you well. FINIS. N. Breton, Gent. In souldiers hands, escaped killing neere: And growing on, did run through many breers, As in the booke, do plainly follow heere. Long wandering, in a world of miseries: Loathing her life, she lamentably dies. Her miseries, in number are but fiue, Yet in those fiue, fiue thousand haps of hate Which she endurde, whiles that she was aliue, And dide at last, in miserable state. What need more words, the rest here follows on For mourning mindes, to sit and muze vpon. FINIS. What shall I write the Chronicle of mine owne Calamities? Why? The greefe is so great to remember them, as my heart must needs burst ere I can halfe make an end of them. Sorrow sokes long ere it slayes; Care consumes, before it killes; and Destinie driues the body into much miserie, before the heart be strooken dead. Oh, Ladies looke vpon me, Princes pittie mee, Lords and gentlemen, let some remorse moue you to bemone the maruellous mishaps, of no base person, whom losse nor gaine, wealth nor want, pleasure nor paine, greefe nor ease, feare nor hope, weale nor woe, one thing nor other, could once bring downe, to submit her minde to the slauerie of the world: But in spite of Fortune, both Moone and Starres against her, and none but one to comfort her, wandred through this wretched worlde, escaping the poysoned snares of mast pestilent and subtile mindes, breaking the force of wanton affection, and conquering the crueltie of cankred Cupid : conteining her selfe with all discontent, liued till all worldly mindes were wearie of her companie, and dyed long after shee was wearie of the world, wherein shee had passed such innumerable woes, as fewe will beleeue, lesse can indure, none but her onely selfe can recount. But why shall I tell this tale? who takes pleasure in a Tragedie? Why? myrth is in many places, and sorrow is no where welcome. Then let me holde my peace: alas I cannot. And why? I haue sworne to my selfe, the world shall see my miserie: but what am I the better? Oh yes, should I sit still and weepe? so shall I but spill mine eyes, and marre mine head. Sit still and sigh? Alas, so shall I but abide more sorrow, wilfully then wilfully: and can my griefe be any thing eased by laying my miseries before me? why? they say, that the eye sees not, the heart rues not. Oh thought is the torment of torments: and can I chuse but see my selfe? and by sight of my selfe, to bring in memorie the sorrowes that I neuer put out of my mind. What need I then to record, that I cannot but remember? I must keepe mine oath, how shall the world wonder at me? some mindes pittie me, and other bee warned by me, and all mindes erne when they thinke vpon mee, if I say nothing. Wherefore sweete friends, that faire Ladies, wish their welfare to you, and all the world besides, I will here vnfolde a Trunke full of such torments, as no minde can well beare, nor any heart but would burst with the carriage: the verie sight will affray the eye to looke on it, and the heart will pant with griefe to thinke on it. But since I now am gone, that to my liues ende haue borne it, and none I thinke now wil dare to meddle with it: nor if they were enforced, were able to abide it, I will heere set it downe to the pitifull viewe of all good people, whose wits will conceiue, and wills peruse, iudgements beleeue, and harts lament, the summe of such sorrow, as neuer was heard of. In the troublesome time of a King vnnamed, in a Countrey too well knowne, a certaine Towne sacked by such Souldiours, as hadde little mercie vpon the harmelesse enemies: It was my vnhappie Parents hap, (among many other) to fall into the hands of these bloudie fellowes, who embrewing their blades in the aged breasts of my poore Father and Mother: Caring no whit to heare me crie at this cruell act, nor pittying the teares that bitterly fell from an Infants eyes: spurned me at there feete, spet in my face, slong me out of doores to goe seeke my fortune. Whereas I laie weeping, hearing some say, knocke the Elfe on the head, peace squall (quoth another) let her bawle, sayes a vile Boy, be stil you were best baggage (quoth a heard hearted man) with a drawne sword in his hand: Not one would say, alas poor Girle, take her vp, but still must lye vpon the bare earth, till some good mind would looke vpon me, or mercilesse mind wold make an end of me, or the God of his mercy would some way comfort me. And being then betwixt foure and fiue yeares of age, well able to bring out a sword, I cryed, oh Iesu, Iesu, and said, sweete God, though he had many to helpe besides me: Yet, as in the Scripture you may reade, Christ euer loued the little one: so surely (beeing little and vnable to helpe my selfe) he shewed his great mercifull might, in helping me to the hands of a poore Laundresse, that followed the Campe, who taking me into a Cabbin where she kept her Uitling, so intreated with her friend, a Souldiour of the Campe, that he gaue her leaue to keepe me, (though hardly) yet better then to liue in the streetes. But Lorde, what miserie did I then abide? When my houres of breakefast, dinner, or supper came, then (as I was wont) I called Mother, but I heard no sounde of Daughter. I was wont to be set in lap, and dandled and danced, & colled about the necke, with many a sweete kisse: my father would take me by the chinne, teach me to holde vp my head like a prettie Maide, and then call mee good Gyrle, sweete Mouse, owne Wenche, and Dads Byrd, and in the ende with a prettie smile, please mee with an Apple, or Peare, or some such Childrens ioy or other. When I came out of the Parler, happy are they in the Hall, could first catch me in their armes, with God blesse my sweete Mistresse: Loue me? yea, oh it is a faire Gentlewoman, who could finde in their heart, to hurt such a sweete soule? The Maidens would sing mee, the neighbours would giue me prettie things, and straungers that I neuer sawe, would make much of me: and euery prettie Childe would be glad when they might play with mee. In summe, the worlde went with me. But nowe, this (something) kinde, but greatly curst woman, with whome I must now make an ill chaunge, to take her for my mother; when I could crie a little drinke, some bread and butter, I would go to bed: peace you little whore, would she say, learne to lie in the strawe, you are like: tarrie and be hanged, is meate so good cheape? I will make you grate on a crust, ha, you Monkie, you shall haue butter with a birchen rod: then if I cried, take me vp, clap, clap, clap, clap, set me downe againe, crie till thy heart burst, I thinke it longs to bee knocked on the head, you were not best to keepe such a wrawling, heere is a trouble with a Monkie. Oh, heere was a miserable Metamorphosies , then got shee me a Booke, and a feskew: now began a new miserie, when I woulde bee at play, either with the Catte, or a little Dogge, or making of a Babie, of an olde ragged cloute: then woulde shee come with a rodde, come on you Urchen, you will neuer come to good, pull the clout out of my hand, flapt it in my face, take mee by the shoulders, and squatte mee downe so mischieuouslie, that I had more minde to crie, then to my Christs crosse rowe. But yet at last, with much adoo, it pleased God to make mee somewhat apt to my Booke, that within a while I had learned to reade any place in the Byble, so that then she tooke some delight in mee, and then she would vse mee somewhat more kindly. Then did she set mee to my Needle, there was an other Miserie. I must learne to make a Water flower, in an old ragge, good enough for a Sampler for mee. But many a time did shee make me prick my fingers, with suddaine shoouing my hands tohither, before shee would learne me to hold my Needle: Many a whyrrit on the eare had I, before I could learne to take two stcihes, and leaue two: with thou vntoward apes face, wilt thou neuer bee handsome? But see how good was God vnto me, yet in these my Miseries, he made me so cunning at my worke, that within a while, I could make a pretie hemme, gather a plaine Ruffe, and make plaine worke pretelie, so that then she began indeede to make very much of mee, with thats a good Gyrle. But oh what a Miserie of mind it was to me, to heare that word: alas, then I remembred my good Father, who commonly was wont to say so, when I held vp my head at his bidding. But with that Miserie, see an other: Nowe was I set to my worke, and if I wrought well and apace, so that I got her any money, then I had a peece of the better bread, and a cuppe of indifferent drinke, or else bread and Water, and many an vnpappy bang had I poore wretch. And thus continued I seelie Wenche in this Miserie, till it pleased GOD, to graunt mee deliuerance by this blessed meane. The Towne was besieged, the Walles were sealed, the Souldiours entred, slewe a number, some they ransommed. This poore Lawndresse I saued the life of, by my humble suite to the Captaines: which being my Countrey men, and knowing my Parentage, hearing my tale of her kindnesse, (not as I tell it now) but otherwise to their content, graunted her life, and with a hundreth Crounes, sent her by water away, with a poore Fisherman, with commaundement vpon paine of death to see her safely conducted to the cheife Citie, that she desired to goe too. Thus was I now rid of my first Miseries, in my time of infancie, which continued with me, for the space of three yeares and vpwards. The ende of the first Miserie. Now when I had sent away this olde Uitler, with more Crownes then shee was mistresse of many a day before, I now fell to worke, to mend the Captaines Ruffes, to draw vp a brack, or a broken stitch: Which done, I would to my booke, which both pleased God, and the Captaine liked very well off: and so well, as seeing mee oftentimes sit, sighing by my selfe, to thinke vpon my parents death, my losse of wealth, my hard life with the Laundresse, and my present vnhappie estate, nothing to my hearts content: One day in the morning, walking about a garden, he called me to him, and there vsed this speech vnto me. Mistresse,  &c. I am sorie to see your sad & heauie countenance: I perceiue though you be yoong of yeares, God hath blessed you with a good wit, craue his grace to vse it well: take thankfully the crosse that he hath laide vpon you, and giue him thanks for his great mercie, in deliuering you out of the hands of your enemies: No man is sure of life, the worlde is variable, you see to day a man, to morrow none: This scourge of Warre, is a plague for our sinnes, and a warning to penitencie. We now haue wonne the Towne, but God knowes how long we shall keepe it. Wherefore, seeing that I see you growe in yeares, likely in short time to prooue a propper Woman, and that now hauing escaped the handes of enemies, I would bee loth you shuld rest neare them, I will send you to such a place with my Page, and such and such Gentlemen my friends, that I know will (for my sake) safely conduct you thither. What I said to him, I haue now forgot, saue I remember this, that (yeelding him thanks) I beseeched his speedie dispatcht from thence: where being but a foolish Gyrle, I should bee eyther attempted to vanitie, or fall in some too good liking, which (perhaps) one vnworthie, or else in the Captaines absence (the Souldiours somewhat ouerseene,) I might be offered some villanie. Therfore I had no minde to staie; but thinking euery day a yeare till I was gone, I remember within two or three dayes after, I was sent away, with two or three gallant Gentlemen, and the little Page: By whome the Captaine had sent a Letter vnto a Brother of my Fathers there in the Countrey, to whom he wrote for me, in earnest and friendly sort, as you shall see hereafter. But first I will tell you of a new Miserie, that by great mishappe befell mee. As wee were trauelling towardes the Towne that wee were determined to goe too, aboue foure score myles distant from the place whence the Captaine sent me, Suddainly, at vnawares, there issued out of a Woodde, a Horseman or two, verie well appointed, who drawing somewhat neare vs, began to charge vpon vs: And to bee short, sette vpon vs, and for the time, (O Lorde) mee thought it was the sorest fight that neuer was: the Speares flewe in peeces, then went the Swoordes clish clash: anon they were vnarmed, downe were their Horsses, and the men on foote, fell to it so fiercely, that now one and then another, were cut and mangled so sore, that I was euen halfe dead to behold them. What shall I say? long lasted this Combate: but at last one had the better bargaine, for first the horsses, and then their Maisters, were forced to giue the world a farewell. Oh Lord, that euer seely Wench should be borne, to see such a day: Iudge now, what Miseries was I fallen into? my parents dead, their goods gone, I in enemies handes: yet once escaped, and safe in the Captaines guarde. Nowe looking more libertie, am falne into further daunger: in the enemies Countrey depriued of my company, manned but with a poore Boye, and in perill of my life, farre from any Towne, my Horse runne from mee, and I on foote. How shall I do? a hungry stomacke will call for meate, meate will not be had without money, money is none heere, except with the dead Souldiers: and alas, my heart will not serue mee to rifle a Carkasse, but see what is vse? The Page is in theyr pockettes, hee is filching for Crownes. But come away Boye, alas, what good will mony doo, where there is no meate to get? Yes Mistresse (quoth hee) you shall see, God will send vs some odde Peasant or other, this way, with a bagge of bread and Cheese, who will gladly sell his dinner for Crownes: if not, I hope to kill some odde Pigion in the fielde, or one thing or other, that wee will roste finely and quickly, and away. Why? alas Boye, howe shall wee doo for fire? Oh Mistresse, the fire-locke of my Pistoll, my Match, and a little powder in my Flaske, and light my Match: and then a fewe rotten stickes out of the hedge, and a few of these drie Sedges, oh they will burne roundly. Thus did the poore Boye a while comfort mee, but hauing wandered all that day, that night, and the next morning following, without either meeting any man, or seeing anie thing worth the shooting at for our releefe, and sighing with sorrowe, I prayed God yet to prouide vs some poore repast or other. Who heard our prayer, and graciously graunted our requests: for hauing passed a little further, wee espied comming towards vs a Cowe, which had a goodly Udder, to whome wee came neerer and neerer, praying God that shee would stand still, til wee had gotten of her Milke, to comfort our selues withall: and (as GOD would) the poore beast made no haste away, but seemed glad to bee milked, her Udder was so full: well, thanked be God, here wee sped well. For in steede of a payle, I tooke my Hatte, and though shee was the first Cowe that euer I milked, yet I fell too it so handsomely, that I got my Hatte full: out of which, first my selfe, and then the Page, drunke so heartily, that it sufficed vs for that day, and that wee left in the Hatte, serued vs till the next daye at night. When the poore Page laying him downe vppon a banke side, to take a little rest, beeing heauie with great wearinesse, forgotte to looke to his little Dagge that hee had vnder his gyrdle, the spring wherof, being started vp, and hee leaning on it, made it of it selfe discharge a bullet into his right hippe, so that hee was not able to rise alone, but laye in such torments, as that I was ready to swounde with suddaine greefe to behold him. But the little wretche bearing a better heart then his poore Mistresse, made little bones at it. Mistresse (quoth hee) the hurt greeues mee not so much, as to thinke how I am hindred from my heartie desire, to shew mine humble dutie, in conducting you to your Uncles house. But since God hath laide his punishments vpon me, I beseech him to graunt mee his Grace, to take it patiently: alas, I thinke I am the most vnhappie Uillaine in the worlde. But Mistresse, this is the worlde, a man that hath trauelled many Countreyes, and passed great perilles, beeing tossed in many tempestes, among the boyling billowes of sore Seas, In the ende comes home, and perhappes, walking but through his owne ground, his foote slips off a Bridge, and is drowned in a ditch: Though I bee but a Boy, I haue beene among men, I haue carried my Maisters Peece and Target in hote skirmishes, when the Bullets haue fline about mine eares, yet alwayes I thanke God, escaped hurt: and see, now am halfe soyled, and no enemie neare mee. But alas, good sweete Mistresse, weepe not so, then you will hill me outright, for the griefe of your sorrow, will goe nearer my heart, then the hurt by a great deale, you shall see it will do well. Was not this a wise Boy? yes surely, and such a kinde hearted wretch, as it would hame made a heart of stone to haue bewayled his Miserie. But nowe in this extremitie, what was to bee done? Alas, how did I deuise to helpe this poore maimed Page: First, the blood must bee stinched, and howe was that done? I remembred, that in time that I liued with the Lawndresse, I saw a Souldiour come in one day, with a wipe ouer the shinnes, that hee lay by ten dayes, ere hee could goe on it. Now a Surgion of the Camp, to stinch his bleeding, tooke certains droppes of his bloud that fell vpon a hotte Bricke, which beeing dryed, he pared off the Bricke and strewed it into the wound: which dust did quickly stinch the bleeding. So tooke I the drops of blood, which being dried against the Sunne, fel to powder: which I vsed in like maner, and so helpt the poore Boy. His bleeding stentcht, the Ladde began to looke somewhat chearely, and with the water in his eyes, for kinde dutifull loue, with humble thanks, thus speake vnto me. Oh deare Mistresse, how shall I euer liue to deserue this sweete fauour? surely, if I may liue to do you good, I shall thinke my selfe a happie man: surely Mistresse, the world is neare at an ende, when things fall out so contrarie, the Mistresse to serue her seruant. Well, God reward you, I will pray for you, and if I liue I will somewhat deserue this your singular goodnesse. Alas Mistresse, I remember my Maister was wont to vse a kinde of leafe, that growes neare the grounde, there be great strings in it, I thinke they call it a Planten: will you see it there growe any heere abouts? I will make shift to put it into the wound, it will draw it and keepe it cleane, till wee come to some Towne, where we may meete with some Surgion. No Boy (quoth I) looke heere growes wilde Isope, and that is good indeede, for the olde Woman that I was withall, I see once heale her hand with it, which shee thrust through with a knife, as shee was opening of Oysters. Euen as you thinke good Mistresse (quoth the Boy). So now wee haue got some helpe for the hurt, [illeg.]or meate was farre to seeke: but God is a good God, and euer will be. In this miserie, as we sate sighing to thinke how wee should do for meate, comes by a Foxe with a little Lambe on his back, whome first the boy espied, and cried, Mistresse, Mistresse, looke yonder is a Fox with a Lamb on his back, for Gods sake run to him, and crie now, now, and the Foxe will be afraide, and leaue the Lambe behinde him: and as the boy said, it fell out: the waight of the Lambe being too much for him to run withall, I ouertooke him, and fraying him with a loude crie, hee let fall the Lambe, and away he went: thinke how glad was I of this Lambe. Which bringing to the Boy, good Mistresse (quoth hee) let mee helpe to flea him: and so kindely togither wee sate, plucking off the skinne, and cutting the quarters the one from the other: which with helpe of the Boyes deuise of powder and matche, and the fire-locke of his Dagge, wee made a fire and roasted finely. And I remember oftentimes as I went for stickes to make the fire, the poore Boye would somewhat yet shewe his kinde honest duetie. Hee would entreate mee yet to let him turne the Spit, that wee made of an olde sticke, and as hee was turning, to make me laugh, (which was hard to doo in this miserable case) he would say, Mistresse you are Cooke, and I am Skullion, if I burne the meate, beate mee for my labour: who would thinke that such a young Gentlewoman could playe the Cooke so pretilie? Alas doo not burne your selfe in the fire: God deliuer vs quickly out of this miserie, and defende vs from all other. Amen , (quoth I.) Anone hee would sing one merrie song or other: Nowe hee would whistle in his fist, and by and by tell mee a tale of a roasted Horse, onely to make me merrie withall, but when hee sawe nothing could make mee leaue my heauy thoughts, then fell hee to sighing with mee for company, and I might perceiue by little and little, how his sorrowe of heart more and more increased, by the teares that did euer distill downe his cheekes, I was forst to force a smile. Why, weepe not for mee Boye (quoth I) I am well ynough, and I hope shall doe better ere long, I am sorie to see thee in this case. Alas Mistresse (quoth the Boye) it were better I were hanged, then you should be so sadde for mee: for Gods sake let me see you merrie, and I shall bee euen whole withall. Will ye haue an olde Song? Then would hee haue vp a peece of stuffe, that would make a Dog halfe dead to laugh at it: Thus with a little pleasure, wee liued in this great miserie a long time. But oh good God, that sent vs the good Lambe, to doo vs so much good, the flesh serued vs many a day, and the skinne serued to lap about the boyes lame legge, to keepe it warme. Which beeing dressed orderly, euening and morning euerie day, within a fewe dayes grew so wel, as that he was able to set his foote on ground, and then leaning on my shoulder with one hand,  & resting on a staffe with the other: wee went onwards through a great Forrest, where when we had traueiled many a wearie steppe, at last we came to a great hill, which when he had gone ouer, at the foote thereof, lay a wilde Bore, who when he had espied vs, came running with open mouth, and at the poore page he strooke, who with the Pistoll that hee had charged, shot him full in the head, but not before he was sore wounded in the legge: I poore soule was in such a case, as that heart I had not to fight with the Bore, nor power to leaue the lame boy. But abyding still the ende of the Combat, I stinched the bloud, bound vp the hurts, and tooke of the Grease of the Bore, to annoint the olde hurt withall. Which done, we wandred on, till anon we came to a poore Cottage, where dwelt a poore Shepheard, to whose house when we came, and finding none about the house, wee knocked at the house, and not remembring common Countrey speech, God be heere: wee heard none aske who is there, a great while. At last comes out a crabbed old Woman, with her daughter: how now, what would you haue? heere is not for you. The Daughter being of somewhat younger sight then the mother, puld her by the arme: mother, mother (quoth she) it is a Gentlewoman, she is in silke, and fine, she is as braue as our young Landlady. Is she? then let vs go see what she is, I will goe talke with her: and so with a Countrey Cursie, Mistresse (quoth she) whence come you? and whither will you? what doo you lacke? and what young boy is that you leade so? Good mother (quoth I) a poore Mistresse as it falls out. I came from the Camp, and am going I knowe not whither. This poore Boy was a Page vnto a Captaine, a friend of my fathers, who with two other Gentleme, was sent with me to mine vncles house, a Gentleman heere in the Countrey. But my friends are both slaine by the enemies, who likewise at one instant, tooke al their leaues of the world togither. This little Lad onely escaped away with me aliue, who by misfortune caught a hurt first in the thigh with a Bullet, and scarce able to go alone, hath heere bene hurt againe by a wilde Bore, at the foote of the hill, yonder by the Wood side: but he hath slaine him: for witnesse, beholde heere is some of his greace. But because the poore Boy is somewhat stiffe, with the hurt of his legge, I beseech you let me haue a Chamber, and a bed for him, and not of the woorst, I will content you well for it. Yes Mistrsse (quoth she) with all my heart, come neere, God be thanked, that the wilde Beast is dead: Oh it was a vengeable theefe, hee did much hurt heere in the Countrey, many a time hath he made me leaue my burthen of sticks behinde mee: hee once fraide my childe here almost out of her wits. Well mother (quoth the Page) I warrant you now, he shall do no more hurt, I am the last I warrant you, that is, or will be slaine by the wilde Bore here abouts. Wherefore good Mother, let vs go in quickly, I find my selfe somewhat faint with bleeding: Marrie come (quoth she) mine owne sweete Boy, and therewith she kist his cheeke. Oh mother (quoth I) I thanke you, beleeue mee, it is the best natured Boy on earth. Thus in we went with him, had him to bed, opened his wounds, washed them with Milke, for lacke of white Wine: and then asked counsaile of the olde Woman, what was best to lay to the hurt. Tarre Mistresse (quoth shee) we commonly vse when the wound is not deepe: but berlady, for this I can tell you what we will doo, a little Flagxe, and the white of a new laid Egge, mingled with a litle Honey, you shall see, I will make a medicine for him: but let him take a sleepe first, oh it will do him good, and against he awake, wee will haue some warme thing made for him. Content good mother (quoth I) with twentie thanks: holde heere is fiue Crownes, take them to you, lay out what you will for Gods sake, if any good Towne bee neare, send for some white Wine and Suger, and a bottle of good Ale. Yes Mistresse (quoth she) and God his blessing on you: whiles this holds, you shall not want any thing, and when this is gone, Ile sell all the Sheep I haue before Ile see you miscarrie. Gramercie, good mother (quoth I) God reward you, and if I liue, and euer be able, I will make you amends, I thanke you sweete Mistresse (quoth she): But see, the boy is fast a sleepe, let him alone, my daughter shall sit here at the doore to watch when hee wakes, and if he need any thing, she shall see him haue it. Will you go a little into the Garden and gather a flower? (or Cockes my bones) I haue not bid you drinke yet. Come shall we haue a messe of milke, and a peece of cheese? I tell you, though I be but a poore woman, I haue a cup of good Ale in my house, my good man loues it, and hee will haue it, and he is worthie, for why? he gets it. Thus went this old woman and I to our vittailes, which I fell too full sauourly: but as we were sitting, being in Summer time, the Window open against vs, the old woman espied her Husband comming home, through his field afore the doore: Now vnder his arme he had a burthen, which the old woman maruailing at: Mistresse (quoth she) looke yonder comes my good man with somewhat vnder his arme, I muse what it is, shall we go see? Yea mother (quoth I) and so we went to meete the olde man, whom when we came neare, we peceiued it was a Hogs head: Nailes Mistres (quoth she) what haue my man brought home on Gods name, a Hogs head? how hath he come by it trow? Thus at last as we were talking, the olde man put off his Cap, and made a leg or two. What Landlady (quoth he) how doo your Mistriship? I haue good newes for you, to carrye mine olde Mistresse, the wilde Bore is dead, and heere is the head of him. Gramercie Father (quoth I) for thy good newes, but I pray thee be couered, thou arte deceiued. No faith man, (quoth she) but it is a good Gentlewoman, looke heere man, what Golde shee hath giuen mee, shee knowes of the wilde Bores death: here is a little Lad within that kild him, hee is a sleepe, oh hee is sore hurt, when he wakes, wee will giue him some warme drinke. Is it true Woman (quoth hee?) Yea man (quoth shee) I pray you bid this Gentlewoman welcome, and to morrowe goe to my Landladies, and tell her of her, I know she will send for her, and make much of her, and the Lad too: there hee shalbe well tended, and haue better things made him, then wee can deuise for him. Yes (quoth hee) I care not if I goe to morrow morning. Welcome Mistresse (quoth he) I pray you if you lack any thing here, call for it. Thus as wee were talking togither, in comes the little Gyrle, mother (quoth she) the Gentlewomans Boy would haue his Mistresse. Oh Lord (quoth I) let mee goe to him, so to him wee went all, asked him howe hee did? Mistresse (quoth he) well, and better (quoth he) I shall be shortly, for I feele my selfe at a good poynt, I am content to goe whither God doth call mee. With that word, I sunk presently down to the ground, and lying in a traunce a pretie while, at last I came to my selfe againe: when looking on the poore Boy, I was ready to fall dead againe. Good Mistresse (quoth he) be contented, dooth it greeue you, to thinke I should goe to Heauen? beleeue me, but for you I would not wishe to liue any longer. Mother (quoth he) to the olde woman, here hold this Purse full of Golde, I tooke it out of the dead Captains pockets: take it, spend it, but let not my Mistresse want. And here is an other for my Mistresse, lay it vp for her, till shee demande it, but do not keepe it from her for Gods sake. Father, looke well to my good Mistresse, it is the best Gentlewoman that euer was borne: oh what paines she hath taken with me, in dressing my wounds, in leading mee vp and downe, not able to helpe my selfe. Alas, her Parents are dead, and she farre from her friends, her yeares but young, her sorrows great, her comfort small, and she alone: If you should not vse her well, you will soone kill her, and God will plague you: good father remember my words. And good mistresse, since I must needs bid you farewell, let me kisse your hand, for the honour I beare vnto that most noble and vertuous heart of yours, which I knowe will pray vnto God for me. Here my sweete Mistresse, take this Pearle Ioye, set it in the Ring that hangeth at mine eare, weare it for my sake, and God send you great ioy withall. Heere is the Letter that my Maister sent vnto your Uncle, the Waxe is so dried, that it is almost open: I beseech you reade it, though my capacitie bee but grosse, yet sure I had a great delight in hearing of my Maisters talke, or to heare diuers of his Letters reade. Therefore since this is the last that euer I looke to heare good Mistres, leaue your teares weeping, and do me this fauour. With much sobbing and sighing, at last as I could, I read him these lines. of such a Towne. This with all speed possible. courtesies, present good will doth sende you this newes of our late good hap. So it is, that wee haue had a sore conflict with the enemie, lost many of our men,  & put to hard pushes. But in the end, wee droue them to retire, followed them to their Fort, droue them out of their Skonce, home to their doores, layde batterie to the walls, made breaches in many places, entred the Towne, and by Gods help got the victorie, to God be giuen the glorie. Nowe in the Towne, wee found none of our Countrey-men, nor women, but this little soule, your neere Neece: whose hazards and hard vnhappie life, I referre it to her owne report, God hath done his part in her, and the wenche is well minded. I am glad to haue found her, I loued her parents well: for whose and for my sake, I pray you vse her well, shee is worthy to be made much of: let this Page attende on her, and sende these Gentlemen backe againe to mee with all speede, that I may heare of her safetie, which I greatly desire. No more, but God keepe you: From the Campe, this present and alvvaies. Your Friend to commaund, F. VV. Oh Lorde, what a worlde of Miseries brought this Letter to my minde? First, the remembrance of my Parentes death, then my harde life with the Lawndresse, my liberty got by the Captaine, his fauour so greatly extended, so little to my good, the death of the gallant Gentlemen, my harde escape with the Boye, our perplexitie for lacke of meate, the Boyes vnhappie hurte, and last of all, his most deadlie wound by the wilde Bore: which of these was the most grieuous thought? And then what griefe was it to think of them all togither? Well, to set mee in further extremitie of sorrowe. When I had read the Letter: Mistresse (quoth the poore Boy) now I thanke you, I see I was sent purposely to attend vpon you, now I trust, I haue performed my dutie, I can but ende my life with you. Farewell, good Mistresse, once againe let me kisse your hand: Which when I gaue him, hee clapt it earnestly to his lippes, and kist it twentie times togither. And fetching a deepe sigh, held vp his eyes, and called to God for mercie: and with these last words, farewell good Mistresse, the good poore wretch let goe my hand, and gaue vp the Ghost. But Lord how I cried, Iesus how the old folks wept,  & with teares intreated me to take it patiently. Good God how the little Girle cried, Mother, mother, Father, father. And oh sweete Christ, howe then my heart throbbed, and was readie to burst, with griefe to thinke I had no Father, no Mother, no companion, no Page, no freend, no bodie to haue any comfort in. Well, this was such an houre of sorrowe, as neuer poore Soule endured: and thus I continued, till what with entreatie of the olde folkes, that had me out of the roome where the Boy lay, with pittie to see the olde folkes lament with mee: and with crying so much, I could crie no longer, and with Gods gratious perswasion, I tooke it as quietlie as I coulde, and for that night I got me to bedde, where how little I slept, I leaue to indifferent iudgements. The ende of the second Miserie. Nowe , the next morning when I awaked (hauing had little rest all night,) comes the old Woman to call mee vp, Mistresse (quoth she) you will but hurt your selfe with lying in bed, come you must learne to rise a litle earlyer shortlie. Oh God thought I, nowe doe I feare, that afterwardes fell out: the Boy they carried out to buriall to a Church a mile off, but would not let me follow him, except I would put off my apparell, and put on an old russet Peticoate of her daughters: which I was contented to doo, for the good will I bare vnto the Boy in his life, I would see him buried, though I had gone in a peece of an olde sacke, as (alas) that was a little better. Well now began a new Miserie, after I had (with sorrowe enough) seene the Boy buried, I returned home, as one as ready to go to the graue as he. But Lord, to see the villany of these olde folkes, the olde Woman had deuised, and so had schoolde her Husbande, to say as shee sayde, that I and the poore Boy, were Brother and Sister: that walking vp the Forrest, shee found lying in a highe way, begging of Almes, and for that we were a couple of pretie Children, shee had a minde to vs, and for pittie tooke vs home. Nowe the Boye was somewhat sickly with fruite, Berries, Plummes, and such geare that he had eaten abroade, that when he came to good lodging, and good dyet, he euen turned vp his heeles. This was I also threatned to say, or else I were as good,  &c. Nowe thinke of my extreame Miserie, my last worldly comfort, my good companion, the poore Page, gone. Alas that euer I was borne, I dye to thinke what woes I now was to endure. Now being come home, I was euen faire set to hemming, of such Hempen stuffe, and with such needle and thread, as my tender fingers were neuer vsed too: but now must of force learne to acquaint my selfe withall. But it was euen a peece of worke fit for mee at that time, for mine eyes were so sore with weeping, for the death of the poore Boye, that I was not able scarce to see the threads, as great as they were. Oh vilde Creatures, of such cankred mindes, who could be so hard hearted? Now was my poore Pages words forgotten. Now were my crownes that should haue bene my comfort, fallen out to be the ground of all my calamitie. For not manie dayes after, when the olde Woman, and her good man, had tolde ouer their Golde, and sawe well what summe it did amount vnto: then fell the olde fellowe, to purchase a peece of Lande, and a fayre house vpon it. And nowe Iacke will bee Gentleman, no longer a Sheepheard: now Sheepheards must make a legge, and doo reuerence to this fellowe But Lord, how ilfauouredlie the olde Woman could Gentlewoman it. Well, now began my Miserie indeede, to see my money laide out for others commoditie, and I nothing the better, but a great deale the worse for it: Oh it kilde my heart, and yet I could not dye, and kill my selfe I would not, for feare of Gods displeasure: for desperation, is the high way to damnation, God deliuered mee, from that ill thought. So then passing on the time, as well as I could, I was now sent into a Miserie of Miseries, I must both become a double seruant, and halfe a Mistresse. I must serue the olde Woman, I must learne to spinne, to reele, to carde, to knitte, to washe buckes, and by hande, brewe, bake, make Mault, reape, binde sheaues, weede in the Garden, Milke, serue Hogges, make cleane theyr houses, within doores, make beddes, sweepe filthy houses, rubbe dyrtie ragges, beate out the olde Couerlets, drawe vp olde holes: Then to the Kitchin, turne the Spitte, although it was but seldome, for wee had not Roast meate often: then scoure Pottes, washe Dishes, fetche in Wood, make a fire, scalde milke Pannes, washe the Cherne, and buter dishes, wring vp a Cheese cloute, set euery thing in good order. And alas, to all this was but another Maide and I, and it was such an ydle droyle, that shee would almost doe nothing but sleepe, so that the greatest parte of the worke was turned to my hand. Now for all my paines, I was faine to content my selfe with a cup of sowre whigge, or a dishe of sowre milke, and a crust of browne black bread: lye vpon a Matte at night, in one sheete, and that so course, as euerie threede was readie to runne through my ribbes. Iudge Gentlewomen how little was my rest, yet vse made mee in time (too long,) abide it a little better then at first. This life continued I, till the peece of Lande, and the fayre house was purchased, then was other Maides taken in, and I put to another office, a greater miserie to my minde then that before. Nowe forsoothe, I must attende vppon my young Mistresse, the olde Womans Daughter, the most ill-fauoured and vntowarde Urchin that euer was borne: This baggage must I goe teache her Booke, and forsoothe, touch her I must not, but good Mistresse looke on your Booke: yea, that is a fayre Gentlewoman, when shee saide neuer a worde, but I was faine to speake for her: if I complained of her, then, Oh you thinke much of your paynes, would you haue her Reade as well as you the first daye: goe, come not to mee with such twittle twattle, then goe to the Gyrle, ha Mouse, doth she say thou wilt not learne? Marrie she lyes: Holde heere, wilt thou haue a Plum or an Apple? yea marrie, it is a good Gyrle: then was I gladde to get Apples and Peares, and such geere to bring her to the Booke. And then the Apish Elfe, for my heart, would not say a worde, so that I could not for my life, but giue her a little slap on the shoulders: and if I did but euen touch her, the Monkie would set out the throate, and crie so vengeouslie, that to it must the mother come, and then, howe now gyrle? tell mee, doeth shee beate thee? Minion, you were not best touch her, see you? the Wenche would learne well inough, and you were willing to teach her, well, you were best vse her gently, least yee fare the worse for it, and so away shee goes. Nowe would I sitte weeping for greefe, that the squall would learne no faster: and if the hylding had gotte out of my sight, that then shee had runne padling about out of my sight, and by chaunce spotted any of her cloathes, or taken a fall, (and yet it was olde inough) beeing betwixt seauen and eight yeeres of age, to goe alone. Yet as I saye, if ought were amisse with her. I was checkt, snibd, called prowde Minkes, rated like a Dogge, and nowe and then beaten so extreamely, if the Olde crone were in an angrie moode, as shee was seeldome little better. But yet the olde Man (I remember) many times, when shee was laying on mee with a Faggot sticke, hee would come and plucke her off mee, and say: why wife forbeare her, doe not vse her so cruelly, let vs not altogither forget our selues: Wife, wee are the better for her, remember the Boyes wordes, and surely God will plague vs for it. Tushe, would shee say, meddle with your men, let mee alone with my Maides, you are but a foole, you were best prate that all the worlde may heare you. Foole, I thinke you are madde, and I be plagued, you shall not be the worse for it, I warrant you, this would the olde Man, yet somewhat speake for mee, and if hee were in the waye, then was I the better at quiet: and manie times I did marke the olde fellowe, who for kind heart, yet to thinke of my abuse, he would fetch a deepe sigh or two, and so with the water in his eyes, hee would goe away from her. Now when shee was out of doores, hee would come to mee, and sometime out of his pocket hee would pluck a peece of White bread and Rost meate, that hee would steale from his Wife, and giue mee in secrete, and nowe and then hee would plucke me forth a peece of Golde or twoo, and bid me lay it vp for my marriage, if hee should die before his Wife. Why? shee was so harde hearted, that hee was afrayde I should haue nothing. Thus was yet the good olde Man somewhat kinder hearted of the twoo, and the money that I had of him from time to time, I would laye vppe as hee bade mee. But in his absence, thus continued I in the olde Womans handlings, till it pleased God for her wicked minde, to laye his plague vpon her. After I had passed away three or foure yeares with her in this Miseries, then fell the olde Woman sicke of the Gowte, which held her so sore in the Feete, Toes, Fingers, Knees, and almost in all her ioyntes, that shee could neither goe, sitte, stand, nor lie in rest: Oh, shee was so extreamely tormented, that (notwithstanding all her crueltie towards mee,) it greeued mee euen at the heart, and made mee shead many a teare to see her in such taking: but yet I had such a Miserie with her, in this time of her sicknesse, that almost would haue killed anie but mee: Such an euill sent of Oyntments and Medicines, that shee layde to her lame Ioyntes, such a doo in making her readie, and hauing her to Bedde, such a filthie sight to see her spitting vppon the Walles, such a vile ayre as daily was in her Chamber: what with her filthie Fleame that shee spitte about the Chamber, and with the beastlie sweate of her vnwholesome fleshe, that a Dogge would haue scarce beene able to abide the roome. Yet was I enforced still to tarrie, sometimes so long, till I was almost stifled, and oft constained to make all her Medicines, so loathsome to my stomacke, that I was oft ready to swound with fulnesse of the ill ayre, that it did halfe ouercome me. This wearie life lead I, till it pleased God to take away this cursed creature out of the world, whose couetous minde, euen at the houre of death, called for the keyes of her Chest, and scarce contenting her selfe to call to God for mercie; without either minde of the Pages wordes, or my good seruice, or chieefely of Gods displeasure: her husband, her Daughter, and one or two of her neighbours about her, with the keyes in her hand, not giuing me one groat, in a suddaine sore pang (halfe franticke) dyed. This miserable life continued with mee for the space of foure yeares, or there abouts, and longer had continued, had not God by her death sent me comfort, which lasted not long. For that now hauing passed a fewe dayes in some better estate with this olde Widower, then I had done, in the time of his wiues (it goes against my stomack to tearm her mine olde mistresse) life. This old man beeing as it were betwixt fiftie and threescore yeeres of age, and somewhat sickly, made mee his Nurse, I must looke to him, make him broaths, haue him to bedde, make him readie in the morning, warme his slippers, and his staffe ende, keepe his chamber cleane, which was so filthie with his spitting, that it greeued me to come into it. Beleeue me, it is no little Miserie to a yong minde to be an olde mans Nurse: well, yet for his kinde and honest vsage of me, I could farre better away with him, then with the olde Woman, which hee seeing, made verie much of mee, and committed vnto my charge the keyes of his counting house, where his money lay, the keyes of his Chests, and in a manner the charge of all his house. Nowe in this good life, I continued but two monthes, when the olde man fell verie sore sicke, and beeing in great daunger of death, sent for one or two of his neighbours: of which, in one hee did repose his speciall trust, for performaunce of his will. Which finding himselfe verie weake and faint, he made verie short: but I remember thus much he sayde of mee. Good Cosen, I beseech you bee good to this Wench, let her haue the fiue hundreth poundes that I giue her: my Daughter shall haue a good portion enough, besides her Landes. I pray you take care to see this Wench doo well, let her not lacke any thing: I and mine haue beene the better for her, so God blesse her, and all you. God haue merrie vpon mee: and so calling mee to him, taking mee by one hande, tooke his Daughter by the other, and willed her take mee by the hand: Which done, first he kist her, and then me, and after vttered his last speech. Daughter, thou knowest howe well this Wench hath deserued at our handes: as your handes, so let your hearts be ioyned, shee hath brought you that, you are the better for, and taught you that, you are bound vnto her for. As either thou louest me now, or euer doost thinke to haue loue at Gods hand, make much of her, and in all respects, vse her as thy selfe: I am not able to talke any longer vnto you. God blesse you both. Good Cosen remember my woordes for Gods sake, looke well to this Wench, and make much of her: Lord haue mercie vpon mee, and so fare you well. Thus dyed the good olde man, and thus sprung a new my sorrowfull Miseries, which fell out as followeth. The ende of the third Miserie. While I was weeping, almost mine eyes out, with sorrow of this good old mans death, the executors, as careles of his words, as he and his wife of my poore pages speech. No sooner was the life well out of the body of him, and he scarcely cold, but they came to me for the keyes of all the Chests in the houses: and presently tooke an Inuentorie of all things belonging to the houses. Which (while they were dooing) what cospiracie was wrought against me, the couetous villains (loath to let me haue the summe bequeathed vnto me) wet vnto a maide in the house, who enuying my litle fauour, and credit with the old man, did agree (by their perswasions, and bribes togither) to accuse me of fellony in this sort. So out she comes among them. Syr (quoth she) to the trusted carelesse man, the chiefe Executor, haue you not the keye of such a Chest? pointing to mine: no (quoth they) not yet. Well (quoth shee) there is something in it, worth the searching for. So then they came to me for the keye, which in that sorrow of minde, making as litle account of the Chest, Keye, or that was in it, as of my selfe, I tooke it to them: wherewith presently they went vnto the Chest, and the maide with them. To whom (before my face) they gaue the one halfe part of my mony, and the other to the poore, calling mee hypocriticall queane, I mought leaue my weeping well inough: ah young whore, had she cozoned the old man of so much money? So then they came to me, and asked me how I came by all that money? I tolde them (as it was) by gift of the olde Man, and wherefore. For that (quoth I) he thought me worthie of no lesse, as was well seene by that hee had further bequeathed me. Yea (quoth the vilde Maide) much giuing: I will tell you what, my mistresse knew her fashions well inough, she was the death of her: you may see how she loued her, she would not giue her a groate. But she had the vaine of mine olde maister, aske my young mistresse heere, shee was so proud after mine olde mistresse death, that she would be haile fellow with her: Yea (quoth she) that she would. How now minks (quoth the cheefe Executor, the author of all this vaillanie) how like you this geare? You shall haue fiue hundred pounds, yea marrie shall you, for robbing the olde man of his goods. Oh, you will make a trimme peece, if you holde on as you begin. This is well for a beginning, I see you loue to begin betimes. Yea Syr, (quoth the arrant honest mayde againe) I am sure she stole it from my Maister: for diuers times when he had sent her into his Counting house, she would serue her selfe as shee list: Now shee thought because hee had inough, it would neuer be mist. I had tolde him of it long ago, but that no body might be welcome to him with any ill tale of her. And therefore till now, I neuer said any thing: but, because I see her haue so much bequeathed her, and yet will not confesse it of her selfe, I haue thought good thus to bring it to light. I haue seene her my selfe, when shee hath put three or foure peeces of Golde into her Chest at once. And therefore now you see what shee is, thinke of her accordinglie. Yes marrie (quoth the Executor) that I will. And so sending for the Constable, who with mine accuser this Maide, sent mee before an vniust Iustice, who hauing heard mine accusation, when I began to aunswere for my selfe, cut mee off short: And with ha ydle huswife, the worlde is too full of such: Bidde away with mee to the Gayle, whither (in hope of death, wearie of life.) I went as willingly, as to a place of greater pleasure: where, how wofully I passed the time, I leaue to the iudgements of such as haue escaped thraldome, and liue at libertie. This onely I will recite, the filthy ayre of the place, pestered with infectious persons, the losse of light, (the comfort of the minde) in so darke a hole, as one could scarce see one another, the harde lodging vpon the bare earth: the hearing of Songs, laughings, and other tokens of myrth of Passengers that went by the doore, that liued at libertie: the hunger and thyrst so great, and releefe so little, and last of all, the companie of such wretched and accursed creatures, as in their criminall offences had passed the bounds of Christianitie: such vile behauiour among them, such blaspheming of GOD, such cursing of the worlde, such desperate inuentions, such filthy complexions, and such beastly conditions, such sighing on one side, and sobbing on the other: such weeping, such wayling, such wringing of handes, and sometimes such terrible cryes, as were inough to pearce through the Walles, or at the least, breake the hearts of them that were within them: Oh most miserable life. Well, this life continued so long, till the time of Sessions came, that the Prisons should be emptied, Prisoners should be called, the guiltie condemned and executed, and the guiltlesse discharged. Nowe when the time was come, and I among the prisoners sent for to the Barre, and my accuser there, ready to tell her tale against mee, the Sheepheards daughter (by mee made the young Gentlewoman, in time of my imprisonment being married) came with her Husband to see and heare mine arraingnment. Now as I stoode at the barre, so soone as I beheld her, I swounded, but anon being called to the barre againe, I held vp my hand: and being asked guiltie or not, looking againe vpon this young Gentlewoman, beeing great with childe, Oh my Lord, (quoth I) let that young Gentlewoman with the great belly answere for me: for I can say nothing for my selfe. Guiltie? I should condemne my selfe. Not: you would aske, how I would be tryed: and I would answere, by God and this young Gentlewoman, and none else. Susanna was accused by two of the Elders: litle Daniel deliuered her, by the iust will of God. This olde Miser, and this maide my accusers God by this gentlewoman, may shew to be as vntrue as they. Gods will be done, I will say no more, vse your authoritie, I feare not death. This Gentlewoman hearing my speech, considering my case, remembring what good shee had got by mee, not forgetting her Fathers wordes: and last of all fearing Gods high displeasure, suddenly stept downe vnto the Barre, beseeching the Iudges to cause my Irons to bee knocked off, which they graunted: tooke me by the hand, and falling on her knee before the Iudges, pronounced these words. My Lords, to dally with the world in some causes, is daunger of death: but in such a cause as this, to dallie with God, may purchase damnation: oh my Lords, I am to aske God great forgiuenesse, for my hainous offence, in seeing her Miserie so great, without redresse or releefe vnto his houre. Her imprisonment for mine offence, her arraignement for my fellony, and her discredit and defame, for my default. My Lord, indeede the mony was my fathers, and I stole it: the day before hee fell sicke, I found the keyes of his Cubborde, I tooke out the money, and finding the Chest open, threw it into it, and couered it with the foule Napkin, as it was found, minding to haue caried it to mine owne Chest: but hearing one come vp the stayres, I flung it in thyther for haste, fearing to bee discried before I should get to mine owne Chest, standing two Chambers off, but meant, when they that came vp the stayres were gone, to haue taken it out, and caried it into mine owne Chest: but vp comes shee her selfe, and as she past by her Chest, (finding it open) she clapt downe the lid, and so lockt it. Now my Father comming home verie sicke, she went to him, made a fire in his Chamber, watcht by him all night, and vntill he died, neuer stirde from him. Nowe the Maide perhaps, seeing me, and thinking that wee two had beene halfes in this bootie, enuying this poore Gentlewomans deserued fauour, and yet not daring to accuse me, hath heere wrongfully accused her, vtterly guiltlesse of the matter, or knowing of the money: Though being taken of suddaine, in extremitie of sorrow, she said shee knew not what. But now my Lordes, that you haue the offendour, discharge the Prisoner, and if the Daughter for robbing of her Father, deserue death, let me haue iudgement without further Lawe? Nowe were the Iudges appalde, the people amazed, the Husbande astonied at his Wiues tale, mine accusers afraide, my selfe a little comforted. But yet seeing the kinde nature of the yong Gentlewoman, that would rather wrongfully cast her selfe, and her little one, both away, then see iudgement passe vpon mee vniustly, my heart was so full of sorrowe, with a deepe sighe, I brought out these wordes: My Lord, the Lord of Lordes dooth knowe this tale to bee vntrue, and her vnguiltie. For indeede I tooke the money, but giuen, not stole: I laid it in my selfe, not giuen mee, I vowe for any ill desert, but vpon good will, and that vpon good cause. Shall I say mine accusers haue doone mee wrong? yea, they haue accused mee of money stolne, found in my Chest, the money they founde, I not denie, the stealing let them approoue. I am but a young Wenche, God be on my side, I care not who be against mee, nowe let mine accusers say theyr mindes. With that came the Mayde to the Barre. My Lordes (quoth shee) to cleare both these persons, of this Fellonious crime, I heere crauing pardon of God, for wrongfull accusation of this guiltlesse Prisoner, forgiuenesse at her hande, for the wrong I haue done her, and of my young Mistresse, for the hurt I haue wrought her, beeing with Childe, to bring her to this arraignment, where shee would bring her selfe vnto, as vntimely, as vndeserued a death, and with confession of offence, shame of the same, of you my Lorde, and all the world besides, humblie beseeching pardon, I will heere vnfolde the secret of all this endightment. My Lorde, it is not vnknowne to a number here present, that I haue bene a long time Seruant of the Sheepheards: this Prisoner I knewe, since the first hower of comming to this house, not brought home (as mine olde Mistresse sayde) but comming to her doore by chaunce, trauelling with a Page (in company with her,) who was the death of the wilde Bore in the Sandie hill: which Combat cost him his life, it were a Tragedie, to tell you the discourse of her comming thither: but this in briefe, the Boye that was buried heere at Whitsontide last, was hee, who brought with him such store of Crownes, as purchased the Lande that my Maister left my Mistresse. Now whether hee had good cause to loue her or not, I referre to your iudgements. My Lorde, the money my Maister gaue her, in her curst Mistresse time, to helpe her yet toward her Marriage, if hee should chaunce to die before his Wife, whose couetous minde (hee feared) would affoord her little or nothing: Shee hath beene a good Mistresse they might say, (if they were now liuing) vnto them: and I will now say, for a Seruant, there was neuer a truer, more painefull, nor kinder hearted Wenche in the worlde, no fault in her but too much sorrowe, (which well considered) was cause too much for any good Gentlewoman in the world. And my Lord, a Gentlewoman shee is, for proofe here is a Letter that shee brought with her to the house, shee lost it, and I found it, and vntill this day haue kept it. Therewith shee gaue him the Letter, which as hee perusing, my Lorde (quoth shee) if there be anie Theefe, it is I, who by false accusation of an other, would openly steale her money out of her Cheste, honestly come by. Wherefore, if Law passe vpon any, let me haue it, that most iustly haue deserued it. With that, stept vnto the Barre, the olde Executor, the authour of all the accusation. My Lordes (quoth hee) the Maide hath tolde a true tale, and sufficient to approoue both the other guiltlesse, yet hath shee not tolde what shee might: shee is not onely guiltie, but another more worthy death, which is the author of all this mischiefe, and that is I, who seeking to defeate the Gentlewoman of the summe bequeathed her, with fayre wordes perswaded, and with Brybes enticed this Maide vnto this villanie. Who beeing poore, and hauing receiued the one halfe of that I found in the Chest, was content heere to confirme her accusation. But nowe hauing the feare of God before her eyes, repents her of the facte, and crauing pardon, hath bewrayed the whole effecte of our most villainous treacherie: If then, a Theefe that would robbe a Uirgin of her Dowry, entise a maide to folly, and seeke the death of a guiltlesse person by such vnchristian conspyracie, be worthie to deserue death, let mee haue my desert, for I desire it. Nowe Iesus blesse vs, (quoth a number of the people,) who euer heard of such an arraignement? A great while there was such a noyse among them, that till silence was cryed, wee could not heare the Iudges: at last when all was still. Gentlewoman (quoth the Iudge) by your Letter that I haue read, I see what you are, and whence you come, of your trauaile, I will talke more at home with you. From your accusation I discharge you, and this order I take before you. The Gentlewoman there with you, for that shee is with Childe, I committe to your Iudgement, after her deliuerance what punishment shee shall haue to content you: Her lands and goods, (as your owne of right) I giue you. The Maide for her accusation, shall presentlie as you will, be handled before you, her money receiued, shee shall repay you. The Executor shall paye you double the summe bequeathed you: his Lands and goods shall be confiscate, for the conspiracy against you, and his death you shall see (if you will) to satisfie you: if not, say what you will, it shall be done, wee will graunt it you. Then my Lordes (quoth I,) the Gentlewoman shall haue her Land and liuing still, in recompence of her kinde loue, in offering her life for mee. The Mayde shall haue her money still, for reuealing the villanie, her pardon I graunt, for confession of the offence, & henceforth I will that shee shall attende vppon mee. And the Executor shall paye mee my money bequeathed mee, and hee and the Mayden shall aske me forgiuenesse before all this companie, and I will heartily forgiue their conspiracy. Good my Lord graunt me this fauour, and so to morrowe, or sometime ere long, this Gentlewoman and I will wayte vpon you, till when, and alwayes, God preserue you. Content (quoth hee) so order was taken, the offendors asked forgiuenesse, pardon was graunted: Other Prisoners were called, and I with the Gentlewoman departed: and into the Countrey wee came to a very fayre house of her Husbands, who made mee great welcome, and vsed mee exceeding well. But see, I was borne in an vnhappie hower, and vnder an vnhappie Plannette, for not long this good hap lasted with mee, but an ill and sore ill hap befell mee as followeth. The ende of the fourth Miserie. After I had passed awaye in indifferent pleasure, the space of two yeares with this Gentlewoman. Nowe did diuers Gentlemen become Suters vnto mee, one must be Seruant, another my Fellowe, one my Friende, another my friendly Enemie: another my selfe, another my Trust, another my Loue, one this, and another that. Nowe among all these was one, (that I called my Seruant) by birth a Gentleman, and of no worse behauior, of personage a proper man, and for his vertues, a rare man as could be found in a whole Realme: This Gentleman began in iest, to make loue vnto mee, perswaded mee, he loued me dearely, and that so entirely: as that except I would affoorde him fauour, hee would fall into such desperation, as I should be sorie to beholde. Now began I to think this of my selfe, I am heere a straunger in this Countrey, this Gentleman is well knowne: I haue bene in great disgrace, though wrongfully: hee was neuer dishonored, that I could heare off, his personage is sufficient to please a dainty eye, his qualities are of the best to be commended, his speech is such as may allure a wiser then my selfe, to giue eare vnto it: the contents of his words well considered, would mooue a harde heart to compassion: and what a griefe were it to a good minde, to driue a man into desperation? surely, hee can not dissemble with me so deepely, his vowes are sufficient to perswade me to a good beleefe, yet young men can vse faire words: why? fowle words are not worth the hearing. Oh faire words come of flatterie, and Louers can lie vilely. When it is full Sea, sweete baites for Fishe, but the Fishe that are frayde, will swimme along by the Line: though some foolish Fishe will leape at a flie, and be caught with a hooke. The worlde is so full of craft, that I knowe not what to doo, say, nor thinke, almost to auoyde the snares of subtill mindes. I haue hearde much talking of Loue, and no little harme that hath befallen Louers. Let mee then take heede betimes, if Fancie be once caught, it is but Follie to repent. What shall I doo? graunt him Loue, then when hee hath it, hee will make no account of it: for the rarest things in the Worlde once obtained, within a little while is little set by. And loue of all other things, lasteth the least while, for to daye I loue dearely, to morrowe reasonablie, next day indifferently, next day a little, to morrow I am not in loue, next day almost out of loue, and one daye more, farewell loue. But now let me see, whereupon doth hee now mooue his sute? What? haue I played the wanton, in smiling lookes, which might giue suspition of lightnesse? and so hee thinks good (being a proper man) to set in foote first before an other? thinking perhappes that a lustie Gyrle is soone gotte, with gallant speeches: no sure, I doo not thinke but I haue more care of my credite, then to shewe such ill countenance, then that is no grounde of his Sute. What then? am I so proper a woman of personage, or so faire of face, as that euery man that sees me, should be in loue with mee? Much in faith, then this is no cause of it: is hee in loue with my money? Alas, what is fiue hundreth pounds, to make a man madde for? money is good ware, and much made off. But what then? if hee shoote at my money, hee will make the more of me for it. Why? If I had nothing, who would care for mee? dooth he see any vertues in mee, for which hee doth honour mee? Perhaps he gesseth I haue a good minde, and hee is not deceiued in mee. I gesse likewise of him, I praye God hee doo not deceiue me: as for my money, surely hee needes it not, he may well enough liue without me. Well, good mindes will thinke the best, God forgiue him, if hee halt with mee, his good nature is such he cannot abuse me. Thus was I one day in a Garden prating to my selfe, when walking all alone in an Arbour, hee espied me, and in this sort saluted mee. Mistrsse, I hope you haue made an ende of your Pater noster ,  & if you haue put me in your Creede you shall haue me at more then ten commaundements: I heard you at your Prayers, I hope I was not quite out of your minde. If you prayed for me, I hope I shall thriue the better, and if you thought of mee, I hope it was for no harme, and if you forget mee, it was because I deserue no good thought. Now I thought it not manners, to trouble you at your deuotion, but when I sawe you rise from your seate, beholding your sadde countenaunce, I thought good to make you merie with this mad salutation. Welcome good seruant (quoth I.) but as I was not at prayer, & yet in a Beleefe, in which you were not left out: so, I pray you let me intreate you, to iest no more with commandements, what you doo at my request, I will requite you with courtesie: my sadnesse was not such, but may be soone laide aside, and for your merie salutation, good seruant I thanke you. Good Mistresse (quoth he) a thanks well deserued, might be as heartily giuen, as happily receiued: I am sorie, I haue deserued no more, and you can giue no lesse. Now though the gift be but little, the cost not great, yet is the receit not small, the desert no greater, to haue a thanke for a thing of nothing, where dutie could not well deserue a greater thing, I must consider it your courtesie, and honor you accordingly. But if good hap would giue good occasion, to shew my good minde, you should see my good nature, in deseruing your goodnesse. Good seruant (quoth I) your speech is good, and if your meaning be as good, then shall I thinke as much good of you, as a good Mistresse may of her good seruant. But since I haue yet no good occasion to try your good will, I will be so good as to thinke the best of you, till I haue cause to think the contrarie: wishing you as much good, as you can wish your selfe, and sorie that I am not able to doo you as much good as I wish you: ready to doo you what good I may. I thanke you for your good company, good Mistresse (quoth hee,) if my company, my selfe, my seruice, my sword, my loue, or my selfe, may doo you pleasure, or halfe that good, that your goodnesse deserues, I should thanke God for my good happe, and wishe for no better. Good Lorde what a world it is to desire, and not deserue? and what a miserie to deserue, and goe without desire? Alas, to vse glosing speeches, giues suspicion of little good meaning: To speake groselie, to a person of so fine capacitie, will make my wordes not woorth the hearing: plaine Dunstable, is the high way, and yet there are many holes in it, by a circumstance is founde an effect. Who dare not speake, must looke as hee may: hee that desireth to please, is afraide to offende: Seruantes must not bee fancie, least they be shent for their labour: Ladies may giue leaue, and Seruants to be bolde. I would if I durst, and dare if I would: but because I dare, I will not: and because I would, I dare not. These speeches are darke, and yet they carrie light with them, you may vnderstand them, and as it please you, answere them, or thinke of them at your pleasure. Good Seruant (quoth I) of darke speeches, I must not giue light iudgement: suffiseth as I saide before, I will thinke the best: and for that by a little, I gesse at a great deale: I pray you in plaine, speeches, say your mind plainly. I promise you pardon, if you say that which may dislike me, and thankes for any thing that shall content me. Mistresse (quoth he) vpon pardon a man may be bolde to say his minde: and therefore, not to trouble you with any long talke, thus it is. You know I haue a long time beene your Seruant, yet neuer did you seruice. How long you haue beene my Mistresse, and yet would neuer set me to worke whereby I might deserue your fauour: I haue often merilie (fearing to driue you into a Melancholie) mooued a sute to you in iest, which now in earnest I am to beseech you to graunt mee, thus it is The comfort of my minde, the ioye of my heart, the stay of my health, and the onelie sauegard of my life, lyes in your hands. I mourne with feare to misse my faithfull desire, I ioy in heart to thinke what I desire, this ioy maintaines my health. Now my life lies in your handes, which by the loue that at your handes I desire, which desire is nothing but loue, that craues but like, with humble sute obtained, my health may be maintained, my life preserued, or (my sute disdained) my selfe soone dispatched. Alas good Seruant, I am sorie to see your extremitie, so doo I pittie your perplexitie: and if you meane but honestly, you may speede happily. Otherwise, your dissimulation will soone be descried, and your selfe accordingly esteemed. I will not vse many words vnto you, copany comes, and therefore now let this suffise you. Write me your mind I will answere you; deliuer it me wisely, I will returne you my resolution speedily. Meane time, I pray you absent your selfe, for yonder comes mine olde woer, your aduersarie: I must handle him kindlie, giue him faire words, and send the foole parking, to morrow let me heare from you: Thus with as humble as heartie thanks, tooke my seruant his leaue, and to me comes mine olde doating louer, a rich chuffe in the Countrey, who hauing lately buried his olde Ione, would now faine play the young Gentleman with me, But no, it would not be, Contraries can neuer agree: age is froward, and youth foolish: age is lame, and youth lustie: age sickly, youth healthfull: age is melancholly, and youth merrie: age is modest, youth mad: age is towards Death, and youth lookes for life: age is iealous, that cannot youth away withall. How then, is it likely that we two should agree hardly? yet I can do little, if I cannot speake him faire, giue him good words, and let him goe. But the foole will be kissing, and the stubble of his olde shauen beard new come vp, so pricks mee, and tickles my lipps, that I am ready to scratch them after euery kisse: but yet his nose is so great, that hee hath much adoo to kisse kindly: Besides, he hath a stinking breath, and a hollow eye. Further, I feare by his complexion, he hath bene a traueller, into some lowe Countreys, where he hath bene infected with some vnholsome ayre: I gesse it the more by his speaking in the nose, and neuer a good tooth in his head. Hee is as deafe as a doore, I must tell him a tale in his eare, that all the Towne must be priuie too, or else hee cannot heare mee. He hath the Goute in one of his legges, and blinde of one of his eyes: hee hath almost no hayre on his head, and hee hath lost one of his eares: hee goes crup shouldred, and sits downe by leisure: hee is continually coughing, and betwixt euerie three words spitting: hee neuer playes at Tables nor Cards, without a paire of Spectacles. Oh what sporte I haue to deale him the knaue of Clubbes: his play is not great, thirteene games for three farthings, and yet wrangle too, and in the ende looke vpon both sides, whether it be a penny or no: Yet will hee haue his Purse full of Golde, to make a braue shew withall, and a faire Chaine about his necke, to set out a filthy body withall: a Brooche in his Hatte, with a good deale of Golde in it, and a Seale Ring on his finger, with an ounce of Golde at least. Marrie sir, who would not be glad of such a bargaine? Faith not I. Oh this filthy fellowe nowe must I meete, and haue a little talke with all, and a kisse as good, sauing your reuerence. But patience, wee must nowe to the matter. Mistresse (quoth hee) what all alone? lacke you any good companie? Yea thought I, farre better then yours, else none for Gods sake? But yet I answered. Oh Syr, you are welcome, howe haue you done this great while? well (quoth hee) good sweete Ladie. And then the olde Horse would haue a young Fillie: and, for all the worlde, like an olde Horses neyghing, would hee be smoyling. And then must one hande goe about my middle, which if I did but put away with my hand, hee would be ready to fall on his nose, for hee had but one good legge to stand on, and therefore my side was a good rest for him. Nowe when I sawe his foolishnesse, I would merilie saye: Oh Syr, you are a merie man, I praye you talke of somewhat else. To be shorte, I could not away with his stale Iestes, and therefore making but little answere to his propositions, I came out of the Garden into the Parlor, where wee found sitting at his Booke, the Gentlewomans Father of the house, a goodly, well- fauoured, well coloured, and well spoken olde man: who marking the doting loue of this olde Dizarde, notwithstanding, that hee made great account of him, hee would say to him: In faith Syr, you doo but loose your labour, shee is not for you, you and I are both of vs past the world. Tush Syr, would the olde foole answere, you knowe not what may hitte, I haue a graunt already. Oh shamelesse villaine thought I, and therewithall, Syr (quoth I) I hope you are in iest. Iest (quoth hee?) nay I hope you will not goe from your worde so soone. Why Sir (quoth I) what worde haue I spoken, for you to take holde by? Why (quoth hee) did you not plight mee your troath euen now in the Garden? No sir, (quoth I) I thanke God, I neuer meant it, Yes (quoth hee) but you did meane it, and you did it, and you shall performe it, or I will know why to the contrarie Oh, shamelesse Sir (quoth I) can you so much abuse a poore Gentlewoman? God will plague you for your villany. No (quoth he) not a whit: but I will plague you for your lustinesse, and therefore resoule to make mee amends with courtesie, or I will requite thee with such crueltie, as thou shalt repent thy pride I warrant thee. O wretch (quoth I) what art thou a Christian, and canst deale thus dishonestly? Fie vpo thee (quoth I) I defie thee I curse the time that euer I saw thee, & while I liue, I will neuer looke vpon thee. Good words Gentlewoman, (quoth the good olde man of the house.) And Sir, though you bee my freende, and welcome to my house, I pray you abuse not anie heere: if the Gentlewoman had giuen you her word, I doo thinke so well of her, as that I dare vndertake, shee would not haue denied it. What? (quoth the olde Theefe) will you giue credit to this young baggage, before mee, you doo abuse me. But a fig for you, and your house too, I will neuer come more in it, and yet I will haue her out of it. What? sir (quoth he) good words, or get you packing out of doores. Thus were the olde men ready to fall out for mee: now away in a heate, without farewell to one or other, goes this olde Gander. And the olde man of the house fell to straight examination of mee, whither it were so or not: to whome, when I had vpon solemne oath tolde, it was nothing so. He bade me be of good cheere hee should doo me no harme. Now yet my heart beeing sore agreeued to see the villainy of this olde Fornicator: and ioying to see the kinde heart of this other olde Gentleman sorie to bee an occasion of such anger to himselfe, and trouble to his house, betwixt a merrie, go sorie, I fell to such weeping, as quite spoilde mine eyes, and had almost burst my heart. But comforting my selfe alwaies in God, I tooke it, and brookt it as well as I could: so sometime sighing and sobbing for sorrowe to see my hard happe and [illeg.] comforting my selfe, with the hope of my seruants fidelitie: I past away the time as well as I could, till the next morning, whe comes my seruant to me with my letter. Which being deliuered vnto me in the garden all alone, I perused the contents thereof, as followeth. at your last time of copany, hath made me remember my charge, for which I longed for leaue a great while. To trouble you with many words I will not: let this suffice. My sute is humble, my meaning honest, my loue heartie, and my heart yours: my hope happie, by your high fauour. My selfe yours alwaies, and onely to commaund. R. G. When I had perused this Letter: Seruant (quoth I) whereas I thought to answere you by Letter, it shall be now by word of mouth. If my company did comfort you, I am glad of your amendment: in your performance of promise, you haue showne the dutie of a friend: let your humilitie, henceforth become familiaritie: and for your honest meaning, I grant you heartie fauour: for your heartie good will, I thinke my selfe highly in your debt, your hope shall haue what hap with honour I may graunt you, and I alwaies and onely will rest yours, as mine owne: my sorrow that I see you dismaide at, came by the accursed dealing of the olde youth, that would bee: the matter is, he claimes promise at my hand, which I vow contrarie: he hath threatned mee villainie, and I feare it shrewdlie. But to auoide this extreamitie, I will tell you what I will doe: I will reueale this vnto the olde Gentleman of the house, he is a very wise, courteous, and kinde hearted man. If he be made priuie to the matter, I knowe he will pittie the case: and for that he sees your liuing not great, during the life of your father, I know he will let vs one of his Farmes good cheape. And so with my Stocke of money, with Gods fauour, care, and good vsage, we may thriue and come forwards well. Mistresse (quoth he) I like your aduisement well, do as you wil I am contented. Then went I to the olde man, and tolde him the matter, which heard, he presently promised vs his fauour: and willed him to prouide all things readie, he with his son and his daughter would accompany vs, and he would giue me himselfe vnto my sweete seruant. Now the day appointed, appointment kept, all things in readinesse, and we in the Church: comes this old villainous Louer, or enemie of mine, who hauing heard of the matter, met vs at the Church doore, and there with threatning words, sware to be reuenged of vs, which in most horrible sort he thus performed. My Husband and I walking abroade one day, into a fielde, a pretie way from our house, to see certaine sheepe of ours. This olde villaine, watching to haue his will on vs, be set suddainly with two mercilesse Knaues, who staying there for the purpose, ran vpon vs, with each of them a Sword drawne in his hand, and he on horseback by them. Now to my husband they came, and him they tooke by the shoulders, shaking him like a Dogge, and reuiling him with these words Thou traytour, raskall, begger, knaue and boy, thou shalt dearely buy this thy saucie part with my maister. Would none serue thy turne but his sworne wife, she shall not be glad of her bargaine neither: and therewith, turning them to the olde man, they askt, sir, whom will ye haue first dispatcht? The queane is with child (quoth he) spare her a while, and let mee heare what the scab can say for himselfe, and then you shall vse him, as I will tell you. Then fell my Husband on his knees: Syr (quoth he) I can say no more, but that I haue offended you, if this Gentlewoman haue made you any former promise: if not, let your conscience accuse you, of wrong to vs, and offence to God: and if you haue either feare of him, or loue to him, change your minde in this murdrous enterprise, God is mercifull, and here we vow, not to bewray you, but during life, to doe you what seruice wee may be able. If you doe vouchsafe vs this fauour, it is more then wee looke for: and if you graunt vs it not, it is no lesse then you will bee damned for. Let my wiues great bellie mooue you to compassion, and let my humilitie, perswade your clemencie. This is all I haue to say, to vse your discretion, and shewe your good nature. Nowe Mistresse (quoth hee) what can you saye for your selfe? Oh Sir (quoth I) you knowe that you haue done me wrong, and by your countenance, I see you doe confesse it: I am sure in heart you are sorie for it: and assure your selfe, God will therefore forgiue it: if there be any humanitie in you, looke vppon the bellie that is to bring foorth a humane creature: let the pittie of the Infant perswade you to mercie: if there be any sparke of good nature in you, lament these bitter teares, that shewe the sharpe sorrowes of an vnhappie heart, if none of these. If there bee any wisedome in thee, looke vpon thy little discretion, in this vnwise, and vngodly pretence. If thou doest eyther knowe God, feare him, or loue him, or beleeue that hee is, and such a iust God as will plague thee in the Infernall pit, for this thy vnchristian pretence: Looke vp to the heauens, see how God doth frowne on thee, and threaten thee, in his high displeasure: turne from this Diuellish determination, looke how God doth freely forgiue thee. What should I say? God will haue no murther hidden, and when it comes to light, thou wouldest be hated of God and man, the byrds of the ayre will bewraye thee, the children in the streetes will throw stones at thee, and euerie woman will be ready to scratch out thine eyes. Nowe vse thy will, I will say no more. Well Dame (quoth hee) I promise thee, thou hast turned mee from my wicked deuise: some reuenge I will haue of thee, yet not such as I entended. Therefore chuse whether thou wilt loose thy Husband, or thy Nose, the one is a disgrace to thy face, the other, a discontent to thy minde: chuse which thou wilt, for one of them I will see before I goe, and make haste, for I may not tarrie. Alas (quoth I) my Husband spare, whether I liue or die, and if my life may content you, I pray you take it: I rather chuse to die, then to be disgraced. Well, then (quoth he) come hither, let me haue a kisse for all the Loue I haue borne thee, and so I will bid thee farewell. I with teares in mine eyes, leaping in for ioy of this good promise, ranne to him, and taking him about the necke to kisse him, the cankred olde Uillaine (with the ill-fauoured tooth that hee had) bitte off my Nose, and so with two Uillaines like himselfe, away he goes. Oh Raskall, begotten in an ill houre, borne to mischiefe, brought vp in Uillanie, and continuing in the same. God wil plague thee, and those teeth that tare my harmelesse face, will the Diuell teare out with a hote fire hooke. Well, yet God forgiue thee: and gramercie yet for sauing my Husbands life: since I am borne to miserie, Gods will be done. Thus went I away with my good husband, who notwithstanding my disgrace, made so deare account of mee: as first taking great paines and care, in procuring Medicines for my hurts, and being whole, keeping mee alwayes within doores, or not letting mee goe further then the Garden without sufficient garde, loued mee, tendered mee, and vsed mee in all respects, as well as my heart could desire. Now but himselfe, all men loathed my companie, for my ill-fauoured face: and hee himselfe would often sigh,
