 where to find them. 1 The Iest of George Peele with foure of his companions at Brainford. page. 1. ------ 2 The Iest of George Peele and the Barbor.    Pag. 5. 3 How George Peele became a Phisition.    Pag. 9. 4 How George Peele helped his friend to a supper.    Page. 13. 5 How George Peele was shauen, and of the reuenge he tooke.    Page. 14. 6 The Iest of George Peele at Bristow.    Pag. 16. 7 How George gulled a Punke, otherwise called a Croshabell.    Page. 18. 8 How George gulled the Gentleman for shauing him.    Page. 20. 9 How George read a play booke to a gentleman.    Page. 22. 10 How George serued half ascore citizens.    pa. 24. 11 A Iest of George riding to Oxford.   Ibid. 12 How George serued his hostice.    Pag. 27. How George serued a Tapster.    Pag, 29. 14 How George serued a Gentlewoman.    Pa. 31. Brainford. Tauerne, hauing more store of coyne then vsually they did possesse, although they were as regardlesse of their siluer, as a garden whore is of her honesty: yet they intended for a season to become good husbands: if they knew how to be sparing of that their pockets were then furnished withall; Fiue pounds they had amongst them, and a plot must be cast how they might be merrie with extraordinary cheere three or foure dayes, and keepe their fiue pounds whole in stocke, George Peele was the man must doe it, or none, and generally they coniured him by their loues, his owne credit, and the reputation that went on him, that he would but in this shew his wit: and withall he should haue all the furtherance that in them lay, George as easie as they earnest to be wonne to such an exploit, consented, and gathered their money together, and gaue it all to George , who should be their purse-bearer, and the other foure should seeme as seruants to George Peele , and the better to colour it, they should go change their cloakes: the one like the other so neere as they could possible, the which at Belzububs brothers the broker they might quickly do: This was soone accomplished, and George was furnished with his blacke Sattin suit, and a paire of bootes which were as familiar to his legges as the pillory to a Bakers or Colliers necke, and he sufficiently possest his friends with the whole scope of his intent, as Gentle Reader, the sequell will shew. Instantly they tooke a paire of owers, whose armes were to make a false gallop no further then Brainford, where their faire was paid them so liberally, that each of them the next tide to London purchased two new wastcoats, yet should these good benefactors come to their vsuall places of trade: and if they spie a better fare then their owne, that happily the Gentleman hath more minde to go withall: they will not onely fall out with him that is of their owne sweete transporters as they are: but abuse the fare they carrie with foule speeches, as a Pox or the Diuell go with you: as their godfather Caron the Ferry man of Hell hath taught them: I speake not this of all, but of some that are brought vp in the East, some in the West, some in the North, but most part in the South: But for the rest they are honest compleat men, leauing them to come to my honest George; who is now merrie at the three Pigeons in Brainford with Sacke and Sugar, not any wine wanting, the Musitians playing, my host drinking, my hostes dauncing with the worshipfull Iustice, for so then he was tearmed, and his mantion house in Kent, who came thither of purpose to be merry with his men: because he could not so conueniently neere home, by reason of a shrewish wife he had, my gentle hostes gaue him all the entertainement her house could afford: for M. Peele had payd royally: for all his fiue pounds was come to ten groats. Now George Peeles wit labors to bring in that fiue pounds there was spent, which was soone begotten: Beeing set at dinner, my host, quoth George , how fals the tide out for London, not tell the euening, quoth mine host, haue you any businesse sir, Yes marry, quoth George , I intend not to go home this two dayes: Therefore my host saddle my man a horse for London, if you be so well furnished, for I must send him for one bagge more, quoth George , ten pounds hath seene no sunne this sixe moneths. I am ill furnished if I cannot furnish you with that, quoth my host, and presently sadled him a good nagge, and away rides one of Georges men to London, attending the good howre of his Maister Peele in London, in the meane time, George bespeakes great cheere to supper, saying: he expected some of his friends from London: Now you must imagin there was not a peny owing in the house: for he had paid as liberall as C aesar , as farre as Caesars wealth went: For indeed most of the money was one Caesars an honest man yet liuing in London: but to the Catastrophe. All the day before had one of the other men of George Peele bene a great soliciter to my hostes, she would begge leaue of his maister, he might go see a maid a sweete heart of his so farre as Kingstone, and before his maister went to bed he would returne againe: saying he was sure shee might command it at his maisters hands: My kind hostes willing to pleasure the yong fellow, knowing in her time what belonged to such matters, went to M. Peele , and moued him in it which he angerly refused: but she was so earnest in it, that shee swore he should not deny her, protesting he went but to see an vnkle of his some fiue miles off. Marrie I thanke you quoth George , my good hostes, would you so discredit me, or hath the knaue no more wit, then at this time to go knowing I haue no horse here, and would he base cullion go a foote nay, good sir, quoth mine hostes, be not angrie, it is not his intent to go a foote: for he shall haue my Mare, and I will assure you Sir, vpon my word, hee shall bee here again, to haue you to bed; well, quoth George , Hostes, Ile take you at your worde, let him go, his negligence shall light vpon you, so be it, quoth mine Hostes, so downe goeth shee, and sends away ciuill Thomas , for so shee cald him, to his sweete heart backt vpon her Mayre: which Thomas insteede of ryding to Kyngstone, tooke London in his way where meeting with my other horseman attended the arriuall of George Peele , which was not long after, they are at London, George in his Chamber at Brainford, accompanied with none: but one Anthony Nit a Barbor, who dind and supt with him continually, of whome hee had borrowed a Lute to passe away the melancholie afternoone, of which hee could play as well as Bankes his Horse, The Barbor very modestly takes his leaue, George Obsequiously bids him to supper, who God willing would not faile, George beeing left alone with his two supposed men, gaue them the meane how to escape, and walking in the Court, George found falt with the weather, saying it was rawish and colde, which worde mine Hostes hearing, my kinde Hostes fetched her Husbands holliday Gowne, which George thankfully put about him, and withall cald for a cup of sack, after which hee would walke into the Meddowes, and practise vpon his Lute, tis good for your worshippe to do so, quoth mine Hostis, which walke, George tooke directly to Sion, where hauing the aduantage of a paire of Owres at hand, made this Iorney for London, his two assosiates behinde had the plot in their heads by Georges instruction for their escape: for they knew hee was gone, my Hostes shee was in the Market buying of prouision for supper: mine Host hee was at Tables, and my two maisterlesse men desired the maids to excuse them if their M. came, for quoth they wee will goe drinke two pots with my Smug smiths wife at olde Brainforde, I warrant you, quoth the Maides. So away went my men to the Smiths at olde Brainforde, from thence to London, where they all met, and solde the Horse and the Mare, the Gowne and the Lute, which mony was as badly spent as it was lewdly got. How my Host and my Hostes lookt when they sawe the euent of this, goe, but to the three Pidgions at Brainford you shall knowe. Anthony the Barbor was sorrowfull at Brainford for the losse of his Lute,  & therefore determined to come to London to seeke out George Peele , which by the meanes of a kinsman, that Anthony Nit had in London, his name was Cuts or Feates , a fellow that had good skill in tricks on the Cards, and hee was well acquainted with the place, where Georges common abode was: and for kyndred sake hee directed the Barbor where he should haue him, which was at a blind Alehouse in Sea-cole Lane, There he found George in a greene Ierkin, a Spanish platter fashioned Hatte, all alone at a peck of Oysters. The Barbers hart danst within him, for ioy he had so happily found him, he gaue him the time of the day, George , not a little abashed at the sight, of the Barbor , yet went not to discouer it openly, hee that at all times had a quick Inuention was not now behinde hand to entertaine my Barbor , who knewe for what his comming was, George thus saluted him, my honest Barbor quoth Georg , welcom to London, I partly know your businesse, you come for your Lute, doe you not? Indeede Sir quoth the Barbor for that is my comming, & beleeue me quoth George you shall not loose your labour, I pray you stand too and eate an Oyster, and Ile go with you presently: For a Gentleman in the Citie of great worshippe, borrowed it of me for the vse of his Daughter, that playes exceeding well and had a great desire to haue the Lute but Sir, if you will goe along with me to the Gentlemans house you shall haue your Lute with great satisfaction, for had not you come, I assure you I had sent to you, for you must vnderstand, that all that was done at Brainford among vs mad gentleman, was but a Iest and no otherwaies. Sir I thinke not any other wise, quoth the Barber: but I would desire your worship, that as you had it of me in loue: so in kindnesse you would helpe me to it againe, Oh God what els, quoth George , Ile goe with thee presently, euen as I am, for I came from hunting this morning; and should I goe vp to the certaine Gentleman aboue, I should hardly get away, I thanke you Sir, quoth the Barber so on goes George with him in his greene Ierken, a wand in his hand very prety, till he came almost at the Aldermans House , where making a sodaine stay, a fore God quoth George I must craue thy pardon at this instant, for I haue bethought my selfe, should I go as I am, it would bee imagined I had had some of my Lords houds out this morning, therefore Ile take my leaue of thee and meet thee where thou wilt about one of the Clock. nay good Sir, quoth the Barber goe with me now: for I purpose God willing to be at Brainford to night, saiest thou so, quoth George? why the Ile tell thee what thou shalt doe, thou art here a stranger, and altogether vnknowne, lend me thy cloake and thy hat, and doe thou put on my greene Ierken and Ile goe with thee directly along: The Barber loth to leaue him vntill he had his Lute, yeilded to the change. So when they came to the Gentlemans porch he put on Georges greene Ierkin, and his spanish hat: and hee the Barbers Cloake and his hatte, either of them beeing thus fitted, George knocks at the doore, to whom the Porter bids heartily welcome, for George was well knowne, who at that time had all the ouersight of the Pagiants he desires the porter to bid his friend welcome for he is a good fellowe and a keeper, Maister porter, one that at his pleasure can bestowe a haunch of Uenison on you, marry that can I, quoth the Barber , I thanke you Sir, answered the Porter, M. Peele my Maister is in the Hall, pleaseth it you to walke in, withall my heart quoth George , in the meane time let my friend beare you company, that he shall M. Peele , quoth the Porter, and if it please him he shall take a simple dinner with me. The Barbor giues him harty thanks, not misdoubting M. Peele any way seeing him knowne, and himselfe so welcome: fell in Chat with the Porter. George Peele goes directly to the Alderman who now is com into the Court in the eye of the Barbor , where George after many complaints, drawes a black paper out of his bosome, and making action to the Barbor , reads to the Alderman as followeth, I humbly desire your worship to stand my friend in a sleight matter, yonder hard fauoured knaue, that sits by your worships porter, hath dogd me to arrest me, and I had no other meanes but to take your worships house for shelter, the occasion is but triuiall, onely for stealing of a peece of flesh, my selfe consorted with three or foure gentlemen of good fashion, that would not willingly haue our names come in question. Therefore this is my boone, that your worshippe would let one of your seruants let me out at your Garden dore, and I shall thinke my selfe much indebted to your worship. The kind gentleman, little dreaming of George Peeles deceipt, tooke him into the parlor, gaue him a brace of Angels, & caused one of his seruants to let George out at the Garden dore; which was no sooner opened, but George made way for the Barbor seeing him any more, & all the way he went could not choose but laugh at his knauish conceipt: how he had guld the simple Barbor , who sat all this while with the porter blowing of his nailes, to whome came this fellow that let out George , you whorson keeperly rascoll, quoth the fellow, do you come to arest any honest gentleman in my Maisters house? not I so God helpe me, quoth the Barbor . I pray Sir where is the Gentleman Maister Peele that came along with me, farre enough quoth the fellow, for your comming neare him, hee is gone out at the garden dore, Garden dore quoth the Barber , why haue you any more dores then one, wee haue sir, and get you hence or Ile set you going goodman keeper, alas quoth the Barber , Sir I am no keeper, I am quite vndone: I am a Barbor dwelling at Brainford, and with weeping teares vp and tolde him howe George had vsed him, the seruant goes in and tels his M. which when he heard he could not but laugh at the first: yet in pitie of the poore Barbor he gaue him twenty shillings towards his losse. The Barber sighing tooke it, and towards Brainford whome he goes, and wheras he came from thence in a newe Cloake and a faire Hat, hee went home weeping in an olde Hatte, and a green Ierken. FINIS the horse he hired, and the money hee borrowed: but no matter how he was possest of them, and towards Oxford he rides to make merrie with his friends and fellow students: and in his way he tooke vp Wickham, where he soiourned that night: Being at supper accompanied with his hostes: among other table talke, they fell in discourse of Chirgerie, of which my hostes was a simple professor. George Peele obseruing the humor of my she Chirgion, vpheld her in all the straunge cures she talked of, and praised her womanly endeuor, telling her he loued her so much the better: because it was a thing that he professed, both Phisicke and Chirgerie: and George had a Dictionarie of Phisicall words, that it might set a better glosse vpon that which he seemingly profest: and told his good hostes at his returne hee would teach her something that should do her no hurt: for quoth he at this Instant I am going about a great Cure as far as Warwick-shire to a gentleman quoth he, of great liuing, and one that hath beene in a consumption this halfe yeare, and I hope to doe him good! O God, quoth the hostes, there is a Gentleman not a quarter of a mile off, that hath beene a long time sicke of the same disease: Beleeue me sir, quoth the hostes, would it please your worshippe ere your departure in the morning, but to visite the Gentleman, and but spend your opinion of him, and I make no question but the Gentlewoman will be very thankfull to you, Ifaith, quoth George , happily at my returne I may. But at this time, my hast is such that I cannot, and so God night good hostes: So away went George to bed, and my gyddie hostes right of the nature of most women, thought that night as long as ten, till she was deliuered of that burthen of newes which she had receiued from my new Doctor: for so he termed himselfe. Morning beeing come, at breake of the day my hostes trudges to this Gentlemans house, acquainteth his wife what an excellent man shee had at her house: protesting hee was the best seene in Phisicke, and had done the most strangest cures that euer she heard of: saying that if shee would but send for him, no question hee would doe him good. The Gentlewoman glad to here of any thing that might procure the health of her husband: presently sent one of her men, to desire the Doctor to come and visite her husband: Which message when George heard he wondred: for hee had no mere skill in Phisicke then in musicke, and they are as distant both from him, as heauen from hell: But to conclude, George set a bold face on it, and away went he to the sicke Gentleman: Where when he came, after some complement to the Gentlewoman, hee was brought to the Chamber where the auntient Gentleman lay wonderful sicke: For all Phisicke had giuen him ouer. George begins to feele his pulses and his temples: saying, he was very farre spent. yet quoth he, vnder God I will doe him some good, if nature be not quite extent: whereupon he demanded whether they had euer garden? That I haue, quoth the Gentlewoman, I pray you direct me thither, quoth George . Where when he came he cut a handfull of euery flower, hearbe and blossome, or whatsoeuer else in the garden, and brought them in, in the lapid of his cloake: Boyld them in Ale, straind them, boyld them againe: and when he had all the iuyce out of them: of which hee made some pottle of drinke: he caused the sicke Gentleman to drinke off a maudlin cup full, and willed his wife to giue him of that same at morning, noone, and night, protesting if any thing vnder God in this world did him good, it must be that: giuing great charge to the Gentlewoman to keepe him wonderfull warme, and at my returne, quoth George , some ten dayes hence, I will returne and see how he fares: For, quoth he, by that time some thing will be done, and so I will take my leaue, not so, quoth the Gentlewoman, your Worshippe must needes stay and take a simple dinner with me to day. Indeede, quoth George , I cannot now stay: my hast is such, I must presently to horse: For George was in hast vntill he was out of the Gentlemans house: For hee knewe not whether hee had poysoned the Gentleman or not, which made him so eager to bee gone out of the gentlemams house: The Gentlewoman seeing she could not stay him, gaue him two brace of Angels, which neuer shined long in his purse: and desired him at his returne to knowe her house, which George promised: and with some nicenesse tooke the gold, and towards Oxford went he fortie shillings heauier then he was, where he dominerd while his Phisicall money lasted. But to see the straungenesse of this: whether it was the vertue of some hearbe which he gathered, or the conceipt the Gentleman had of George Peele: but it so pleased God the Gentleman recouered, and in eight dayes walked abroad: and that fortunate potion which George made at random did him more good, then many pounds that hee had spent in halfe a yeare in Phisicke. Georges money beeing spent, made his returne towards London, and when hee came within a mile of the Gentlemans house, hee enquired of a countrey fellow how such a Gentleman did: the fellowe told him God be praised his good Landlord was well recouered by a vertuous Gentleman that came this way by chance: Art thou sure of it, quoth George , I beleue me, quoth the fellow? I sawe him in the fieldes but this morning. This was no simple newes to George . He presently set spurres to his horse, and where he thought to shunne the towne, he went directly to his Inne: at whose arriuall, the hostes clapt her hands, the Ostler laught, the Tapster leapt, the Chamberlaine runne to the Getlemans house, told him the Doctor was com: How ioyfull the Gentleman was, imagine them that haue any after healths, George Peele , was sent for and after a million of thanks from the Gentleman and his frinds: George Peele had 20. pounds Deliuered him, which mony, how long it was a spending let the Tauerns in London witnes. white horse in Friday streete, and in the euening as he was going, hee met with an old friend of his, who was so ill at the stomack hearing George tell him of the good cheere hee went to, himselfe beeing vnprouided both of meate & mony, that he swore he had rather haue gone a mile about: then a met him at that instant, and before God, quoth George , I am hartily sorry, that I cannot take thee along with me, my selfe beeing but an inuited guest, besides thou art out a clothes, vnfitting for such a copany: Mary this Ile do, if thou wilt follow my aduise, Ile helpe thee to thy supper, any way, quoth hee, to George , do thou but deuise the meanes, and Ile execute it, George presently told him what he should do, so they parted, George well entertained with extraordinary welcome, and seated at the vpper end of the Table, supper beeing brought vp. H. M. watched his time below, and when he saw that the meate was caryed vp vp he followes (as George had directed him) who when George saw, you whorson Rascoll, quoth George , what make you here? Sir, quoth he I am come from the party you wote of. You rogue, quoth George , haue not I forwarned you of this, I pray you Sir, quoth here my Arrant, do you prate you slaue, quoth George : and with that tooke a Rabbet out of the dish, and threw it at him quoth he, you vse me very hardly, you donghill quoth George , do you out face me, & with that tooke the other rabbet and threw it at his head, after that a loafe, then drawing his dagger making an offer to throw it, the Gentlemen they stayd him, meane while H. M. got the loafe and the two Rabbets and away he went, which when George saw he was gone, after a little fretting, he sat quietly, so by that honest shift he helped his friend to his supper, & neuer suspected for it of the company. There was a Gentleman that dwelt in the West country, and had staid here in London a tearme longer then he intended, by reason of a Booke that George had to translate out of Greeke into English, and for he wanted money, George had it of the Gentleman, but the more hee supplide him of coyne, the further off was hee from his booke, and could get no end of it, neither by faire meanes, entreaty, or double payment, for George was of the poeticall disposition, neuer to write so long as his mony lasted, some quarter of the booke beeing done, and lying in his hands at Randome. The gentleman had plotted a meanes to take such an order with George , next time he came, that hee would haue his booke finished. It was not long before hee had his company, his ariuall was for more mony: the Gentleman bids him welcome, causeth him to stay diner, where falling in discourse about his booke, found that it was as neare ended as he left it, two moneths agoe. The Gentleman meaning to bee guld no longer, caused two of his seruants to binde George hand and foote in a chayre, a folly it was for him to aske what they ment by it, the Gentleman sent for a Barbor , and George had a beard of an indifferent sise and well growne, he made the Barbor shaue him beard and head: left him as baire of heirs, as he was of mony, the Barbor he was well contented for his paines, left George like an old woman in mans apparell, and his voice became it well: for it was more woman then man, George , quoth the Gentleman, I haue alwaies vsed you like a friend, my purse hath beene open to you, that you haue of mine to translate, you know it is a thing I highly esteeme; therfore I haue vsed you in this fashion, that I might haue an end of my booke, which shall be as much for your profit as my pleasure. So forthwith he caused his men to vnbind him, and putting his hand in his pocket, gaue him two brace of Angels, quoth he, Maister Peele drink this, and by that time you haue finished my booke your beard wil be growne, vntill which time, I know you will be ashamed to goe abroad, George patiently tooke the gold said little, & when it was darke night tooke his leaue of the Gentleman, and went directly home who when his wife saw, I omit the wonder she made, but Imagine those that shall behold their husband in such a case, to bed went George , and ere morning, he had plotted sufficiently how to cry quid procoe , with his pollitick Gentleman. would last him, his palfrey that should be his carier to London, his head was growne so big that he could not get him out of the stable, it so fortuned at that instant, certaine players came to the towne, and lay at that Inne where George Peele was: to whome George was well knowne, beeing in that time an excellent Poet, and had acquaintance of most of the best Players in England, from the triuiall sort he was but so so: of which these were, only knew George by name no otherwise, there was not past three of the company come with the Cariage, the rest were behinde, by the reason of a long Iorney they had, so that night they could not inact, which George hearing had presently a stratagam in his head, to get his Horse free out of the stable: and money in his purse to beare his Charges vp to Londone, and thus it was, hee goes directly to the Maior tels him he was a scholler and a gentleman, and that he had a tertan historie of the knight of Rodes,  & withall how Bristow was first founded and by whome, & a briefe of all those that before him had succeeded in office in that worshipfull City, desiring the Maior that he with his presence, & the rest of his Brethren would grace his labours. The Maior agreed to it, gaue him leaue and withall apointed him a place, but for himselfe he could not be there beeing in the euening, but bid him make his best benefit he could of the City: and very liberally gaue him an Angell, which George thankfully receiues, and about his businesse hee goes, got his stadge made, his history cryed, and hyred the players Apparell, to flourish out his show, promising to pay them liberally, and withall desired them they fauour him so much as to gather him his mony at the doore, for he thought it his best course to imploy them, least they should spy out his knauery, for they haue parlous heads, they willingly yeeld to doe him any kindnesse that lies in them, in briefe caries their apparell to the Hall, placeth themselues at the doore, where George in the meane time with the ten shillings hee had of the Maior, deliuered his horse out of purgatory and caries him to the Townes end, and there placeth him, to be ready at his comming. By this time the Audience were come, and some forty shillings gathered, which mony George put in his purse, and putting on one of the Players silke Robes, after the trumpet had sounded thrise: out he comes, makes lowe obaysance goes forward with his prologue, which was thus. A tryfling toy, a Iest of no account, pardie. The Knight perhaps, you thinke for to be I. Thinke on so still, for why you know that thought is free Sit still a while, Ile send the Actors to ye. Which beeing said after some fire workes that hee had made of purpose, threw out among them, & down staires goes he gets to his horse, and so with his Forty shillings to London leaues the Players to answere it, who when the Iest was knowne, their Inocence excused them, beeing as well gulled as the Maior, and the Audience. Comming to London he fell in company with a Cokatrice; which pleased his eye, so well, that George fell abording of her, & proffered her the wine: which my croshabell willingly accepted, to the Tauerne they go, where after a little Idle talke, George fell to the question about the thing you wote off: My shee hobby was very dainty, which made George arre more egar, and my leacherous animall proffered largely to obtaine his purpose. To conclude, nothing shee would graunt vnto, except ready coyne, which was Forty shillings, not a farthing lesse, if so he would, next night she would appoint him where he should meete her: George saw howe the game went, that she was more for luker, than for loue, thus cunningly answered her. Gentlewoman how soeuer you speake, I doe not thinke your heart agrees with your tongue, the mony you demaund is but to trie me: and indeede but a trifle to me, but for it shall not bee saide I bought that Iem of you, I prize so highly, Ile giue you a Token to morrow that shall bee more worth then your demaund, if so you please to accept it, Sir, quoth she, it contenteth me well, and so please you at this time weele part: And to morrow in the euening meete you where you shall appoint, the place was determined, and they kist, and parted, she home, George into Saint Thomas Apostles to a friend of his that he knew he could take vp a petticote of trust, the first letter of his name begins with G. a peticote hee had of him at the prise of 5 s which money is owing to this day. The next night beeing come, they met at the place appointed, which was a Tauerne, there they were to suppe, that ended, George was to goe home with her, to end his yeomans plee, in her common case. But Maister Peele had another drift in his mazard: for he did so ply her with wine, that in a small time she sponne such a threed, that she roled homewarde, and George hee was faine to bee her supporter: when to her house she came, with nothing so much painting in the inside, as her face had on the outside, with much adoe, her maide had her to Bed, who was no sooner laid but shee fell asleepe, which when George sawe, hee sent the Maide for milke, and a quart of sack to make a posset, where before her returne, George made so bold to take vp his owne newe peticote, a faire gowne of hirs, two gold rings, that lay in the window, and away hee went, the Gowne and the gold Rings, hee made a chaffer, of the peticote, he gaue to his honest wife, one of the best deedes hee euer did to her, how the croshabell lookt when she awaked and sawe this, I was neuer there to heare. but of an excellent wit, all part of her was Father, saue her middle and shee, had George so tutord all night, that although himselfe was the Author of it, yet had he by transformed into his daughters shape: he could not haue done it with more consaite. George at that time dwelt at the bank side, from whence comes this shee-sinnow, early in the morning, with her haire dicheuelled, wringing her hands, and make such pitifull mone: with strikes  & teares, and beating of her brest, that made the people in a maze, some stoode wondring at the childe, others plucketh her to know the occasion, but none could stay her but on she kept her Iorney crying, O her Father, her good father, her deare Father, ouer the bridge thorough Cheapside, and so to the old Baley, where the Gentleman soioured, there siting her selfe downe, a hundred people gaping on her, there she begins to cry out woe to that place: that her Father euer saw it, she was a cast away, her mother was vndone, till with the noyse, one of the Gentlemans men comming downe, looked on her, & knew her to be George Peeles daughter: he presently runnes vp and tels his M. who commanded his man to bring her vp, the Gentleman was in a cold sweet, fearing that George had for the wrong that he did him the day before some way misdon himselfe, when the Girle came vp, hee demaunded the cause why she so lamented, and called vpon her father ( George , his flesh and bloode) after a million of siths, cryed out vpon him, he had made her Father, her good father drowne himselfe, which words once vttered, she fell into a counterfait sound, whome the Gentleman soone recouered, these newes went to his heart, and he beeing a man of a very milde condition, cheered vp the Gerle made his men to goe buy her newe clothes from top to toe, said he would be a Father to her, gaue her fiue pounds, and bid her goe home and carie it to her mother, and in the euening he would visit her. At this by little and little, she began to be quiet, desiring him, he would come and see her mother, he tels her: he will not faile, bids her go home quietly: so downe stayres goes she peartly, and the wondring people that stayd at doore, to heare the manner of her griefe, had of her naught but knauish answeres, and home went shee directly. The Gentleman was so prosseld in minde and disturbd in thought, at this vnhappy accident, that his soule could not be in quiet, till he had beene with this wofull widow, as he thoght & presently went to the Black-fryers, tooke a paire of Oares & went directly to George Peeles House, where he found his wife plucking of larkes, my crying crokadile turning of the spit, and George , pind vp in a blanket, at his translation, the Gentleman more glad at the vnlooked for life of George , then the losse of his mony, tooke part of the good cheere George had to dinner, wondred at the cunning of the wench & within some few dayes after, had an end of his booke. There was a Gentleman, who God had indued with good liuing to maintaine his small wit: he was not a foole absolute: although in this world he had good fortune, and he was in a manner an Ingell to George , one that tooke great delight to haue the first hearing of any worke that George had done, himselfe being a writer, and had a Poeticall inuention of his owne: Which when hee had with great labour finished, their fatall ende was for priuie purposes. This selfe conceyted brocke, had George inuited to halfe ascore sheetes of paper, whose Christianly pen had writ Finis to the famous play of the Turkish Mahamet . And Hyrin the faire Greeke, in the Italian called a Curtezan, in Spaine a Margerite, in French un Curtain , in England among the barbarous a whore: but among the Gentle their, vsuall associates a punke: but now the word refined being latest: and the authoritie brought from a climate as yet vnconquered: the fruitfull countie of Kent they call them. Croshabell is a word but lately vsed, and fitting with their trade, beeing of a louely and of curteous condition: leauing them thus fantasticke, whose braine was made of naught but corks and spunge. Came to the cold lodging of Monsir Peele , in his blacke Satten sute: his gowne furred with Cony in his slippers: beeing in the euening, thought to heare his booke, and so to returne to his Inne. This not of the wisest (being of Saint Barnards ) George bids him welcome: told him he would gladly haue his opinion in his booke: hee willingly condiscended, and George beginnes to read, and betweene euery sceame he would make pauses and demaund his opinion how hee liked the cariage of it: quoth hee wondrous well, the conueyance! O but, quoth George , the end is farre better: for he meant another conueyance, ere they two departed, George was very tedious in reading, and the night grew old. before God, quoth the Gentleman, I haue stayd ouer long, I feare me I shall hardly get into my Inne: if you feare that, quoth George , we will haue a cleane paire of sheetes, and you shall take a simple lodging here: This house-gull willingly imbraced it: and to bed they go, where George in the mid of night spying his time, put on this Dormouse his clothes, desired God to keepe him in good rest: honestly takes leaue of him and the house: To whom he was indebted foure nobles. When this drome awaked and found himselfe so left: he had not the wit to be angrie: but swore scuruily at the misfortune, and sayd, I thought he wold not haue vsed him so: And although it so pleased the fates he had another shute to put on: yet he could not get thence till he had payd the mony George ought to the house, which for his credit hee did: And when hee came to his lodging: in anger he made a Poem of it: Peele is no Poet, but a gull and a clowne, To take away my cloathes and gowne: I vow by Ioue, if I can see him weare it, Ile giue him a glyg, and patiently beare it. where they were passing merrie no cheere wanting, wine enough musicke playing fine. the night growing on, and being vpon departure they call for a reckning, George sweres there is not a peny for them to pay, they being men of good fashion, by no meanes will yeeld vnto it, but euery man throwes downe his money, some ten shillings, some fiue, some lesse, some more: protesting something they will pay: well, quoth George , taking vp all the money, seeing you will be so wilfull, you shall se what shall follow, he commaunds the musick to play, and while they were scipping and dancing, George gets his cloake sends vp two pottles of Hypocrist,  & leaues them and the reckoning to pay. They wondring at the stay, if Georg ment to be gone, but they were stayd by the way, and before they went: forced to pay the reckoning a new, this showed a minde in him, he cared not whome he deceiued, so he profited himselfe for the time. There was some halfe dozen of Citizens, that had oftentimes beene solicitors to George , he beeing a M. of Arte at the Uniuersitie in Oxford, that hee would ride with them to the commencement, it beeing at Midsomer, George willing to pleasure the Gentlemen his friends, Rid along with them, when they had Rid the better of the way, they bayted at a Uillage called stokon, within a mile of Wickham, good cheere was bespoken for dinner: and forlict was the companie all sauing George , who could not bee in that pleasant vaine that did ordinarily possesse him: the reason he was without mony: but hee had not set forty turnes about the chamber before his noddle had intertayned a consayt how to many himselfe with credit, & yet glene it from some on of the companie which among them was on exellent asse, a fellow that nothing but frisk vp and downe the chamber, that his mony might be heard chide in pocket, this fellow, had George obserud & secretly conuayd his gilt rapier and dagger into another chamber, and there closly did hid it, that done, he called vp the Tapster, and vpon his cloake borrows 5 shillings for an houre, or so till his man came: as he could fashion it well enough, so much mony he had, and then who more merrier then George : meate was brought vp, they set themselues to Dinner, all full of Iocisance, especially my little ouf that dranke not of the conclusion of ther feast, dinner ended, much prattle past, euery man begins to buckle to his furniture: among whome this hichcock missed his Rapier, at which all the company was in a maze: he besides his little wits, for that he had borrowed it of a speciall friend of his: & swore he had rather spend twenty nobles, this is strange: quoth George it should be gone in this fashion, none being here but our selues & the fellowes of the house, who were examined, but no rapier could be heard of, all the company much greeued, but George in a pitifull chase swore, it should cost him Forty shillings, but he would know what was become of it if art could do it, and with that hee caused the Ossier to saddle his Nag, for George would Ride to a Scholler a friend of his, that had skill in such matters O good M. Peele , quoth the fellow want no mony, here is forty shillings se what you can do, and if you please Ile ride alog with you, not so, quoth Georg taking his forty shillings, Ile ride alone: & be you as merry as you can til my returne. So George left them & Rid directly to Oxford, there he acquaints a friend of his withall the circumstance, who presently tooke Horse and Rid along with him to laugh at the Iest, when they came back: George tels them hee had brought one of the rarest men in England, whom they with much complement bids welcome: hee after a distracted countenance, and strange words, takes this bulfinch by the wrist, and caryed him to the priuy, and there willed him to put in his head, but while hee had written his name, and told forty, which hee willingly did that; done, the Scholler asked him what he saw, by my faith Sir I smelt a villanous sent, but I saw nothing: then I haue, quoth hee, and with that directed him where his Rapier was, who saieth it is iust northeast inclosed in wood, neere the earth, for which they all made diligent search till George , that hid it vnder a setell found it to the comfort of the fellow, the Ioy of the company and the eternall credit of his friend, who was enterteyned with wine and suger, and George redeemed his cloake, rid merrily to Oxford, hauing coyne in his pocket, where this leach spares not for any expence, for the good fortune he had in the happie finding of his rapier that his credyt would stretch no further: for she had made a vow, not to departe with drynke or victualls, without redy mony: Which George seeing the fury of his most froward Hostis, in greife kept his Chamber, called to his Hostis, and told her shee should vnderstand that hee was not without mony: how poorely so euer hee appeared to her, and that my dyet shall testify, in the meane time good Hostis quoth he, send for such a friend of mine, shee did, so his friend came: to whome, George imparted his minde: the effect was this to pawne his Cloake, hose and Dublet, vnknown to his Hostis: for quoth George , this seauen nights do I intend to keepe my bed, truly he spake, for his intent was, the bed should not keepe him any longer, away goes he to pawne his apparell, George bespeaks good cheere to supper, which was no shamble batcher stuffe, but according to the place, for his chamber beeing remote from the house, at the end of the Garden, his apparell beeing gon, it appeared to him as the counter, therefore to comfort him selfe, he delt in poultry, his friend brought the mony, supped with him his Hostis hee liberally payd, but cauelled with her at her vnkindnes, vowing while hee lay there, none should attend him, but his friend, the Hostis replyed in Gods name, shee was well contented with it, so was George too: for none knew better then himselfe what he intended, but in briefe, thus he vsed his kind hostis. After his Apparell & mony was gone, he made bold with the fetherbed, he lay on, which his friend slily conuaide away: hauing as villanous a wolfe in his belly as George , though not altogether so wise, for that fetherbed they deuoured in two dayes fethers and all: which was no sooner disgested, but away went the Couerled, sheetes and the blancket, and at the last dinner, when Georges good friend perceiuing nothing left but the bed cords: as the Diuell would haue, it straight came in his minde the fashion of a halter, the foolish kinde knaue would needes fetch a quart of sacke for his friend George , which sack to this day neuer saw Uintners sellor: now this villonous a mouth: after that his friend George whome he left in a cold Chamber: a thin shirt, a rauisht bed, no comfort left him: but the bare bones of diceased capons, in this distresse George bethought him what he might doe, nothing was left him: and as his eye wandred vp and downe the empty chamber: by chaunce it found out an old Armour, at which sight, George was the ioyfulest man in Christendome for the Armour of Achyllis that Vlysis and Aiax stroue for was not more pretious to them then this to him: for he presently claps it vpon his backe the halbert in his hand, the Moryon on his head: and so gets out the backe way, marches from Shordich to Clearken well: to no small wondering to those specktators that beheld him, being ariued to the wished hauen he would bee, an old aquaintance of his, furnished him with an old suite, and an old cloake for his old armour: how the hostis looked when shee saw that metamorphisie in her chamber, Iudge those bombortes that liue by tapping, betweene the age of 50. and 3 score. where the Tapster of the house was much giuen to Poetrie: for hee had ingrosed into his hands the Knight of the sunne: Venus , and Adonis , and other phamphlets which the stripling had collected together, and knowing George to be a Poet, tooke great delight in his companie, and out of his bountie would needes bestow a brace of cans of him, George , obseruing the humor of of the Tapster, meant presently to worke vpon him what will you say, quoth George to his friends: if I out of this spirit of the seller fecth a good angell: that shall bid vs all to supper wee would gladly see that, quoth his frindes: content your selfe, quoth George : the Tapster assends with his two cans deliuers on to maister Peele , and the other to his frindes: giues them kind welcom but George in steed of giuing him thanks bids him not to trouble him, & begins in these terms: Before god gentlemen I wonder you wil vrge me so much I protest, I haue it not about mee, what is the matter, quoth the Tapster, hath any on angered you: no faith, quoth George , Ile tell thee, it is this, there is a friend of ours in Newgate: for nothing but only the command of the Iustices, and he is now to be released, sends to me to bring him angell: now the man I loue deerly well for if he want ten angels he shall haue them for I know him shure: but here is the Diuell, either I must goe home, or I must be forced to pawne this: and plucks an old Hare groate out of his pocket: the Tapster lookes vpon it, why, and it please you Sir, quoth he this is but a groate no Sir, quoth George I know it is but a groate, but this groate will I not loose it for Forty pound, for this groat had I of my mother, as a testimony of a Lease of a House I am to possesse after her decease, and if I should loose this Groat, I were in a faire case, and either I must pawne this Groate, or there the fellow must ly still quoth the Tapster, if it please you I will lend you an Angell of it, and I will assure you, it shall bee safe. Wilt thou quoth George? as thou art an honest Man: lock it vp in thy Chest, and let me haue it whensoeuer I call for it. As I am an honest man, you shall quoth the Tapster, George deliuered him his groat, the Tapster gaue him ten shillinges, to the Tauerne go they with the money, and there merrily spends it it fell out in a small time after, the Tapster hauing many of these lurches fell to decay, and indeede was turned out of seruice, hauing no more coyne in the world then this groat, and in this misery met George as poore as him selfe. O Sir, quoth the Tapster you are happily met, I haue your groate safe, though since I saw you last, I haue bid great extremity: and I protest, saue that groate, I haue not any one penny in the world, therefore I pray you Sir, helpe mee to my money, and take your pawne, not for the world, quoth George , thou sayest thou hast but that Groate in the world. My bargaine was, that thou shouldest keepe that groate vntill I did demaund it of thee. I aske thee none: I will doe thee farre more good, because thou art an honest fellowe: keepe thou that groate still, till I call for it: and so doing, the proudest iacke in England cannot Iustifie thou art not worth a groate, otherwise they might: So honest Michaell, farewell. So George , leaues the poore Tapster picking of his fingers, his head full of proclamations what hee might doe, at last, sighing hee ends with this prouerb. For the price of a barrell of Beere: I haue bought a groates worth of Wit, Is not that deere. good wifes in the House held a great pride, and vaine opinion of her owne mother wit, for her tongue was as a Iack continually wagging, and for shee had heard that George was a Scholler, shee thought shee woulde finde a time to giue him notice, that shee had as much in her head, as euer was in her grandfathers, yet in something she differed from the women in those dayes, for their naturall complextion was their bewtie, now this titimouse what she is scanted by nature: shee doth replenish by Art: as her boxes of red  & white, which daily can testefie. But to come to George , who ariued at the Ordinary, among other Gallants: throwes his Cloake vpon the table, salutes the Gentlemen, and presently calles for a cup of canarie: George had a paire of hose on, that for some offence durst not be seene in that hue, they find dyed for, but from his first colour, beeing a youthfull greene, his long age turned him into a mournfull black: and for his antiquity was in print, which this busie body perceiuing, thought now to giue it him to the quicke, and drawing neere M. Peele , looking vpon his breeches, by my troth sir, quoth she, these are exceedingly wel printed, at which word, George being a little stirred in his mind, that his olde hose were called in question: made this present reply. And by my faith, quoth George: Mistres your face is most damnably ill paynted, how meane you Sir? quoth she, marry thus Gentlewoman quoth George , that were it not for prynting & painting, my arse, and your face would gow out of reparations: at which she biting her lip, in a parat furie went downe the stayres, the Gentleman hartily laughed at the suddain answere of George . And beeing seated to dinner, the Gentleman would needs haue the company of this witty Gentlewoman to dyne with them, who with little denying came, in hope to cry quitance with George , when she was asended, the Gentleman would needs place her by M. Peel : because they did vse to darte so daungerously one at the other, they thought it meete for their more safety, they should be placed nearest together. George , kindly entertaines
