 Belphegor who was Prince of Gluttony, Asmodeus Prince of Lechery, And Belzebub Prince of Enuie, with many other Diuels assembled together, which reioyced for the misorder of these Religious men. And as they were all assembled together with one accord: they chose a Diuell to goe and dwell among these Religious men, for to maintaine them the longer in their vngracious liuing, which Diuell was put in rayment like an earthly creature, and went to a Religious house, and there he stood at the gate a certaine space all alone with an heauie countenance. Then within a while after the Priour came vnto the gate and espied Rush the young man standing there all alone. Anon he said vnto him, what dost thou here, and what wouldest thou haue. The young man with great reuerence answered and said: Sir, I am a poore young man, and am out of seruice, and faine would haue a Maister. And Sir if it please you to haue me, I shall doe you diligent seruice, and shall doe so well that you and all your brethren and couent shall be glad of me, for I shall keepe so well your secrets, that I trust to obtaine at all times your good loue and fauour, and all theirs also. And when the Priour had heard his words, he was mooued with pittie, and said: Goe into the Kitchin to the Cooke, and shew him that I haue sent thee thither, and bid him show thee what thou shalt doe: for thou shalt be with him a certaine season, till that some other better thing fall. Then the young man made his reuerence to the Priour, and thanked him, and foorth he went to the Kitchin, where hee found the maister Cooke. Anon he made reuerence vnto him, and said: Sir, my Maister the Priour hath sent me hither vnto you, and he commaundeth you to shew me what I shall doe, for I must be here and helpe you. The maister Cooke answered and said, you be welcome. And anon hee set him to such businesse as he had to doe. And thus the Deuill became vnder-Cooke in the place that he was assigned vnto, by the Prince of Deuils. And then hee said (laughing to himselfe) as followeth. I am right glad that my purpose is come so well to passe, for now all mine intent is fulfilled, and I doubt not but all shall be ours: for I shall make such debate and strife among the Friers, that they shall neuer be at concord and peace. And I shall make them good staues wherewith the one shall beate well the other: and often times they shal lye together by the eares, in so much that there was neuer seen nor heard tell of such a rumour and discord in no Cloyster in the world. And I shall vse my selfe so, that I shall be in great loue and fauour among them. Then within foure or fiue dayes after, it fortuned that the Priour came into the Kitchin, and there he found the young man, to whom he said, where wast thou borne, and what is thy name? The young man answered and said, Sir, I was borne very farre hence, and Rush is my name. Then said the Priour vnto him, Rush , canst thou couple Hounds together? Yea Sir (said Rush ) that I can doe right well, and more then that, for I can couple men and women together, which is a more mastrie, and also Sir (if neede be) I can conuay a faire woman into your chamber, and conuay her home againe in the morning so secretly, that no man shall spye it. And also I shall keepe your counsaile so secretly, that it shall neuer be knowne. And when the Priour heard Rush speake so, he was right glad of him, and said: Rush , if thou canst doe as thou hast said? I shall reward thee well for thy labour, and thou shalt be my most welbeloued seruant: wherefore make an end of thy businesse, for soone, thou shalt goe a little way on a message for me, and so he departed and went to supper. And when euery man had supped, and Rush had done all his businesse in the Kitchin, hee came vnto his maister the Priour, and said, Sir, what is your will with me? the Priour answered and said: here a little beside dwelleth a faire Gentlewoman, the the which I loue very well, but I dare not discouer my minde vnto her my selfe: and if thou canst finde the meanes to bring her secretly vnto me, I shall reward thee right well for thy labour and paine. And when Rush had heard the words of his Maister, and knew all his minde, he answered and said: Sir, be of good cheere, and let mee alone with that matter: for I shall goe vnto the Gentlewomans house, and I shall say your message so well, that this night she shall come to you: and so departed Rush from his Maister, and went straight vnto this Gentlewomans house. And when he was thither came, hee found the Gentlewoman sitting all alone. And when Rush was espied of her, he made vnto her great courtesie, and with many reuerences these words he said. brought her priuily vnto his Maisters chamber. Rest you merry faire Mistresse, the most fairest creature in the world. My Maister greeteth you by me, desiring you to come and speake with him. Then said the Gentlewoman to Rush , who is your Maister, and what is his will with me? faire Mistresse, said Rush , I will shew you, my Maister is the Priour in a house of Religion here beside, and he loueth you so well except that you come vnto him this night, I know he will be dead for sorrow. And when the Gentlewoman had heard the words of Rush , shee answered and said, Faire, Sir, it were great pittie that the Gentleman should die for my sake, and rather then he should so doe for me, I will come to him, and shew him all the courtesie that I can. Rush was very glad of those comfortable words, and thought that his enterprise was well brought to passe, and he said vnto her: Faire Mistresse, may it you to my Master, and as I suppose, hee will make you good cheare, and Gold and Siluer you shall lacke none, for hee hath great plenty thereof. Then saide the Gentlewoman, Sir, I pray you let vs depart hence: for as I suppose the Gentleman looketh long for vs. So foorth they went both together, till they came to the Priours Chamber. And when the Priour sawe that she was come: he was the gladdest man in the world, and thanked Rush much for his labour and paine: And so the Priour receiued her into his chamber, and there he made her good cheere, and they had good meate and wine great plenty. And when they had well refreshed themselues, Rush departed and went to the Kitchin, and left the Priour and the Gentlewoman alone, and there she saued the Priours life. And when Rush was in the Kitchin, hee said vnto himselfe: I am right glad that I haue brought this matter so well to passe: and I doubt not but they will agree well enough together, for they be both of one accord. And when the other Friers perceiued that Rush was such a priuie fellow, and so well could keepe counsaile: they desired him to helpe them also, and so he did: for he brought to euery man, the woman that they most desired, whereof they had great meruaile. But they were so blinded with ignorance, that they neuer perceiued that he was a very Deuill, but euery man had him in loue and fauour. seething vpon the fire, wherein he died. It befell vpon a day that Rush went forth to sport him, and it was very late ere he came home againe, and the maister Cooke was very angry with him that hee was so long absent. And as soone as Rush was entred into the Kitchin: the thou beene so long: and with a great staffe hee laid vpon Rush and beat him sore. And when Rush saw that the Cooke was angry and so farre out of reason, and that he had beaten him sore: anon he began to waxe very angry with the maister Cooke, and said vnto him: thou horson villaine, why hast thou beaten me thus: I will be reuenged on thee: and suddainly he caught him in his armes, and threw him into a great kettell which was full of water seething vpon the fire, and said, lye thou there in the Diuels name: for now thou shalt neither fight nor chide no more with me: and so Rush slew the maister Cooke. Then when hee had so done, hee departed out of the Kitchin, and went to the next Towne to fetch the faire woman againe for his Maister: and in his absence certaine of the Friers came into the Kitchin to speake with Rush , but they found no body stirring therein, and some of them went to stand by the fires side, to tarie till Rush came in: for they thought he would not tarie long. And as they stood talking together by the fires side, they spied a man in the Kettell seething vpon the fire. And anon they perceiued that it was the maister Cooke, whereof they were greatly abashed. And with that (crying out) they went vnto the Priour and shewed him that the maister Cooke had drowned himselfe in a Kettell seething vpon the fire in the Kitchin: for which tydings the Priour was right sorrie. And in the meane season Rush came home, and had conueyed the woman into his Maisters chamber. And anon the Friers shewed Rush of the great misfortune that was fallen on the Maister Cooke in the Kitchin, and he made as he had beene sorrie therefore, and had knowne nothing thereof, and he was in great loue and fauour with the Priour and all the Friers, that they mistrusted him nothing for that deede, and so there was no more mention of the Maister Cooke. Then the Priour commanded that Rush should be made Cooke, and all the Couent was right glad of that, and so he was himselfe also, for he thought his enterprises came well to passe after his minde, and as he would haue it. Thus Rush became Maister Cooke in the Kitchin, and dressed their meate meruailous well: for in the Lent, and in the Aduent, both Fridayes and also other dayes, he put Bacon into their pottage pot, the which made the pottage to sauour well, and he dressed their meate so deliciously, that the Priour and all the Friers had great meruaile that he did it so well: in so much that they said he did much better then their other Maister Cooke did,  & that he was a more cunninger man in his occupation, and could doe much better in his office. Thus Rush continued in that office the space of seauen yeares, and did right well, and euery man had him in loue and fauour. Then it fortuned vpon a day the Priour and his brethren were assembled together in a generall counsaile, and as they stood talking together, the Priour remembred Rush , and anon he said vnto his brethren: Friends we haue here Rush which is our maister Cooke in our Kitchin, and he is an olde seruant, and much diligent and true seruice he hath done to vs, and he hath continued among vs longer then any seruant that euer wee had: wherefore me thinke it reason, that hee were promoted into some other office, and made a brother among vs. Then all the whole couent with one voice said they were content it should so be. So the Priour sent for Rush , and when he was come before him and all his brethren, the Priour said, Rush it is so, thou hast beene here a long season and we haue found thee hitherto a true and diligent seruant, wherefore wee will that thou be promoted, and take vpon thee an habite as we haue, and to become a brother among vs. Rush answered and said: my Maisters I thanke you all, and then the Priour gaue Rush an habite, and put it on his backe, and so Rush became a brother in the place, neuerthelesse he kept his office still. VVhen Rush had on the habite of a Frier, and was a brother in the place, he had more vacation dayes then he had before. And as a King or a great Prince prepareth ordinances against their warres, in likewise did Frier Rush : for when all his businesse was done in the Kitchin, and that he had leysure, he went and sate in the Port of the vtter gate, and there he was making of good bigge Truncheons of Oke. And he made them with Hilts ouer the hand for slipping, of the which the other Friers had great meruaile,  & demanded of him wherefore he made those Truncheons. Rush answered and said: Faire Sirs, I make them for this intent: that if there come any theeues hither for to rob vs, and to spoile our place, yet shall we haue weapons to defend vs withall. And therefore I make them. And moreouer, when any neede shall be, come to mee and euery man shall haue one, and they shall be ready at your commandement, and then the Friers thanked him and so departed. Then it fortuned vpon a day, that the Priour and Subpriour fell at discord, and were greeuously angry, the one with the other, and would haue fought together, but onely for shame: neuerthelesse, the anger abode still in their hearts, and all was for an harlot within a while after, the noyse spread abroad among the Friers, that the Priour and the Subpriour were fallen at discord, for the which they were angry in their mindes. And they that loued the Priour, tooke his part, and they that loued the Subpriour, tooke his part, and so they murmured among themselues. Then they appointed in time or other, and so to make a more surer way in fulfilling their malicious mindes and angry hearts, euery man after other went priuately to Frier Rush to lend them staues, in so much that there was not a Frier in the place but he had one, and they neuer went without their staues vnder their habite, and the one knew not that the other had any, they kept them so secretly. And when Frier Rush had deliuered all his staues, he was right glad in his heart, for he knew right well there should be a great fray among them, either one time or other. So it fortuned afterward, as it is a common custome among Religious people at an high feast, to keepe solemne seruice, and euery man to be at Mattens at midnight, and so vpon a good night, all the whole Couent assembled together in the Quier, and were ready to begin Mattens, they taried for nothing but for the comming of the Priour. Then anon the Priour came into the Quier, and sate him downe in his place, and as he looked about him, he espied that the Subpriour was there present, and with that his heart began to grudge of the olde anger that was fallen betweene them two, and he thought in his minde that he could neuer be reuenged in a better time, and sodainly he rose out of his place, and went to the Subpriour, and with his fist he gaue him a good buffet, and the Subpriour which was moued with the stroke, started vnto the Priour and gaue him another buffet, and with that they went freshly together by the eares, and when the other Friers saw that, euery man rose out of their places, and drew out their Truncheons, and together they went: who had beene there should haue seene good buffets giuen on both parties. And when Frier Rush saw that they were fighting together, anon he blew out all the Candles and Lamps that were burning in the Church, and left no manner of light therein whereby the one might see the other: and when he had so done, he tooke his Truncheon in his hand, and went into the Quier among the thickest of the Friers the which were fighting freshly without light, and there he laid so lustily about, that many of them he felled to the ground, and left them lying there for dead, and when he had so done, he stole his way from them, and as hee went, he found standing in the portall of the Quier, a great olde Deske, and anon hee tooke the Deske betweene both his hands, and threw it ouer the portall into the Quier among all the Friers, and hurt many sore, in so much that some had an arme broken, and some a legge, and other some had their noses cleane pared from their faces, that the bloud ranne in their mouthes, and as for broken heads to the hard scalpe were no dainty, for euery man had one, there scaped none free away, who had beene there, should haue had a goodly pastime to see the Friers creepe about the Quier, and in steede of ( Domine labia ) they cried out alas and well away. Then when the fray was done, and all the noyse seased, Rush came in among them with a Candell light in his hand, and made as he had knowne nothing thereof, and said to them: Fie for shame Sirs, how fortuned this discord to fall among your selues? I see well now you regard not your honour, nor the good name of your place. All the people shall say ye be not honest, nor good religious men, the which words I would be loath to heare, and I may not suffer our place so to fall in an euill name: wherefore good Masters, I require you to set your hearts at rest, and put the matter into my hands, and I shall doe so much that all shall be well, and you shal be good friends againe, and no words shall be spoken thereof, then euery man complained to him of their great hurt, and he made semblance as he had beene sorie therefore and then they that could goe, went vp to their Sels, and they that could not goe, did creepe vp as well as they could, and laid them duwne in their beds, and there they lay till they were whole againe, and in the space of three weekes and more, God was euill serued, for in all that space they sung neither Mattins nor Euensong, nor neuer entred into the Church for it was suspended, and for shame they durst neuer let it be knowne. And when they were all whole, and euery man vpon his feete againe, and might goe about the house, they brought againe their staues to Frier Rush , and thanked him much, and then Frier Rush said vnto them: Sirs when ye haue neede of them againe, ye shall finde them here ready at your commandement, for which they gaue him thankes, and departed. When Frier Rush saw that they were gone, and that he had all his staues againe, he laughed vnto himselfe and said: I am right ioyfull that mine enterprises be come so well to passe, for I haue done many mischieuous deeds since I came first, and yet I will doe more before I depart hence, for I shall cause them to be damned, and I shall bring their bodies and soules into the burning fire of hell, there to remaine world without end, and of me shall be spoken a thousand yeeres hereafter. in the Country. Another time it fortuned that the Priour had a iourney to ride into the Country about a little businesse that hee had there to doe, and anon he called Rush his seruant vnto him and said, Rush goe thy way into the Court, and take with thee a dish full of greace, and greace well the wheeles and Axeltrees of the Waggon, and make all things ready against to morrow in the morning, for I must ride forth to morrow betimes, then Rush departed from his Maister, and went about his businesse, and in steed of greace, hee tooke a great vessell full of Tarre, and anointed the Waggon all ouer with it, both within and without, and especially in the place where the Priour should sit: and when he had done, he returned to his Maisters chamber, then the Priour demanded of Rush , if he had done as he commanded him: yea Sir said Rush , ye may ride when please you, and so they went to their beds. Then on the morrow after, the Priour and Rush his seruant with his other company, rose vp very early in the morning for to accomplish their iourney, and forth they went vnto their Waggon, and when the Priour was entred therein, hee perceiued himselfe all to berayed and smeyred, and all his clothes were filed therewith: hast thou done to this Waggon that I am thus arayed therein? Rush answered and said: Sir, I haue done nothing but as you commanded me. That is not so said the Priour, for I commaunded thee to take greace and grease but the wheeles and the Axeltrees, and thou hast taken Tarre and annointed it all ouer, both within and without. Why hast thou done so? Sir said Rush , I vnderstoode you bad me doe so. And when the Priour sawe there was no other remedie, hee commanded his seruants to make ready another Waggon, and in the meane season, the Priour went into his Chamber, and put on another habite, and came againe and mounted into the Waggon and went their way, and so long they rode, that they came to their iourneyes end. And when they were alighted at their lodging, the Priour called for his supper, and anon euery thing was made ready, and the good man of the house and the Priour sate downe to supper together, and made good cheere and then the Priour called for wine of the best, and anon he had his commandement. And when the good man of the house and the Priour had supped, Rush and his fellowes sate downe to the reuersions that their Maisters had left, but they had no wine: wherefore Rush was very sad, and euer he mused by what policie he might get some wine. And anon he called the wife of the house and said: Mistresse, I pray you fill a pottle of wine for me and my fellowes, and so shee did: and when that was gone, they called for another: and then they called for the third, and so ended their supper. Then on the morrow when the Priour had done all his businesse, and was ready to returne home againe: he called for a reckoning. And anon, the good wife came in and gaue him a reckoning of all things, both horse meate and mans meate; and at last, she reckoned three pottels of wine that Rush and his fellowes had. And when the Priour heard that his seruants had drunke so much wine: Anon he began to waxe very angry, and asked her, who commanded her to fill in so much wine? the wife answered and said: Sir, Rush your seruant commaunded me to fill it in, and he said, that you should pay therefore. Then anon the Priour called for Rush , and said vnto him: Thou lewd Knaue, why hast thou drunke so much wine? Might no lesse then pottels serue thee and thy fellowes? Sir, said Rush , we haue not drunke so much, for your horses hath had two of the pottels. My horses, said the Priour: what should they doe with wine? Yes Sir, said Rush , your horses laboured sorer than we did, and were very weary, and they had nothing but Hay and Oates: wherefore, me thought it needefull to giue them some good drinke to their course meate to comfort their hearts withall, and to cause them to be the lustier, and to haue the better courage to bring you homeward. And when the Priour had heard that answere of Rush , and saw there was no remedy but patience: he paid for the wine, and all things that he had taken there, and so rode home in his Waggon, and Frier Rush neuer went foorth againe with his Master. charged him to giue him knowledge how many Friers were absent from Mattins at midnight, and what they were. VVhen the Prior was come home, hee made Frier Rush Sexton of the church, and his office was to ring the bell and to light the candles, and to cal the Friers to Mattins at mid-night, and also the Prior commaunded Rush  & charged him, that he should take good heede that there were none of the Friers absent from Mattins, and if there were to giue him knowledge thereof, then saide Rush to his master Sir all your commaundement shalbe fulfilled, and so they within three or foure nights after, Rush espied certaine of the Friers that were absent, and he marked them well, and on the morrow after he presented them to the Prior, and anon the Prior caused them to come before him, and gaue them a check, for their being absent; in a little time, Rush had presented them all which caused the Prior to be greatly offended with them: when they perceiued that Rush had made such complaints against them, they had him im much disdaine, but they could not amend it: for hee had them in such great feare, that neuer after they durst be absent, but well was hee that might be first in the Quier. When Rush perceiued the Fryers had him in so great feare, he deuised to doe some mischieuous thing among them; and vpon a night, a little before he should ring to Mattins, he went and brake downe the staires of the Dorter, and when he had so done, hee went and rung to Mattins, and lighted the Lamps & Candles in the Church, and went into the Dorter, and called vp the Fryers, and so came and sate at the staires foote as he was wont to doe; he had sitten there but a while, but anon there came one, who thought no hurt but to goe soberly into the Quier as he was wont to doe, and when he came to the staires downe he fell, and had a meruailous great fal: then said Rush , thou art one. Presently there came another, and likewise downe he fell and had a sore fall, thou art two said Rush . Anon came the third Frier, which had a mightie great bellie, and was a grosse man, and he made great hast, for he feared that he should haue been last, & when he came to the staires, downe he fell on his fellowes necks, and he was so great and so heauie, that almost he had mischieued his fellowes that lay vnder him: thou makest three said Rush . And with that there came seauen or eight together, and downe they fell all at once. Softly masters for shame, said Rush , ye come too many at once, ye were not wont to be so hastie, but now I perceiue well ye would deceiue me, and one would excuse the other, and therefore ye come so thick to blind me in my tale: How should I now giue account to the Prior of them that be absent? Surely I cannot tell, but now I see well, ye be too subtil for me, I would some other man had mine office, and made as though he had beene verie angrie with them. Then the Fryers, such as could goe, though it were to their paines, rose vp againe, and limping and halting they went into the Quier, and they that fell first and lay vnder, were sore hurt and could not goe, and specially the Frier with the great belly: yet neuerthelesse, they crept into the Quier, as well as they could. And when they were all assembled together in the Quier, each of them complained to other of their great hurts, and so they began Mattins: who had beene there, should haue heard a heauie song and a sad, for they were not merrie in their hearts, their paines were so great. When Mattins was done, they that could goe, went vp againe into their lodgings, and they that could not goe, lay still in the Quier all night: On the morrow, word was brought to the Prior of the great misfortune that was fallen among the Friers at midnight: for the which misfortune the Prior was greatly displeased and angry in his minde, & thought verily it was Rushes deede, for hee had done diuers euill turnes before. Then the Prior sent for Rush to come speake with him, and when he was come, Prior said vnto Rush , how fell this misfortune to night among the Friers, that they be so sore hurt? Sir said Rush , I shall shew you, it is not vnknowne vnto you, that when you put me first into this office, ye commaunded me to giue you knowledge when any of my brethren were absent from Mattins, and so haue I done diuers times, whereby many of them haue beene shent and chidden by you, and for that cause, they owe me euill will, and faine would haue me out of this office, if they wist how. And for to accomplish their desire, and to cause you to be displeased with mee: I shall shew you what they haue done this night. Sir it is so, that when the time was come, I rung to Mattins and lighted candles, and made all things readie, and when I had so done I went into the Dorter to euery mans Sell and called them up, then I went and stoode at the staire foot, for to tell them as they came downe, as I was accustomed to doe, and to knowe who came to Mattins, and who did not, and for spite that I should not reckon them, they came all on a cluster, and for hast the one thrust the other downe the staires, and he that had the greatest belly, had the hardest fall; now if they hurt themselues, what might I doe with all? And when the Prior had heard the words of Rush , he wist not what to say, but for to voyde all tribulations and misfortunes that might fall in time to come, he put Rush out of his office, and set him in the Kitchin againe, and when he was there all alone, he laughed to himselfe and said; this enterprise is well brought to passe, and I haue made a good scuse thereof to the Prior, yet will I doe more ere I depart out of this place. comming home, he found a Cowe, which Cowe he deuided into two parts, the one halfe hee tooke on his necke and caried it with him, and the other halfe he left still: and how soone he had made it ready for the Friers suppers. It befell vpon a time that Rush when all his businesse was done in the Kitchin, he would goe forth into the Countrey to sport, him and to passe the time with good company: as hee walked on his way, his chaunce was to come into a village, which was two or three mile from the place where hee did dwell, and when hee was entred into the village, hee looked round about him in euery corner to finde out some company to make merrie withall: and at the last, espied an Alehouse, and in he entred, and there hee found good fellowes playing at Cardes, and drinking, and made cheare: then Rush made obeysance to them, and sate downe among them, and dranke with the players, and afterward he fell to play, and was as merrie as any man in the company: and so long he played and passed the time, that cleane hee had forgotten what he had to doe at home, and the day went fast away, and the night approached. Anon Rush looked vp and perceiued that it was almost night, remembred himselfe that there was nothing readie at home for the Priors supper and Couent, and it was almost supper time, wherefore he thought it was time to depart thence, so he payed for his drinke and tooke his leaue, and homeward he went, and in his field, and sodainly he deuided her into two parts, and the one halfe he left lying there still, and the other halfe he tooke on his necke and carried it home, and quickly hee made it ready; some he put in the pot, and some vpon the spit, and he made a great fire and set on the pot, and layd to the spit: and he made meruailous good pottage, and rosted the meate very well, and he made such speede, that euery thing was ready by the houre accustomed to goe to supper, whereof the Prior and all the Friers had great meruaile, that he had made euery thing readie so soone, and was so well done: for they knew that it was late ere he came home: for some of the Friers had beene in the Kitchin a little before, and saw neither Cooke nor fire, nor any thing prepared toward supper: wherefore they gaue great praise to Rush , and said he was very quicke in his office. the way homeward, and was faine to lye in a hollow Tree: and of the vision that he had. There was a poore Husbandman, dwelling there beside, which was a Farmer of the Priors: the which poore man had a Cowe abroad in the fields, that was accustomed euery night to come home at a certaine houre, and neuer failed. And at the last a mischaunce fell vnto her, for Frier Rush had slaine her as she stoode in the field, and so shee failed of her comming home at her houre as shee was woont to doe. And when the poore man sawe that his Cowe came not home: he thought in his minde it was not well with her, so foorth he went in to seeke his Cowe, and so long hee trauailed about in the fields, that at the last hee found the one halfe of his Cowe lying there: but the other halfe was cleane gone, and shee was so cleanly deuided in two parts, that hee imagined in his minde, that it was not possible to be done by mans hands, for if any wilde beasts had done it, they would haue spoyled the flesh: so hee returned homeward againe, and ere hee came at the halfe way, the night was so darke that he could not see which way he went, and so hee went out of his way, and house could he finde none: and at the last he came to an hollow Tree wherein he sate him downe, thinking there to take his rest all night, and he had not sitten there but a while: but anon there assembled a company of Deuils, and among them they had a great principall Maister whose name was Lucifer , and hee was the first that spake: and the first that was called, was a Deuill named Belzabub , and with a loud voyce, he said vnto him: Belzabub what hast thou done for vs? Belzabub answered and said: Sir I haue caused debate and strife to fall betweene brother and brother, insomuch the one hath slaine the other: that is well done said the maister Deuill, thou shalt be well rewarded for thy labour. Then foorth he called another Deuill, named Incubus , and demaunded of him what he had done? Sir said Incubus , I haue caused great debate and strife, to fall betweene two Lords, through the which they haue had great warres, and many men haue beene slaine: then said the master Deuill, thou art a true seruant to vs, thou shalt be well rewarded for thy great labour and paine. Then said the great maister vnto another Deuill, named Norpell , what hast thou done for vs? Sir said Norpell , I haue beene among players at the Dice and Cardes, and I haue caused them to sweare many great oathes, and the one to slea the other: and also I haue caused debate and strife to fall betweene man and wife, and caused the wife to cut her husbands throat: that was well done said the Master, thou shalt be well rewarded for thy labour. Then foorth came another Deuill named Downesnest, and said: Sir I haue caused two olde women to fight so sore together, and to beat each other about the head, that their eyes flew out: that was well done said the master Deuill, with much thanke thou shalt be well rewarded for thy labour. Then foorth stepped Frier Rush freshly, and with a good courage, and said: Sir, I am in a Religieus place and I gouerne the Prior and his Couent as I will my selfe, and they haue me in great loue and fauour: for I doe them many great pleasures, and I haue brought them faire wenches euery man one when they lust, and diuers times I haue caused debate and strife to fall among them, and I haue made them staues and caused them to fight stifly together, and to breake each others head, and their armes and legges, and yet will I doe more among them ere I depart out of the place, for I shall make so great debate and strife among them, that the one shall slea the other, then they shall come and dwell with vs in Hell, and burne in perpetuall fire without end. Then said the maister Deuill to Rush : if thou haue done as thou hast said, thou hast done well thy part, and I pray thee be diligent thy selfe about thy businesse, and stirre them to sin, and specially to these three, that is to say, wrath, Gluttony, and Lechery, and briefely to make an end of thy enterprise, and slip it not: and when thou hast done, come home, and thou shalt be highly exalted and well rewarded for thy great labour and paine. When Rush had tolde his tale: the great maister Deuill commanded euery Deuill to goe his way and doe the best he could, and thus they departed: some went one way and some another: and thus they were scattered abroad in the world, to finish and make an end of their enterprises that they had taken in hand. And when the poore husbandman which sate in the Tree, sawe that all the Deuils were departed and gone: he reioyced in his heart and was right glad thereof, for as long as they were there, hee was euer in great feare and dread, and hee was afraid that they should haue seene him there, and euer he prayed vnto almighty God to be his guard, and saue him from that foule and euill fauoured company of Deuils, and to send him the light of the day that he were gone out of that place, for hee was weary that hee aboade there so long, and oftentimes he looked vp, to see if hee could perceiue any light of the day whereby he might see to depart thence, for till then he durst not once stirre out of that place, for he feared that they had beene there still. Then within a while after, the day began to appeare, and when hee perceiued that: anon he started vp and looked round about him abroade in the fields, and when he perceiued that there was no body stirring he thanked almighty God, that he was so preserued out of that great ieopardy, and so departed. after, and tolde him the wordes that hee had heard, and the words of Frier Rush , and that hee was a very Deuill. As soone as the day began to apeare: the poore Farmer arose out of the Tree, and tooke his way streight to the Priour, and he would neuer rest till he had spoken with him: and when he was come to his speech, anon he saide: Sir, this night hath fortuned to me a great aduenture: how so saide the Priour? sir, yesternight late in the euening, I walked foorth in the fieldes to seeke a Cowe which I haue missed this foure or fiue dayes, and so long I wandered abroad, till at the last I founde the one halfe of my Cowe, but the other halfe was gone; and as I woulde haue returned home againe, I was benighted, so sore that I lost my waye: then I wist not whether to goe, but spying a hollowe Tree, I sate me downe, thinking there to take my rest till the day appered againe: and I had not sitten there but a while, but instantly there was assembled a great company of Deuills which made a maruailous great noise, whereof I was sore afrayd. They had among them a great master named Lucifer , who called all the rest to make a reckoning of all their seruice they had done, since they departed out of Hell: there I heard many marueilous tales. At the last, foorth came Frier Rush , then saide the great master Lucifer vnto him, Rush , what hast thou done since thou departed out of Hell? and he answered, that he had ruled you, and all your Couent, and caused you, to chide and fight, and were neuer in vnitie and peace among your selues: and he said he had caused you to liue viciously, and yet he saide he would doe more ere he departed out of this place, for he will cause you to kill each other, and then you should be damned in Hell, both bodie and soule. And so euerie Deuill departed and went about their busines. Wherefore take heede, for he is a verie Deuill. And when the Priour had heard the wordes of the Farmer, he thanked him for his labor and so they departed, the Farmer went home to his house, but the Priour was marueilously abashed at the words of the Farmer, and went into his chamber and was much grieued in his harte that he had so leudly misordered himselfe against his Lord God, and with great contrition he kneeled downe vpon his knees, and asked almighty God mercie, and forgiuenes for the great and greeuous offences that he had committed and done against him, and that he had so vildly misused the order of his Religion. And when he had thus done, he departed out of his chamber and went into the Cloister, and caused all his bretheren to come together, and when they were all assembled, the Priour told them euerie worde as the husbandman had told him, and that Rush was a verie Deuill, and no earthly creature; at the which they were sore astonished, and were right sorry in their hartes, that they had followed him so much in his minde, and done after his counsaile, and were heauy in their heartes for their great and abhominable sinnes that they had committed and done,  & with great contrition they kneeled downe vpon their knees, and desired almighty God, for grace and pardon. Then the Priour caused euery man to fall to contemplation and praier. Then foorth they went and did the Priours commaundement, and briefely made them ready, and went to prayer all at once. And when they were come to the middest of their seruice, the Priour departed out of the Church and went to the Kitchin, wherin he found Rush who was there verie busy: then the priour commaunded him to stand still, and by vertue of almightie God and of all the companie of Heauen, he coniured Rush into the likenes of a Horse, and commaunded him to goe and stand at the gate in the same place that he stood in when he came thether first, and to stand there till seruice was done: so foorth went Rush in the likenes of a Horse, and stood at the gate as the when seruice was done, the Priour and his brethren went to the gate to see what case Rush was in: and when they were come thether they found him standing in the likenes of a Horse. Then they demaunded him to what entent he came into their place, and why he taried there so long? Syrs said Rush : I came hither to cause you to do all mischife as is aforesaid, and yet I would haue done more ere I had gone hence: for I would haue caused you to slaye other, and to be damned both bodie and soule. And when they had heard the words of Rush , euery man held vp his hands and thanked almighty God, that they had so well escaped that great misfortune. Then Rush desired the Priour licence to depart thence, and promised that he would neuer more come there, nor doe any man more hurt: vpon that condition the Priour gaue him leaue to depart. Thus Rush departed from the place, and the Friers went to their Cloyster, and liued there solitarie and chast euer after, and serued almightie God better than euer they did before. Religion. VVhen Rush was banished out of the house of Religion, and was turned into the same likenesse that he was, then he wandred abroad in the worlde with an heauie heart, & these words he said: Alas, alas, what shall I doe, I wote not now whether to goe, for all my seuen yeres labour is lost. And as he wandred about, by fortune he met with his master Lucifer , but he would not haue seene him by his will: neuertheles his maister espied him quickly, and said to him Rush what tydings with thee? Sir said Rush , I haue lost all my labour that I haue gone about this vii. yeares. How so, saide his Maister? Sir, I shall shew you said Rush . The last time that we were assembled together, there was a poore man lay in an old tree hard beside vs, & he heard all that we said: and when we were departed, he arose and went vnto the Priour and shewed him all that we saide and specially the wordes that I had spoken, and so all my labour is lost, & am banished that place. Well, said the master Diuell to Rush , thou shalt goe some other way abrode, and looke if thou canst finde any thing to doe: Then Rush walked about in the country, & long it was ere he could get any seruice: At last he fortuned to come vnto a husbandmans house which lacked a seruant, where he was entertained, but sore against the wifes consent. For this husbandmans wife was a very faire woman, and she loued well the parish Priest, and he loued her againe, in so much that often times they made good cheere and banketted together, and so continued and kept company together a long time. Their meeting was so priuie and so secrete, that it was neuer knowen, and they sure enough of the good man, for he was accustomed euerie morning to rise early and to goe farre into the field, and because his wife would preuent his comming home to dinner, she would alwaies giue him his victailes in a bagg with him, and a bottell full of drinke, to the intent he should tarie in the feeldes from morning to night: she would not suffer him to keepe a seruant or to haue any manner of helpe: for she was afraide that if they should haue a seruant, her secretes should be knowen, and the goodman also feared that if he should take a seruant, that he would haue but little lust to tarrie there: for the Deuill himselfe could not endure the chiding and brawling of that woman: by which meanes she kept her husband without a seruant a long time: For shee knew well, that as long as her husband was in the feeld, the Priest and she might haue their meeting, but at length shee was deceiued. bee entertaind into his seruice. Rvsh trauailing vp and down, came to a Husbandman who was labouring in the wordes vnto him: Rest you merie sir, me thinks you take great paines to worke so sore your selfe: will it please you to entertaine a seruant? I am a poore young man & am out of seruice, and I am very willing to serue you if you please: and I trust to doe you such seruice, as shall be to your good content: The husbandman answered him, and saide; young man, I would gladly giue you entertainement, but my wife will neuer be pleased with any seruant that shall come into my house: Sir said Rush let me alone, for I shall so worke the matter, that my dame shall be well pleased with me: well said the husbandman, tarry with me till I haue done my busines, and thou shalt goe home with me: when he had finished his dayes worke, Rush went home with him, they were no sooner come into the house, but the wife espying Rush , she began to gloome and to looke meruailous angerly at him: which the good man perceiuing, he saide vnto her, dame, I pray thee to be contented, thou knowest well inough that I haue more labour to doe, then I am able to make an end of alone, and therefore I haue hyred this young man to help me: when his wife heard those wordes, she was more angry then before, and began to braule and scolde as if the Deuill had bene in her, and said vnto him: what a vengance needest thou to take a seruant? thou art able inough thy selfe to doe all the busines that we haue to doe, and why should we take more charge vpon vs then we are able to beare? but I now perceiue thou art giuen to lazines, and hast little minde to work thy selfe: when the good man heard her so highly displeased, he said, dame, I pray thee be contented, the young man is honest, and he hath promised me to be a good seruant: yet for all these speeches, she would not be pacifyed, but brawled still: when Rush perceiued her great impaciencie, he said vnto her: dame I pray you be contented, and be not angry with me, for you shall haue no cause, my Master hath hyred me but for a while, vpon a tryall, and I trust, in that time, so to behaue my selfe, as to giue you both content: and when my time commeth out, if you like my Seruice you shall haue it before any other whatsoeuer: if not, I will be very well content to depart. When the wife heard Rush speake so resonably, she pacifyed her selfe, and said no more: which caused the good man to be very glad, and so she set them to supper, and as they sate at meate, Rush demanded of his Master what he should doe the next day? his Master answered, thou must rise early and goe to the field, and make an end of that which I was about this day; (which was a great dayes worke) so when they had supt they went to bed. Early in the morning Rush arose and went to the field, and wrought so lustily, that he had done his worke betimes: for when his Master came to bring him his Breakfast, all his worke was finished, whereat his Master had great maruaile: then they sate downe to breakfast, which being ended they went home, and did such thinges as were there to bee done: when his Dame sawe that he had so soone ended his busines, she thought that he was a profitable seruant, and said litle but let him alone. In the Euening Rush demaunded of his Master what hee should doe the next morrow? his Master appointed him twice so much as hee did the day before, which Rush refused not, but got vp earely in the morning, and went to the Field, and about his worke; so soone as his Master was ready, he tooke his mans breakfast and came to the field, thinking to helpe Rush : (but he was no sooner come from his house, but the Priest came to see his wife, and presently shee made ready some good meate for them to be merry withall, and while it was a dressing, they sate sporting together, who had beene there should haue seene many louing touches.) And when the goodman came to the Field, he found that Rush had done all that which he appointed, whereof he had great maruaile: then they sate downe to breakfast, and as they sate together, Rush beheld his Masters shoone, and perceiued that for fault of greasing they were very hard: Then said Rush to his Master, why are not your shooes better greased, I maruaile that you can goe in them, they be so hard? Haue you no more at home? Yes, said his Master, I haue another payre lying vnder a great Chest at home in my chamber: Then said Rush , I will goe home and grease them that you may put them on to morrow: and so he walked homeward merrily and sung by the way. And when he approached neare the house, he sang out very loude: with that his Dame looked out at the window, and perceiued that it was her seruant, Shee said vnto the Priest: alas, what shall we doe? our seruant is come home, and my Husband will not be long after, and with that she thrust the meate into the Ouen, and all that was vpon the Table. Where shall I hyde me said the Priest? Goe into the chamber and creepe vnder the great Chest among the olde shoone, and I shall couer you, and so he did: And when Rush was asked him, why he came home so soone? Rush answered and said: I haue done all my busines, and my Master commaunded me to come home and grease his shoone. Then he went into the Chamber and looked vnder the Chest, and there hee found the Priest, and he tooke him by the heeles and drew him out, and said, thou whoreson Priest, what doost thou heere? With that, the Priest held vp his hands and cryed him mercy, and desired him to saue his honesty, and hee would neuer more come there: And so Rush let him goe for that once. Priest vnder the Maunger couered with Straw. VVithin a while after this foresaid Priest began to wax warme, and thought once againe to aduenture himselfe and goe to the Husbandmans house: When he perceiued that the Goodman and Rush his Seruant was in the field a labouring, hee went with all speed to the house, and when hee was entered, the Wife said he was welcome, and made ready a good dish of meate and set it on the Table before the Priest, then shee drew drinke and sate downe beside him: who had beene there should haue seene many wanton toyes between them two, and they had not sitten there long, but anon Rush came singing homeward, and when she espyed him, she was abashed and wist not what to doe but thrust the meate into the Ouen as she did before. Then said the Priest where shall I hyde me? come with me, said the wife into the Stable, and creepe vnder the Maunger, and I shall couer you with straw, and tary there till he be gone againe, and then she turned againe into the house where she found Rush her Seruant, and anon she demaunded of him why hee came home so soone? Rush answered, that he had done all his busines, and he was come to make cleane the Stable, and when the Wife heard that, shee was sorry in her heart, for she doubted that he would finde the Priest againe. Then foorth went Rush into the stable and tooke a great Forke in his hand and began to shake vp the Straw: and when he came to the heape that the Priest lay in, the which seemed to him very great, yet his forke he tooke all vp at once and bare it out of the doore, and laide it on a great heape of mucke that lay there, and with his forke he shaked the straw abroad, and when hee had shaken out a little, anon he was aware of the Priests Gowne: then hee said, what a Deuill art thou? and with his forke he turned the heape, and then hee perceiued that the Priest was come againe: then with his forke he gaue him three or foure good dry stripes and said, whoreson Priest, what dost thou heere? thou promised me the last day neuer more to come heere, and now I see thou art a false Priest, but now I shall make an end of thee, and then shalt thou neuer deceiue me more. And when the Priest heard him say so, he fell vpon his knees and held vp his hands, and prayed Rush to saue his honor once againe and he would neuer come there more, and if he did then to doe with him what he would. Thus Rush let the Priest goe the second time. hee trayled him about the Towne. Then within a Fortnight or three weekes after, the Priest thought he was long absent from the Husbandmans wife. And though it should cost him his life, yet would he goe thither once againe: And on a day he perceiuing the goodman was gone to the Field, he tooke his way unto the house, and was so hasty, that assoone as he was entred into the house, hee caught the wife and would haue imbraced her, but shee quickly got from him againe, and went and prepared good cheare for him, as she was wont to doe: for they thought themselues sure enough for the time, but yet they were deceiued: For when the goodman was come to the Field, Rush had done all his busines, then they sate downe and brake their fast with Bread and Cheese: and as they sate eating, Rush spyed a hayre in the Cheese, and then he said to his Master, I trow my Dame would poyson vs, or else she washeth not the Basket that the Cheese lyeth in, behold it is all full of haires, I will goe home and wash the basket and make it cleane: so leauing his Master in the field and walking homeward, he sung merrily all the way. And when he approached neare the house, the Wife knew his voyce and perceiued that he was comming. Then wringing her hands she said vnto the Priest, goe hyde you, or else you be but dead. Where shall I hyde me said the Priest? Goe vp into the chamber and leape into the Basket that hangeth out at the window, and I shall call you when he is gone againe. Then anon in came Rush , and she asked him why he came home so soone? then said Rush , I haue done all my busines in the field, and my Master hath sent me home to wash Cheese basket, for it is full of haires, and so he went into the Chamber, and with his knife he cut the rope that the basket hung by, and downe fell Priest and all into a great poole of water that was vnder the window: then went he into the stable for a Horse and rode into the poole, and tooke the rope that hung at the basket, & tying it to the horses tayle, rode through the poole three or 4. times. Then he rode through the Towne to cause the people to wonder at him, and so came home againe. And all this while he made as though he had knowne nothing, but looking behinde him, espyed the Priest. Then he alighted downe, and said vnto him: Thou shalt neuer more escape me, thy life is lost. With that, the Priest held vp his hands and said, heere is a hundred peeces of Gold, take them and let me goe. So Rush tooke the golde and let the Priest goe. And when his Master came home, he gaue him the halfe of his money, and bad him farwell, for he would goe see the world. Coniured out of the body of the Gentlemans Daughter. VVhen Rush was departed from the Husbandman, he went abroad in the Countrey, to looke if he could find any more aduentures: and so long he trauailed about, that at last he espyed a great Gentlemans place, vnto the which he tooke his way. And when he was come thither, as chance was, he found the gentleman walking vp and down before his gate. And when Rush was approached neare vnto him, he put off his bonet and saluted him saying: Rest you merry good gentleman: Welcome said he: Sir, said Rush , I am a poore young man and am out of seruice, and faine would I haue a good Master. What Countryman art thou said the gentleman  & from whence commest thou? Sir, said Rush , I was borne farre hence and many a myle haue I gone to seeke a good seruice, but none can I find. What canst thou doe said the gentleman, and what is thy name? Sir said Rush , I can doe any manner of thing that shall please you to set me vnto, & Rush is my name. Then said the gentleman vnto him: Rush tarry heere with me, and I will retaine thee into my seruice. When Rush heard the gentleman speake so, hee thanked him much and tarryed there. Then as the Gentleman and Rush went talking together, the gentleman said vnto him: Rush thou hast trauailed farre and gone through many strange Countries: canst thou shew me where to finde any man, can Coniure a spirit out of a womans body? Sir, said Rush , why aske you me that question? I shall shew thee, said the gentleman, I haue a Daughter which is a faire young woman, but she is sore troubled in her minde, and as I suppose shee hath some Diuell within her body. Sir, said Rush , I pray you let me see her, and I trust speedily to finde remedy for her. Then the gentleman brought Rush into the place and shewed him his Daughter. And when he saw her he knew what she had within her body: Anon he said vnto the gentleman, sir there is remedy enough for this. Well said the gentleman, if thou canst finde me any that can helpe her thereof, I will reward him well for his labour, and thee also. Sir, I will shew you what is to be done, there is a place of Religion a forty or fifty miles hence, wherein I was a seruant a long time, and the Priour is a cunning man in that science: and I doubt not, but if he were heere euen now she should be holpen within this houre. When the gentleman heard the words of Rush , he reioyced in his heart and was full glad of that good tydings. And on the morrow after, the gentleman sent his seruant with his letters vnto that house of Religion, desiring the Priour to come and speake with him. When the Priour had read the gentlemans letters, and knew for what cause he was sent for, he made him ready to ride with the messenger. Then forth they rode, and the next day they arriued at the Gentlemans place. When the gentleman vnderstood that the Priour was come, he was glad and went to the gate, and with great reuerence he receiued the Priour, and brought him into his place. Then the gentleman commanded his seruant to fill a cup of Wine, that the Priour and he might drinke together. And when they had drunke and refreshed themselues well, they walked foorth into a faire Garden, and then they commoned together of many things, and when they had finished all their communications, the Gentleman said vnto the Priour: Sir, the cause that you be come hither is this. It is so, that I haue a young Gentlewoman to my daughter which is grieuously vexed and troubled in her minde, and as I suppose she hath some wicked Spirit in her body, and sir, it was shewed me by a seruant of mine which was long seruant in your place, that you could helpe her. Sir said the Priour what is his name? The gentleman said his name is Rush . And when the Priour heard his name hee knew him well enough, and said vnto the gentleman, sir, cause the gentlewoman to come before me and I trust in almighty God, shortly to finde a remedy for her, and when the gentleman heard the Priour speake so, he was glad in his heart, and commanded in all hast to bring foorth his Daughter before the Priour: and when she was come into his presence, he commanded her to kneele downe vpon her knees, and also he commanded her Father and her Mother, and all the company that were there present, in likewise to kneele vpon their knees, and pray vnto almighty God for the young Gentlewoman. And then he himselfe said certaine prayers ouer her: then he lifted vp his hand and blessed her, and incontinent there flew a great Deuill out of her mouth. And the Priour neuer after he came there. Thus was the young gentlewoman restored to her right minde and health againe. Then the Gentleman would haue giuen to the Priour a great summe of money for his labour, but he would take none, but said vnto the gentleman: Sir, I haue a new Church in building, and I lacke Lead to couer the roofe: and as it is informed me, this is a plentifull Countrey thereof. Wherefore sir, if it will please you to giue me asmuch as shall serue me: I and my Bretheren shall bee your dayly beadsmen, and you shall be prayed for as long as the world endureth.
