 (From all the wildes of Neptunes watrie sphere) For euer guards the Erymanthian Beare. Since then your Lordship, settles in your shade A life retir'd; and no Retreate is made But to some strength; (for else, tis no Retreate, But rudely running from your Battailes heate) I giue this, as your strength: your strength, my Lord, In Counsailes and Examples, that afford More Guard, then whole Hosts of corporeal powre, And more deliuerance, teach the fatall Howre. Turne not your medcine then, to your disease, By your too set, and sleight repulse of these, The Adiuncts of your matchlesse Odysses ; Since on that wisest minde of Man, relies Refuge from all Liues Infelicities. Nor sing these, such diuision from them; But that these spinn the thred of the same streame, From one selfe Distaffs stuff: for Poesies Pen (Through al theames) is t'informe the liues of Men: All whose Retreates, neede strengths of all degrees; VVithout which; (had you euen Herculean knees;) Your foes fresh Charges, would, at length preuaile, To leaue your Noblest suff'rance, no least saile. Strength then, the Obiect is of all Retreates; Strength needes no friends trust; strength, your foes Retire to strength then, of eternall things, (defeates. And y'are eternall; for our knowing Spring's Flow into those things that we truely know; Which (being Eternall) we are render'd so. And though your high-fixt Light passe infinite farr Th'aduicefull Guide, of my still-trembling Starr; Yet heare what my dischardg'd Peece must foretell, Standing your Poore, and Perdue Sentinell. Kings may perhaps wish, euen your Beggars Voice To their Eternities; how skorn'd a choice Soeuer, now it lies; And (dead I) may Extend your life to lights extreamest Raie. If not; your Homer yet, past doubt shall make, Immortall, like himselfe, your Bounties stake Put in my hands, to propagate your Fame, Such virtue reigns in such vnited Name. Retire to him then, for aduice, and skill To know, things call'd worst, Best; and Best most ill. 1 Which knowne; truths best chuse; and retire to still. And as our English Generall , (whose Name Shall equall interest finde in T'House of Fame, With all Earths great'st Commanders) in Retreate To Belgian Gant , stood all Spaines Armies heate, By Parma led; though but one thousand strong: Three miles together thrusting through the throng Of Th'Enimies Horse, (still pouring on their Fall Twixt him &home) &thunderd through them al: The Gallick Monsiour standing on the wall, And wondring at his dreadfull Discipline; Fir'd with a Valor, that spit spirit Diuine: In fiue Battaillons randging all his Men; Bristl'd with Pikes, and flanck't with Flanckers ten; Gaue fire still in his Rere, retir'd and wrought, Downe to his fixt strength still: retir'd and fought; All the Battaillons of the Enemies Horse Storming vpon him still, their fieriest Force; Charge vpon Charge laid fresh: he fresh as day Repulsing all; and forcing glorious way Into the Gates; that gaspt (as swounes for Ayre) And tooke their life in, with vntoucht Repaire: So fight out (sweet Earle) your Retreate in Peace; No ope-warr equalls that, where priuie Prease Of neuer-numberd odds of Enimie Arm'd all by Enuie, in blinde Ambush lie, To rush out, like an open threatning skie, Broke al in Meteors round about your eares. (Reres Gainst which, (though far fro hece) through al your Haue fires prepar'd; wisdome, with wisdome flanck, And all your forces randge in present ranck; Retiring as you now fought in you strength, From all the Force laid, in times vtmost length, To charge, and basely, come on you behind. The Doctrine of all which, you here shall finde, And, in the true Glasse of a humane Minde. Your Odysses ; the Body letting see All his lifes past, through Infelicitie, And manage of it all. In which to friend, The full Muse brings you both prime and end Of all Arts ambient in the Orbe of Man; Which neuer darknesse most Cimmerian Can giue Eclipse; since (blinde) He all things sawe, And to all, euer since, liu'd Lord, and Lawe. And though our mere-learn'd me; &Modern wise Taste not poore Poesies Ingenuities, Being crusted with their couetous Leprosies; But hold her paines, worse then the spiders worke, And lighter then the shadowe of a Corke: Yet th'ancient learn'd, heat with celestiall fire, Affirmes her flames so sacred and entire; 2 That, not without Gods greatest grace she can Fall in the wid'st Capacitie of Man. If yet, the vile Soule of this Verminous time; Loue more the Sale-Muse ; and the Squirrels chime, Then this full sphere of Poesies sweetest Prime; Giue them vnenuied, their vaine veine, and vent; And rest your wings, in his approu'd Ascent That yet was neuer reacht; nor euer fell Into affections bought with things that sell, Being the Sunns Flowre ; and wrapt so in his skie, He cannot yeeld to euery Candles eye. Whose most worthy Discoueries, to your Lordships Iudiciall Perspectiue in most subdude Humilitie submitteth , George Chapman. The Worke that I was borne to doe, is done. Glory to him, that the Conclusion Makes the beginning of my life: and Neuer Let me be said to liue; till Iliue Euer. Where's the outliuing of my Fortunes then, Ye errant vapors of Fames Lernean Fenn? That (like possest stormes) blast all; not in Herde With your abhorr'd heads: who, because casher'de By Men, for Monsters; thinck Men, Monsters All, That are not of your pyed Hood, and your Hall. When you are nothing but the scumm of things, And must be cast off: Drones, that haue no stings, Nor any more soule, then a stone hath wings. Auant ye Haggs; your Hates, and Scandalls are, The Crownes, and Comforts of a good Mans Care; By whose impartiall Perpendiculare; All is extuberance, and excretion All, That you your Ornaments, and glories call. Your wrie Mouthes censure right? your blister'd Tongues, That licke but itches? and whose vlcerous Lungs Come vp at all things permanent, and sound? O you (like flies in Dreggs) in Humors droun'd; Your loues, like Atoms, lost in gloomie Ayre; I would not retriue with a wither'd Haire. Hate, and cast still your stings then; for your kisses Betray but Truth; and your Applaud's, are Hisses. To see our supercilious wizerds frowne; Their faces falne like Foggs; and coming downe, Stincking the Sunn out; make me shine the more: And like a checkt flood, beare aboue the shore, That their prophane Opinions faine would set, To what they see not; know not; nor can let. Yet then, our learn'd Men, with their Torrents come Roring from their forc't Hills, all crown'd with fome, That one not taught like them, should learne to know Their Greeke rootes, & from thence the Groues that grow, Casting such rich shades, from great Homers wings: That first, and last, command the Muses springs. Though he's best Scholler, that through paines and vows; Made his owne Master onely; all things know's Nor pleades my poore skill; forme; or learned Place; But dantlesse labor, constant Prayer, and Grace. And what's all their skill, but vast varied reading? As if brode-beaten High-waies had the leading To Truths abstract, and narrow Path, and Pit? Found in no walke, of any worldly wit. And without Truth, all's onely sleight of hand, Or our Law-learning, in a Forraine Land; Embroderie spent on Cobwebs; Braggart show Of Men that all things learne; and nothing know. For Ostentation, humble Truth still flies, And all confederate fashionists, defies. And as some sharpe-browd Doctor, (English borne;) In much learn'd Latine Idioms can adorne Averse with rare Attractions; yet become His English Muse, like an Arachnean Loome, Wrought spight of Pallas; and therein bewraies More tongue then truth; beggs, and adopts his Bayes; So Ostentation, bee hee neuer so Larded with labour, to suborne his showe; Shall soothe within him, but a bastard soule, No more Heauen heyring, then Earths sonne the Moule. But as in dead Calmes, emptiest smokes arise Uncheckt, and free; vp, strait into the skies; So drousie Peace, that in her humor steepes All the affects, lets such rise while she sleepes. Many, and most Men, haue of wealth least store, But None the gracious shame that fits the Pore; So most learn'd Men, enough are Ignorant; But few the grace haue, to confesse their want, Till Liues, and Learnings, come concomitant. For from Mens knowledges; their Liues-Acts flowe; Vaineglorious Acts then, vaine proue all they know. As Night, the life-enclining starrs, best showes; So liues obscure, the starriest soules disclose. For me; let iust Men iudge by what I show In Acts expos'd, how much Ierre, or knowe; And let not Enuie, make all worse then nought With her meere headstrong, and quite braineles thought: Others, for doing nothing; giuing All; And bounding all worth in her bursten Gall. God and my deare Redeemer, rescue Me. From Mens immane, and mad Impietie; And by my life and soule, (sole knowne to them) Make me of Palme, or Yew, an Anadem. And so, my sole God, the thrice sacred Trine, Beare all th' Ascription, of all Me and Mine. 
