 mercies in set times of reliefe and daily almes) it was my hap to trauell into, and thorough out the whole Ile of Man: now its vsuall with Trauellers to discourse of their iourneying,  & to relate their Obseruations. And therefore let none obiect and say vnto me that of Persius, Scire tuum nihil est, nisi te scire hoc sciat alter? For I found goods in my pains taking: and bonum is communicativu et sui diffusivum , and so quo comunius, eo melius . In my very entrance, and afterwards euery where I found written that old antient precept, Nose te ipsu . This lesson I began to take out with diligent obseruation.  1 And it brought to my mind the Apostles charge, Quisque exploret seipsum , which I laboured to put in practise, and so besought myselfe in my selfe; for, I remembring that saying long since learned, Orbis quisque sibi, nec te qu ae siueras extra . Thus my trauell became very profitable to me; and the variety of sights withall procured delight, & turned my paines into pleasure. In my trauelling, I came to the County towne, or chiefest Seate there called Soule . Where I rested for sometime, because it fell out to be the Assise weeke, for all that Iland. Where I specially marked how in all things they proceeded against Malefactors, according to the Lawes of England: in this onely lyeth the difference: there is neuer but one Iudge, whereas wee haue euer two appointed in euery Circuit, as wee haue now in this Westerne, very honorable and religious Iudges, quos honoris causa non possum non nominare , Sir Iohn VValter , Lord chiefe Barron, and Sir Iohn Denham , an other worthy Barron of the Exchequer, louers of vertue and iustice. And indeed, such ought Iudges to be, as was and is this Iudge in Man .  2 He is a Iudge of Iethroes choice & verax,  & dei timeris, & Osor turpis lucri . He is diuinely giuen, prudent, impartiall, and very quick vpon good information, in dispatch of causes. He was worthy attended, as he ought euer to be with a worthy Shiriffe, with Iustices of Peace, Knights & Esquires, Gentlemen of singular note & fame in that Countrie. This I heard of them, and it appeared by their practise, that they all stand for the maintenance of the lawes, they see their Soueraigne well serued, iustice duely obserued, and iudgement executed accordingly. They neuer side with any, for they hate faction. Pride and enuie, two restlesse Make-bates, for notorious misdemeanour. I saw bound to the good behauiour. So as now there a Caesar like spirit, patitur superiorem , and a Pompey suum parem . They runne all one course, and as true Israelites, quasi vir vnus for publick good.  3 Therefore doe the people liue in peace, the land prospereth, iustice flourisheth, vertue is exalted, vice suppressed, and the enemies at home and abroad made to feare. The whole discourse of this excellent order, and carefull proceedings there by me obserued, from my first enterance vnto the end, I heere do present vnto your Worships, not doubting of such an acceptance, as the delight in reading, and the profit, by a right vse, may iustly procure, and so I doe humbly take leaue Batcomb Decemb. 6. Your worships in all Christian seruices at command, Richard Bernard. of this Discourse allegoricall narration, that in it sicut bona sunt qu ae dam memoria, sunt mala nulla : Yet if any thing may seeme distastfull, let thy minde be to take it well as Caesars was, to interpret well the seeming offensiue cariage of one Allius the Poet towards him, and thou wilt not be displeased. Thy good minde will preuent the taking of an offence, where none is intended to be giuen. In discouery, attaching, arraigning and condemning of sin, I taxe the Uice, and not any mans person, so as I may say with one, Hunc seruare modum nostri nouere libelli, Parcere personis, discere de vitijs. Thou hast heere towards the end of this discourse, the triall and iudgement vpon foure notorious Malefactors. Two of them the very prime Authors of all the open rebellion, or secret Conspiracies, which at any time euer were in that Isleland. The other two were the principall Abettours, and the chiefest Supporters of them. Their names, their natures, and their mischieuous practises thou maist finde at large in the narration. There should haue beene at that Assises with these, the arraignement of certaine suspected Witches: but this was preuented because the Grand-lurie Gentlemen could not agree to bring in their Billa vera : for that they made question of diuers poynts whereof they could not bee resolued at that present. 1\. Whither the afflicted did suffer by onely sound violent diseases in nature, producing strange effects like practises of Witch-craft?   [  Se doct Cotta his triall of Witches. ] Which for want of a iudicious Physitian they could not discerne. 2\. Whither the afflicted were a counterfeit, as was one Marwood , the Boy of Bilson , and one Mary Brasier ? Or that he or shee hauing some naturall disease, did make vse thereof, and counterfeited the rest, as one Mainy did, who was troubled with the hysterica passion' 3\. Whither being a disease supernaturall, yet might come vpon the afflicted by the operation of the diuel, without any association of a Witch, as it happened to Iob , and others in the Euangelists? Or, that the afflicted hath a diuel, and is a Witch, and hath by his or her owne waies, brought this euill vpon him or her, without the practice of any other Witch? 4\. Whither they might proceede vpon meere presumptious against the suspected, or rather stay till they had more certaine and grounded proofes? 5\. Whither they could (none of them being read in any learned tractates touching the practises of Witches) rightly examine the suspected, to finde out a Witch, and so to bring him or her deseruedly vnder the power of authority? If there come forth, by the leaue of authority, a Guide to Grand-Iury men in causes of Witch-craft; my sute is, that they would be pleased to accept of my well meaning therein. In which al these points before are fully handled; as also, That there are witches, who are most subiect to be made Witches. How they prepare themselues for the diuel. How Satan draweth them to a league, and becometh familiar with them. That there are good Witches, and the signes to know them. That there are bad Witches, and how they practise, & what it is that they can doe, and how many things must concurre in bewitching. What are the signes to know one to bee bewitched. That Witches may be detected What are strong presumptions. of a Witch: what are the certaine euidences against such an one: how throughly to examine a witch, with many other particulars in 28 distinct chapters fully, & yet with great breuity. The death of fiue, brethren & sisters lately codemned, & executed for witches, one more yet remaining, formerly brought before a Iudge, and now in danger to be questioned againe, hath moued me to take this paines, not to preuet iustice, nor to hinder legal proceedings, but that I may not be mistaken nor wronged, as I was once, and more should haue beene; had not the wisedome and goodnesse of so reuerend a Iudge accepted gratiously of my vpright apologie against vaine accusers I made a Petition then to my Lord the Iudge, to the worthy Master Shiriffe, and to all the Worshipfull on the Bench, which I am bold to renew againe now more publikely, because it pleased that reuerend Iudge so well to like thereof, & to second it. The state of poore prisoners is well knowne, and how their soules safety is neglected: and yet our Sauiour gaue such a testimony to a penitent theefe, as he neuer gaue to any mortall man else, for he told him, that he should be that day with him in Paradise. How blessed a worke would it be to haue maintenace raised for a learned, godly and graue Diuine that might attend to instruct you daily. Twelue pece a quarter of one parish with an other in our count, would encourage some compassionate holy man thereunto; and what is this? Not a mite out of euery mans purse to saue soules? If with this instruction there should be meanes to set them also on worke, they might get somewhat for food, for raymet. They might so preuent the miserable fruits of sloth; their mindes would bee employed, their bodies bee preserued in health, and not pine away, and be cosumed with vermine. Yea, enforced labour there, would terrifie loose vagrants lazie wanderers, the idle rout from turning theeues more, then either imprisonment or death hitherto hath done. And besides, such as should escape, would by this heauenly meanes of instructions, and bodily labour become, through Gods mercy, more profitable members in the Common-Weale afterwards: whereas now they become twise more the children of Belial, then they were before. Oh that the honourable my Lords the Iudges the now religiously affected Master Shiriffe, whose the Goale is for the time being, the worthy Iustices of the Country, with other Christianly minded Gentlemen would be pleased to take this matter into a deepe consideration, and in the bowels of mercy commiserate their case. The worke surely would blesse them, all that should come reformed hereby, whither they should liue or die, would praise God for it, and pray for a blessing vpon them and theirs for euer. My sute is to euery keeper of a prison, if they be no kinne to Master Newman , the Goaler in this discourse, that yet they would take acquaintance of him, and become better knowne to him. That their prisoners may by their vertues, & religious care be better disposed. My request to poore prisoners is, to redeeme their time ill spent: to call to God for mercy and pardon; and to moue them heereunto, let them in serious meditation put themselues in minde of these things. 1. That their liberty abused, God hath by the hand of authority taken from them, as vnworthy to liue freely in a Common Wealth. 2. That as they neglected and despised spirituall meanes of saluation, they are now depriued thereof. 3. That as before they delighted onely with wicked company, now are they shut vp one with another together. 4. That their ragges are ensignes to them of their ragged conditions. 5. That their filth and vermine telleth them of their filthie conuersation, and their many sinnes and corruption. 6. That their want of food is a punishment for such of them, as haue abused Gods blessings to gluttony, drunkennesse, and the fruites thereof, wantonnes, and filthy vncleannesse. 7. That their prison is as it were a picture of hel to minde them of their end whither they are going, if they doe not amend. 8. That their expecting of the Assises, is an instruction to look for Iesus the Iudge of all the world. 9. That their chaines, fetters and bolts teach them to consider the nature of their sinnes, which hold them bound to answer at the Barre of Gods iustice. 10. That their desire of life by a Psalme of mercy, should moue them to desire eternall life, through the mercies of God in Iesus Christ, who will be gracious to euery true beleeuing penitent: which graces (poore prisoners) God send you: and feare onely to die eternally. Before I end, I haue a sute to all that professe the law, that if in this allegorie, fetched from such termes, as best knowne to them, then to my selfe, I do mistake, they would be pleased to passe ouer that, & make vse with me of the spirituall sence, which is the drift of my labour heerein. And so at the length, I take leaue, with my prayer to God for the peace of Ierusalem, and for a prosperous successe to all that loue the Israel of God, with our Countries glory and safety, Amen .  Lament. 3.40. Let vs search & try our waies.  mourning, seeing and also partaking with others of those miseries, which befell the state of the Iews, iustly procured at Gods hands for their sins, doth heere giue them aduice what was best to be done, that in this their distresse GOD might shew them mercie; and that was to repent and turne vnto the Lord , to the effecting whereof hee counselleth them two things laid down in my Text. 1. To search out sinne. 2. and to put it to triall. In the handling wherof I will proceed as here wee do against a lewd and wicked Malefactor, legally, according to the lawes of this Realme. The first part of my Text is to Search; wee know that when one hath offended the lawes, hath committed any fellonie, murther, treason, or done any outrage for which he is to be apprehended, hee presently flying & hiding himselfe is pursued, and sought after, diliget search is made to attach him. The Malefactor heere which doth so much harm on euery one, euery where without ceasing, is Sinne . This is a notable Thiefe & Robber , daring to set vpon any. Hee robbeth God of his honour, and man of Gods fauour. This Thiefe stole from Angels their excellency of glory, from our first Parents their innocencie. This is hee that robbeth vs of our graces, the spirituall money which we haue in the purses of our heart, to helpe vs in our iourney to heauen. This Villaine bereaueth vs of our goods, driueth away our Cattell, spoileth vs of euery temporal blessing of our health, our peace, our libertie, and plenty. He it is that vtterly vndoeth vs, and maketh our estate miserable, that wee cannot thriue in any thing, Body or Soule. This is a Murthering Thiefe , wheresoeuer hee breaketh in, by day or by night, there will he either kill or be killed; Man and Sinne cannot both liue together. Most bloudily cruell he is, for hee will spare none. He slayeth the horie head, and killeth the tender Mother with the new borne Babe. Hee regardeth no person, no sexe, no age, of so murtherous a disposition is he, and so inhumanely barberous. He is a very strong thiefe , no humane power can subdue him; hee taketh man and bindeth him: for Iniquitie taketh the wicked ,  4 and holdeth him with the corde of his owne sinnes . He will beare rule where hee commeth, all must obey him. He will commad the Reason , raigne ouer the Will , and swagger ouer the Affections ,  5 and leade captiue the whole man, and make him seruiceable to his lusts; yea, and make him spend his whole estate to maintaine him in his lustfull humours; whether it bee Pride, or Drunkennesse, or Gluttony, or Idlenesse, or Whoredom, or whatsoeuer else it is; he both must and will haue maintenance, else will hee set all on fire:  6 for Wickednesse burneth as fire . This is an vngratefull and mischieuos Thiefe : for let any entertaine him and fauour him, he will worke their ouerthrow. Yea, so vile a Villaine is he, that the more any make of him, the worse he is to them: for, hee with- holds all good from them ,  7 8 hee procureth mischiefes to light vpon them . Hee keepeth our Grace from hauing any entertainment. Hee smothereth Conscience for speaking: hardeneth the Heart for feeling; blindeth the Iudgment from discerning; stoppeth the Eare from heating any good counsell: lameth the Feet from walking in Gods pathes: benummeth the Hands from doing duties of Charitie, and maketh the Tongue to falter in speaking of holy things. Neither yet doth he this only; but he worketh Enmitie betwixt his Fauourite & his best friend , euen betweene God and his own Conscience. And to make vp the height of his Mischiefe: the more to strengthen himself against his foolish and vnhappie friend, hee at vnawares to him, letteth in, and that into the best roome (euen the Heart) his great and most deadly enemy the Diuell .  9 Thus Couetousnes did let him into Iudas heart, and set him on work to betray Christ. Flattery let him into the hearts of the false Prophets,  10 to deceiue Ahab . Carelesnesse lets him in,  11 to hinder the fruit of the Word. Losse of Gods graces lets him in,  & seauen worse with him to ruine a man vtterly. Hypocritical vain-glorie, and Couetousnesse let him into the hearts of Ananias & Saphira ;  12 for vaine-glorie made them sell all, and to make a shewe to bee like Barnabas: but Couetousnesse with vnbeliefe aduised them to withhold som of the money, least they should happen to want: but how to do this,  & keep their credit they knew not; therefore Hypocrisie, Vaine-glorie, Couetousnesse , and Vnbeliefe called in Satan to heare his Counsell, who taught them to lye vnto the Holy Ghost, but to the death of them both. Thus wee see what an vngratefull Villaine Sinne is to his best friends. Lastly,  13 this Thiefe is a pestilent subtile Thiefe . Sinne is deceitfull; it beguiled Adam, Dauid and Salomon: Yea Saint Paul one once wrapt vp into the third heauen, doth acknowledge that it deceiued him And whom hath it not deceiued?  14 He is therefore carefully to bee auoided  & taken heed of: and this robbing, murthering, strong, vngrateful, mischieuous and subtill Thiefe diligently to be sought out. But before Search can be made,    [   A Watch.  ] a Watch must be set to espie him out, that he may be attached. The Watch-man appointed for this purpose is godly Ielousie who hath euer an holy suspicion of a mans owne wayes,    [   Watchman.  ] least in any thing, at any time, he should mis behaue himselfe. This vigilant Watch-man hath with him two Assistants euer to accompanie him;    [   Assistants.  ] the one is Loue-good , a zealous fellow for God  & good duties: the other is Hate-ill , an angry and waspish fellow, and of a fierce countenance against sin. These three euer keepe together, so as Sinne cannot so cunningly enter, but they can as quickly espie him, and as speedily pursue him, and put him to flight. The place where these are set Watch-men is called Soules-towne ,    [ The Towne.  ] a towne of great resort, a thorowfare, neuer without ill motions; the Trauellers,   [   Trauellers.  ] day and night,   [ Posts.  ] and the Posts which are Satans suggestions, euer and anon passe thorow, and many at the Common Inne,   [   The Inne.  ] the Heart take vp their lodgings. This Towne is very spacious and large, for besides many Back-sides, By-lanes , and Out-corners , there are foure great streets:    [   Streets.  ] Sense-street, Thought- street, Word-street and Deed-street ; in some of which this lewd companion Sinne, and his Cope-mates will be found wandering. When the Watch is set , they haue a Charge giuen them by one in Authoritie,    [   Charge.  ] which is this, Keepe thy Soule diligently :  15 and withall to haue a watchfull eye to the Inne, and to take heed least at any time there be an heart of infidelitie to depart from the liuing God :  16 commaunding also the Watch-men to exhort one another daily, least their hearts be hardened with the deceitfulnesse of sinne . These Watch-men haue also a Watch-word giuen them,    [   Watch-word. ] euen a word of preuenting Grace ; saying to them, This is the Way , 17 , Walke in it, when they are turning to the right hand or to the left . To this Watch-word, Godly-Ielosie with his Associates doe diligently attend, keeping carefully the watch, so as the Thiefe is descried,  & presently they make Hue and Crye after him. This Hue and Crie is written by the Bible-clarke ,    [   Hue & Cry. ] and containeth infallible markes to discouer sinne, whereby it may be certainly knowne;   [   How to know sinne.  ] and they are these: 1\. By the Law of the ten Commandements : for by it commeth the knowledge of sinne:  18 for euery failing in that which is commanded, and euery thought, word,  & deed against that which is forbidden, is sin. 2\. By euery exhortation to vertue, and euery dehortation from vice: being appendices to the Commandements, shewing what we ought to doe, and what ought to be shunned and auoided of vs. 3\. By euery Threatning 19 which is the word of Gods displeasure for Sinne 4\. By punishments inflicted ,  20 which is certainly Gods hand for Sinne; for were he not prouoked by Sinne, hee would not afflict vs. 5\. By the humble confession of such as haue acknowledged their Sinnes in particular.  21 6\. By plaine accusations laying Sinnes to mens charge,  22 Isai. 59\. 3.  &c. 7\. By reproofes & checks for Sinne,  23 2\. Chron. 19\. 2. 8\. By Places numbring vp Sinnes by name in sundry Scriptures, Rom. 1\. 29, 30, 31, 32. 1. Tim. 1\. 9, 10. 2. Tim. 3\. 2, & c. 1\. Cor. 5\. 11. Gal. 5\. 19, 20, 21. Reu. 21\. 8. Pro. 11\. 1. Mich. 6\. 11. 9\. By the description of Sinne , shewing what it is, as in, 1. Io. 3, 4. & 5\. 17. Rom. 14\. 23. Pro. 21\. 4. & 24\. 9. & 14\. 21. 10\. By the Description of godly men negatiuely , by such things as they ought to auoide, as in Psal. 1\. 1. & 15\. 3, 5. & 24\. 4. Ezek. 18\. 6.8. Isa. 33\. 15. Psal. 101\. 3. & 16.4. Lastly, by the Description of wicked men , by their bad qualities and conditions, Psal. 10, 2. 11. & 12\. 2.4. & 57\. 21. The Hue and Crie thus set out,    [   Who carieth the Hue & Crie. ] it is caried by the Spirit of Supplication , crying mightily to the Lord for grace  & mercy to help in time of neede, as Dauid did: who saw Sinne before him and then made hee Hue and Crie, saying: Haue mercy vpon mee ,  24 O Lord, according to thy louing kindnesse, according to the multitude of thy mercie doe away all mine offences . This Hue and Cry must not be let slip at any hand, but be carried along in the pursuite, least in following of Sin, men be deceiued, and solide Vertues bee attached instead of Vices. For this wee must knowe, as Vices haue not a fewe friends, as after shall bee shewed; so Vertues haue many Enemies readie to informe against them, that they may be pursued after as Malefactors, that Sinne in the meane while may seeke shelter and escape; and the enemies are these:   [   Virtues Enemies.  ] 1\. One M r . Outside ,    [   1\. Outside.  ] in the inside a Carnall Securitan, a fellow that will come to his Church, keep his Sun-dayes and Holy-dayes. But yet in the Congregation while he sitteth amongst others, sometimes he is nodding, and sometimes fast a sleep; and if he abide waking, then is his mind wadring abroad, so as he remaineth still ignorant, without any effectual power of the Word; and beeing out of the Church he is presently vpon his worldly businesse. This fellow cannot abide any after meditation, or Christian Conference with others of that which he hath heard; and if hee espie any meeting together for this purpose, then he maketh information against them, and is readie to send the Hue and Crie, as against a priuy Schismaticall conuenticling & vnlawfull meeting. This is a vulgar Ignoramus , and a blockish Aduersarie. 2\. The Second is,    [   2\. Wicked worldly-wise.  ] Sir Worldly-wise , a very foole to God, a selfe-conceited earth-worme, whose wisdome is from belowe, and therefore sensuall ,  25 earthly , and diuelish , who proudly with much disdaine condemneth and contemneth the wisdom which is from aboue, pure  & peaceable, sincere and charitable; and is readie to send the Hue and Crie after it, as after foolish and doting Simplicitie. 3\. The third is,   [   3\. Luke-warme.  ] S r . Luke-warm , this fellow is a temporizing time seruer, Iack on both sides, hee is all in the praise of moderation and discretion, one verie indifferent between this  & that: Hee cannot endure seruent zeale; but would haue Hue and Crie sent against it, as against a fiery mad-brain'd rashaes. 4\. The Fourth is,   [   4\. Plausible Ciuill.  ] S r . Plausible Ciuill , a fashionable fellow framed to a commedable outward behauiour for ciuility, but in matter of Religion he hath no more but what he hath by common education, custome and example of others. To the life of Religion he is a stranger: strickt seruing of God,  & a more narrow search of our waies he holds to be foolish scrupulositie, and is desirous to haue the Hue and Crie sent out against it, as against phantasticall precisnesse. 5\. The Fift is,   [   5\. Machiauel.  ] M r . Machiauell , a mischeiuous Companion: all for pollicie, little for pietie, & then in pretence only: He is a very Iehu , zealous against Baal , to roote out Ahabs posterity; for the more sure setling of the Kingdome to him and his: but in state Idolatry, a very Ieraboam , to keepe the kingdome from being reunited to Iudah . He cannot suffer gaineful abuses to be reformed: but if any attempt any such thing; he accuseth them for factious turbulent spirits,  & so would he haue the Hue and Crie made against their endeuours as against some Puritanicall tricke. 6\. The sixt is, one Libertine , this licentious fellow hath a Chiuerell conscience,    [   6\. Libertine.  ] caring for nothing but how to passe on along his life in pleasurable contentments. Religion by him is held to be but a deuised Policy to keepe men in awe of a Deity; and therefore when hee seeth Religion to be made conscience of, hee presently causeth Hue and Crie to bee made against it, as against Hypocrisie. This prophane enemy laugheth at, and mocketh Christianity. 7\. The seuenth is,   [   7\. Scrupulositie.  ] Scrupulositie : this is an vnsociable and a snappish fellow, he maketh sins to himself more then the law condeneth  & liueth vpon fault finding. Weaker Apprehesion is his Father ,  & Mis-understanding his Mother ,  & an Vncharitable hart his nurse . The vse of Christian liberty if it be more in his conceipt then hee pleaseth to like well of, then would he haue the Hue  & Crie sent against it as against Carnal security . This is a ridged  & censorious Aduersarie. 8\. The eight is the Babling Babilonian :    [   8\. Babilonian.  ] this is a doating companion, and superstitiously foolish: he boasteth of Antiquity , though his waies bee Nouelty: yet hee will haue it the Old Religion , and if any forsake it as Idolatry, those he condemneth for Schismaticks , and labours to haue the Hue and Crie sent out against all Reformation in Christian Churches as against Heresie . This is a bloudy Antichristian Aduersarie. These are the principall Informers (for I passe by petty companions) which endeuour to misleade the pursuer of sinne, and to set him to attach very eminent and excellent Vertues for Vices. Therefore it is necessary to haue Sinne set out by markes infallible in the Hue and Crie: else this subtill Villaine Sinne will craftily beguile the pursuer, and will escape either by the shiftes which he canne make to deceiue him, or by his many friends he hath to keepe him from being apprehended. The shifts which comonly a thiefe maketh to escape in his flying away,   [ Shifts to escape.  ] are two. 1\. Is his Counterfeiting the habit of an honest man : so Sinne craftily putteth vpon himselfe the shew of Vertue as Iehu did peace,    [   A shew of vertue.  ] for the getting of a Kingdome, and establishing of it to himselfe; whose sinne was couered with a pretended and hypocriticall zeale for the Lord. Ananias and Saphira made shew of liberality like that of Barnabas , not discernable till Peter discouered it. For as Satan can transforme himselfe into an Angell of light, and his Apostles into the Apostles of Christ:  26 so canne Sinne, the seede of Satan, put vpon it selfe the counterfeit of virtue. [   The name of vertue.  ] 2\. A Thiefe will alter his name, and by assuming the name of an honest man oftentimes escapes away; and after this manner also escapeth sinne, Vice getting vpon it the name of Vertue. And so Drunkennesse escapeth vnder the name of goodfellowship; couetousnes vnder the name of Good-husbandry; Filthy Ribaldry , vnder the name of Merimet; Pride of apparell , vnder the name of Decencie and Handsomenes; bloudy Reuenge for wrongs offered, escapeth vnder the name of Valour. Foolish Wastfulnes , vnder the name of a franke and liberall disposition ; Superstition vnder the name of Deuotion of Fore-Fathers and the old Religion. Remisnesse , in punishing Gentlenes; Flatterie , vnder the name of Vnoffensiuenes; Luke-warmnesse in Religion vnder the praise of Discretion , and many such like foule Vices, doe thus deceitfully hide themselues and so escape vnattached. If by these his shifts hee cannot escape Godly-iealousie , that constant pursuer, the wil he seek to be holpen by his kindred and friends; for sin hath many, who wil either so defend him,    [   Friends of sinne.  ] or excuse him, or deny him, or hide him, or make him so little in fault, as will almost perswade godly iealousie, that it is euen needlesse so eagerly to pursue after him. 1\. The first of these is his Grandsire-Ignorance ; for he knowes no sinne, sin and bringeth him vp  & maketh no conscience of it: if sin get into his house, he holds himselfe safe enough. 2\. The second his brother Error , the sonne of Ignorance;    [   2 Error.  ] this fellow mistaketh all, and misconstrueth the whole Hue and Crie, and canne finde no fault with sin, and so endeuoureth to send the pursuer another way. 3\. The third is his Cousin Opinion ,    [   3\. Opinion.  ] and this will hold the pursuer with a long and tedious disputation, questioning the Act, whither it bee a sinne or no? And will endeauour by probabilities to make it no sinne, that so he might make the pursuer to desist. Thus sinnes of profit and such as may preuent certaine dangers are disputed, Pro & Con , as mensay, The sinne of Vsurie by many is brought vnder Opinion, as lawfull some way. So the Sinne of Idolatry to goe and heare a Masse without inward reuerence, as it was disputed in Queene Maries daies, to preuent the eminent danger of death then; Many sins euident enough are made disputable, if they yeeld profit, or be delightsome to the flesh, or such as may helpe to keepe a mans person or state in safetie; for all these Opinion wil be a Proctour. 4\. The fourth is,    [   4\. Subtilty.  ] one M r . Subtiltie , his wit being attended on by little Conscience of the Truth. This man commeth with his distinctions to cleere an Act from sinne; thus with his latria, & doulia he wil haue Idolatry no Idolatry: so with his biting and not biting, and lending to the rich vpon Vse, but not to a needie brother, damned Vsurie must bee no sinne. This Subtilty of wit with a chiuerell Conscience maketh fowle sinnes to passe along as no sinnes. 5\. The fift is called Custome ;    [   5\. Custome.  ] 27 this old Syre patronizeth many vaine and sinfull practises. By this the Iewes held it no sinne in them to demand, and in Pilate to let loose to them, a wicked Barrabas ,  28 one worthy to die for insurrection and murther. 6\. The sixt is a Popish fellow called Fore-Fathers :    [   6\. Fore- Fathers.  ] he aduanceth his Auncestors and their worth, and thinketh so well of them, that to imitate them is no sinne.  29 Thus the Samaritans iustified their false worship. 7\. The seuenth is one Sir Power ;    [   7\. Power.  ] he maketh euer that warrantable which Law establisheth, ordaineth, and decreeth. Great and capitall sinnes in the Romish Synagogue are thus countenanced. 8\. The eight is Sir Sampler ,    [   8\. Sampler.  ] who produceth for patternes great mens and learned mens examples, as if they could not doe a misse:  30 but whatsoeuer they doe or say, it must be good and lawfull, and therefore imitable without sinne. 9\. The ninth is Sir Most-doe ,    [   9\. Most-doe.  ] who maintaineth sinne from a generall practise, because multitudes do it heere and there & euery where; and therefore no sinne to doe such a thing which almost all or the greatest part doe. 10\. The tenth is one Sir Sillie ,    [   10\. Sillie.  ] one made all of good meaning, who will qualifie the fact by thinking no harme or intending well. Thus would Saul haue iustified his rebellion,  31 and Abimelech excused his taking of Abrahams wife.  32 And thus vaine persons excuse there wanton communication, laciuious songs, foolish ieastings,  & such like, saying, they meane no harme, they only make themselues merry. Thus Sir Sillie is hee that maketh simple soules pleade good meaning, for al their foolish superstitios, blinde deuotions, and licentious merriments. The eleuenth is Vaine-Hope :    [   11\. Vaine-hope.  ] this teacheth to put off the fault to some other, as Adam to Euah ,  33 and Euah to the Serpent, and to denie the fact as Caine did euen to God himselfe, heereby hoping to shift off sinne, and to escape punishment, who maketh God all of mercy. The twelfth is the Lord Presumption :    [   12\. Presumption.  ] he feareth not iudgemet, he blesseth himselfe in his euill waies, hee maketh a couenant with death, and a league with Hell,  34 and suffers sinne to bee his daily guest, and wil let the Hue and Crie passe along without any feare of perill,  35 as nothing at al concerning him. The thirteenth is Sir Wilfull ,    [   13\. Wilfull.  ] hating to be reformed: this is an obstinate friend for sinne; who will wilfully defend it, and bee carelesse of all reproofes. This fellow in contempt will tread downe the Hue and Crie vnder his feete, and maintaine sinne. The fourteenth is Sir S  t . Like ,    [   14\. S t . Like .   ] which vnder the shew and shadow of Piety, aud pretended honesty wil couer much iniquity, and hide it for a time that it bee not taken by the pursuer with the Hue and Crie , such were the Hypocriticall Scribes and Pharisees. These great ones and many other moe are the friends of this Thiefe and Rebell: but yet for all these Fauourites godly ielousie espies him out, and his harbour, and presently goeth to a Iustice of Peace to procure a warrant for the Constable to attach him, and all his companions with him. The Iustice is not one of a meane ranke or any pettie Iustice, but the very Lord Chiefe Iustice of heauen and earth,    [   Lord Chiefe Iustice. ] the Lord Iesus: For it is hee that can giue the warrant to attach sinne, no other warrant will sinne obey. The Warrant is the Power of Gods Word.   [   Warrant.  ] The Forme of which warrant is, (as you see in my Text) to search out and attach sinne, with all his Associates and to bring him and them before Authority to answer to such things as shall be obiected against them, in his Maiestie the King of Heauens behalfe. The procuring of this Warrant, is by going vnto, and conferring with some of the Lord Chiefe Iustices Secretaries ,    [   Secretaries.  ] the Writers of holy Scripture, setting downe this charge as Ieremie doth heere, to search and trie our waies . This Warrant procured, Godly Ielousie taketh and carrieth to an Officer which hath Authority to make search and attach sinne. This Officer without which sin neither can not indeed will be attached,   [ Vnderstanding.  ] is Vnderstanding who knoweth what sinne is. Now as there be fower sorts of Officers which may attach Fellons by Warrant. The Deputie Constable, the Tithingman, The Pettie Constable , and the Head Constable : so is the spirituall Officer fourefold. 1\. The Deputie Constable is commonly some Neighbour,    [   1\. Deputie Constable.  ] intreated to performe the office in the others absence: this is the very shadow of a Constable, and will not willingly intermeddle in any thing: so as the people where hee dwells, may doe for al him, what they list. This Deputie Constable in this spirituall Towne-ship is the Vnderstanding darkened ,    [ Vnderstanding darkened.  ] the sonne of Ignorance and grandchilde of Blindnesse of Heart: 36 this is a blinde Constable, and hath neuer an eye to see with. This suffers all disorder in the whole man or Soule-Towne-ship .  37 Heere be such as bee alienated from the life of God, past feeling, giuen ouer to worke all vncleannes with greedinesse. All the affections are quite out of order, and no care taken for their reformation: for this foolish fellow imployeth himselfe about his grounds, cattell, sheepe and oxen, about buying and selling; as for the estate of his soule, he is to it a very stranger: He knowes the price of corne, oxen, and sheepe: but what is the excellencie of Vertue, what the euill of Vice, what the price of his soule, hee neither knowes nor cares to know. 2\. The Tithingman which commonly is a meane fellow,    [   2\. Tithingman.  ] and soe contemptible, as few or none care for him. And therefore heereupon is very little or no reformation where hee hath his dwelling. If any amendment be sought, it is onely of some notorious shameful misdemenors and hee must bee much called vpon for this too, else no reformation thereof; and as for many other offences there is no care had at all. This Tithingman is Grosse---Vnderstanding ,    [   Grosse-vnderstanding ] like one purblinde who cannot see a farre off, but onely grosse transgressions forbidden in the Law,  38 according to the sound of the bare letter onely; as Theft, Murther, Adultery and so forth. The spirituall meaning and large extent of the Commandement; he is wholly ignorant of. This purblinde Tythingman suffers a number of disorders in his Towne-ship, and must be much vrged to see very grosse and foule misdemeanours; else will hee not seeke to reforme them. 3\. The Pettie Constable which is some ciuill honest man of the Parish, but yet is an one-eyed fellow, halfe sighted, and so passeth by many faults. This Pettie Constable   [   Vnderstanding somewhat cleered.  ] is the Vnderstanding somewhat cleered : hee hath an insight into the Morall Law, who by ciuill education, some art and learning,  & an outward forme of Religion, and reading in the Bible now and then, can speake of the Gospell Historically, and prettily discourse of Religion. But this his knowledge is onely superficiall, for neither in the Common-Law which is the Law Morall, neither in the Statute Law, the Law of the Gospel or Law of Libertie is hee any professed Studient . He is no Innes-of-Court man, neuer brought vp in the Inner Temple . He maketh neither the Common nor Statute Law his profession. As he is no Student in these; so is he no practitioner but only aymeth at ciuill behauiour, common honestie, and careth to be held onely a Christian at large, and to professe the Religion of the present state, without any more curious endeuour to proceede farther to finde out the power of Religion. Therefore where this kinde of vnderstanding dwelleth there care is had onely to see to discord; and against ciuill honestie and common morall duties, and against courses apparantly dangerous to his outward estate; and those things which may offend the most or the greatest sort amongst men. This halfe- sighted Constable, superficial fellow in diuine truth aymeth at no more. The sinnes immediately against God and against his Gospell, as vnbeliefe, impatience, pride, disdaine, enuie at other mens guifts, presumption of Gods mercie, abuse of his fauours and many such he taketh no notice of, but permitteth them to liue where he hath to do without controule. 4\. The Head or chiefe Constable is a man of a right and good vnderstanding, belonging with care and conscience to discharge the same: for hee is studious in both lawes, and a good practitioner therein. This Chiefe Constable is Illuminated vnderstanding :    [   Illuminated vnderstanding.  ] this is one, that hath both his eyes to see with, of nature and of grace, hee is well read both in the Common Law, the Law Morall, and the Statute Law, the law of liberty, the Gospell of Christ, he hath beene a long Practitioner in both, and is called the spirituall man who can discerne  & iudge of al things.  39 The place of his common abode and dwelling is in Regeneration ,    [ His habitation is Regeneration.  ] a very healthfull, comfortable & commodious habitation. Hee is no scragler, but loueth to keepe home and to looke to his office. Hee hath an excellent Familie,   [   His Family.  ] his Wife is called Grace ; his two sonnes, Will , and Obedience ; his three daughters Faith, Hope , and Charitie ; his two seruants, Humility and Selfe-denyall ; and his two maides, Temperance for his Summer-house of Prosperity, and Patience for his Winter-house of aduersitie. This Chiefe Constable where he dwells, keepeth very good order, he suffereth not the rebell sinne to rule and swagger in the Towne-ship of his soule. If Drunkennes, as once in Noah , or Adultery, as once in Dauid , or Pride of heart, as once in Hezekiah , or Enuie, as once in Miriam , or such like happen to bee found where hee hath to doe, he speedily sendeth them packing. For though they may at vnawares perhaps creepe in and bee found where he dwelleth, in some Streete of his Towne, yet they get there no abiding place. Though he cannot euer and at all times preuent their creeping in, yet hee alwaies taketh care that they settle not themselues where hee hath to doe, but will dislodge them wheresoeuer he shall finde them, for he is very carefull in his office, to discharge it to the vtmost. This Chiefe Constable is he to whom Godly-Ielousie bringeth his Warrant to seeke out the rebell Sinne and to attach him. This Constable hauing receiued the warrant, presently addresseth himselfe to make the search. But for that sinne is Masterfull (especially euery capitall Sin, which is attended on by many other) and will not easily submit, but dare make opposition against authority, till he bee ouermastered; therefore this man taketh with him sufficient companie, to watch sinne for escaping, to goe very strongly to attach him,  & to hold him when they haue him, so as neuer a friend may dare to side with him. First he taketh his owne two seruants,   [   Aydants. 2 Seruants.  ] Humility ,  & Selfe-deniall , which euer in euery search necessairly attend him. [   2\. Neighbour.  ] Then going together hee calleth vpon his next neigbour;   [   Godly Sorrow.  ] Godly sorrow with his seuen sons ready to beare them Companie,    [   7\. Sonnes.  ] 2 Cor. 7 11. The first of these is Care to finde out sinne that it may not be hid.    [ 1\. Care.  ] The second is Clearing ,    [   2\. Clearing.  ] which, when hee espieth sinne, will not winke thereat, nor partake with it. The third is Indignation ,    [   3\. Indignation.  ] a fierce fellow which can neuer looke vpon any sin, but with a godly anger. The fourth is Feare , not naturall or dastardly feare,    [   4\. Feare. ] nor seruile feare, all too base minded to attach sin, but such a feare as maketh him to stand in awe of God, reiecting all fellowship with the wicked and partakers with sinne. The fift is Vehement desire to apprehend sinne,    [   5\. Vehemet desire.  ] to be in Gods fauour, in loue with the godly and free from his own corruptions. This is a stirring fellow. The sixt is Zeale ,    [   6\. Zeale.  ] who dare seaze vpon euen the most Capitall Rebell, for he is like to Phinees , ready to thrust him thorow, and to kill him wheresoeuer he findeth him. The seuenth is Reuenge ,    [   7\. Reuenge.  ] who answereth to his name; for hee desireth to pay sinne home for the wrong he hath done him, and would haue him proceeded against to the vttermost. This fellow lustily layeth hold on sinne, and bindeth him at the Chiefe Constables command to leade him away. These are able to take prisoner the sturdiest Rogue, the stoutest Rebel, & strongest Thiefe. What Sinne in the soules is it, which this Chiefe Constable with his men, his neighbour, Godly Sorrow and his seuen sonnes cannot ouermaster, and leade by Gods grace Captiue and make it the Kings Prisoner. As the Constable goeth with these his many neighbours,   [   A couple of busie fellowes.  ] and with his owne seruants to the number of tenne besides himselfe, a couple of busie fellowes vncalled, thrust in themselues to increase the number. The one of these is Selfe-loue a pestilent fellow,    [   1\. Selfeloue. ] for hee not onely can hinder the Constables diligence in taking paines to search, but in searching to be too partiall and ouer respectiue to himselfe, if the sinnes sought after bee either pleasurable or profitable: but also withall, hee can dull the spirit of godly sorrow, and doe his seuen sons very great mischiefe, as by their confessions afterward it doth appeare. Therefore when the Constable Vnderstanding espieth him, hee commandeth forthwith his seruant Selfe-deniall to put him out of the company for hindering the search. The other is Selfe-conceit ;    [   2\. Selfe conceipt.  ] The former lewd companion disordereth all the affections: this blindeth iudgement, by the ouerweening of a mans selfe, and will picke the warrant out of the Constables pocket, and will blow out the candle-light which is in the Constables hand, if hee bee not preuented. This wretched fellow of all wise men is held a foole, for the way of the foole is wise in his owne eyes and there is more hope of a foole then of him that is wise in his owne conceit ,  40 and therefore are wee dehorted, from being wise in our owne eyes, or leaning to our owne wisedome , and a woe is pronounced against such:  41 yet is the foole a very dangerous foole, and a knaue too; hee will so deceiue by flattery. Hee will make a man beleeue his waies to be cleere in his own eyes, when the end thereof is death .  42 Yea can beguile a generation of men, & make them to thinke themselues pure in their owne eyes and sight ,  43 and yet are not washed from their filthinesse . Such a conceited foole was the Laodicean Angell.  44 The Constable therfore commandeth his man Humilitie to thrust this foole and knaue out of their company before they make search for sinne: for if these be suffered to goe along with the rest, labour is but lost, sinne will neuer be found out and attached. Now when the Constable hath ridde away these two troublesome companions (for they vsually goe together) then hee goeth on to the place where hee knoweth that sinne hath taken vp his lodging. The place is a Common Inne ,    [   The Inne Mistresse Hearts house. ] an Harlots house called Mistress Heart , a receptacle for all Villaines, Whores, and Thiefes, and for all dishonest persons whatsoeuer, none denied house-roome or harbour there. And that shee is such a dishonest woman is cleere and euident as in her arraignement shall be fully proued. But to couer her naughtinesse as much as shee may, shee hath gotten into her house one called Oldman ,    [   Oldman.  ] corrupted by her deceitfull lusts,  45 to become her husband, when indeede shee is his owne daughter, and so liue they in incest together, & keepe rout and ryot night and day. If any honest Traueller (a good and godly motion) happen sometimes to fall in there vnawares, hee is straightway denied entertainement. Her answer is by and by, that her lodgings are taken vp for other manner of men, there is no roome for any such troublesome guests as these bee: none can bee merry for them where they come, hindering all good fellowship. The house which this Harlatry dwelleth in hath many in-letts,   [   Fiue doores  ] Fiue doores open for their guests to come in at. These fiue doores are the fiue senses. The first is the doore of Hearing :    [   1\. Hearing.  ] the first that euer was open to let in sin, as, wee may learne in the Serpents beginning to tempt Euah .  46 At this doore, entereth in Lying, Slandering, Backbiting, filchy Communication, Flattery, Swearing, Error, Heresie, False-doctrine, Tale- bearing, Blasphemie, and with these enter also ill Opinions of one another, vncharitable iudging, Ill suspition, rash credulity, and many other sinnes caused and committed by the tongue through want of wisedome and charity. The second is the doore of Seeing at this enter in the lusts of the eye: Adultery, Couetousnes, Desire, of Naboths Vineyard. The marriage of the Sonnes of God with the daughters of men:  48 Achans Theft, who saw a wedge of gold, and desired it, and tooke it:  49 many are the sinnes which enter in by this doore, through want of Chastity and Contentment. The third is the doore of Tasting ;    [   3\. Tasting.  ] at this enter in Ryot, Gluttony, Drunkennesse, Reuellings, and the fruites there of Chambering and Wantonnesse, Prodigality, Quarreling and Fighting: and many other cursed effects of seeking to satisfie the appetite:  50 which the godly man auoideth, and also the very occasion thereof by Sobriety and Temperance. The fourth is the doore of Smelling ;    [   4\. Smelling.  ] at this enter in foolish Niceties,  51 Perfumings and other allurements to dalliance, Effeminatenes and such like. The fift is the doore of Feeling:   [   5\. Feeling.  ] at this doore entereth Wantonnesse,  52 Laciuiousnes & other fruites of the flesh. These be the doores by which all sinne ordinarily entereth into the Heart, except Originall sin bred within, and brought from the wombe; as also Satans immediate suggestions suddenly cast into the Heart. When sinnes enter in, at any of these doores, they first come into the Halle where attendeth Common sense to welcome them.    [   Halle attedant common sense.  ] Then they goe into a Parlour ,    [   Parlour atted Fatasie.  ] a more inner roome, and there stayeth Fantasie to entertaine them. After this they ascend into an vpper Chamber and are there receiued of Intelligence ,    [   Chamber.  ]   [   Intelligence  ] who presently acquainteth Mistresse Heart the Mistresse of the house with it, which is in her Dyning-roome ,    [ Dyning-roome.  ] what are the company and number of her guests came in: For this Hostesse is a stately Dame, and is not to bee spoken with by and by. Thus as you haue heard are her guests entertained and brought in vnto her. With her are eleuen Daughters attending her as Maides,   [   Hearts Maides.  ] lewd Strumpets, and as impudent Harlots as her selfe. These eleuen waiting Maides,   [   11\. Passions  ] are the eleuen passions of the Heart, corrupt, disorderly and immoderate wantons, which bee these. The first is Loue ,    [   1\. Loue.  ] set all on pleasures, profits, honours, and wholly vpon worldly and fleshly Vanities; contrary to that in 1 Ioh. 2\. 15. Loue not the world, nor the things that are in the world . The second is Hatred ,    [   2\. Hatred.  ] which is contrary to Loue , setting it self against Gods Word, good men  & good things, a mischeiuous maid euer setting one another at odds, and disquieting often the whole house and the rable of guests. The third is Desire ,    [   3\. Desire.  ] neuer content, but would haue sometimes this, and then that, now heere, now there, neuer resting, neuer satisfied with either riches, or honours, or variety of pleasures. The fourth is Detestation ,    [   4\. Detestation.  ] contrary to desire which loatheth and cannot endure good counsell, good company, godly conference, much lesse reproofe or any opposition in her waies The fift is Vaine-hope ,    [   5\. Vaine-hope.  ] which possessing the Heart maketh it foolishly presumptuous. The sixt is Despaire ,    [   6\. Despaire.  ] contrary to Hope, which causeth actes against reason, against nature sometimes: as it did in Achitophel , in Saul , in Zimri , in Iudas who killed themselues. It also maketh men runne into dissolute and rebelious courses,  53 euen to walke wilfully or in euill, as being without hope. The seuenth is,   [   7\. Feare.  ] Feare , which passion doth so slauishly captiuate the minde, as it will make a man forget his dutie to God, so as he may escape danger with men, as it did Peter , and Pilate . The eight is Audacity ,    [   8\. Audacity  ] contrary to Feare, which maketh a man foole-hardy, without deliberation to thrust himselfe into imminent dangers as it did the Israelites.  54 The ninth is Ioy ,    [   9\. Ioy.  ] which cheereth a man when hee hath that which he delighteth in, be it neuer so ill, as it did the Inhabitants of the earth at the destruction of the two Prophets.  55 The tenth is Sorrow ,    [   10\. Sorrow.  ] contrarie to Ioy , which afflicteth the soule, causing weeping and wailing, lamentation and mourning, often with an outcry as in the land of Egypt.  56 The eleuenth is Anger ,    [   11\. Anger.  ] which commeth vpon a man not onely for apparant iniurie as on Dauid against Nabal but vpon imagined wrongs,  57 as on Haman against Mordecai, Naaman against Elisha , and Ahab against Michaiah . There is no Passion contrary to this: for though quietnesse bee contrary to Anger, yet its no passion: therefore there are but eleuen as Thomas Aquinas reckons them.    [   In his Sums.  ] Besides these attending very diligently on Mistress Heart,   [   Man- seruant.  ] shee hath a man seruant called Will .    [   Will.  ] This Will hath three at command vnder him, the Feete, the Hand, the Tongue, like the Hosteler, Tapster, and Chamberlaine. All these are at Mistresse Hearts and her Maides commands. If Loue in a Maide affect a young man,    [   Loue.  ] though all her friends bee against it: yet marke how shee sets Will on worke for her. I Will haue him (saith shee) though I neuer haue good day with him. Will heere must make the match against all gaine-saying. Iudah he lusted after one hee saw in the way (not knowing it to bee Tamar) Will must heere make the filthy bargaine.  58 What saith shee, Wilt thou giue me? I Will , saith hee, giue thee a Kid. As Loue sets Will a work, so doth Hatred ,    [   Hatred.  ] as we may see in Esau ,  59 I Will kill my Brother Iacob . So doth Desire ,  60 as in Adoniah , who said,  61 I Will be King. In Gehezi , greedy of gaine. I Will runne after him: Will heere made the feete to runne, the tongue to speake, the hands to receiue. So in Iudas to betray Christ, Will must doe it. What Will you giue me?  62 And I Will deliuer him, deliuer him into your hands? Thus to these and all other Passions, this Will is made a packehorse, a slaue, and without him they can doe nothing. Will is the man that must euer doe the deede for euery Passion, though they bee contrary one to another: miserable is his seruice, that must be commanded by so many Mistresses, and so disagreeing among themselues one from another. When the Heart hath entertained her guests thus as you haue heard,    [ Prouision.  ] and receiued them into her Dyning-roome , prouision is presently made for them, yea shee hath it euer readie for them, as neuer being without manie guests. The Table is spread which all must sit at,    [   Table Instability. ] and this Table is Instabilitie : for inconstant are the thoughts of the whorish Heart. The Table therefore is not square, but round, turning about both for more company, and also that her guests may take their places euery one of them as they come, without discontent. For albeit there bee degrees and differences of sinnes, yet to her they are alike welcome, one as well as another: although some at one time sit neerer to her then at another, as guests doe that sit at such a round Table. The Table-cloath that couereth it is Vanitie :    [   Table-cloth vauity.  ] for vpon Instability with such vicious guests, what can there bee but Vanity . This Salomon found in all his Inuentions, Eccles. 1. The Bread set on the Table is the Fitnesse of euery Sins proper obiect , without bread. The Salt ,    [   Salte.  ] which seasoneth sins appetite to feede it selfe, is Oportunitie , for time, for place, for person; this sharpeneth sinne to be working, as the apetite to receiue food, when it is well seasoned. The Trenchers ,    [   Trenchers.  ] to eate on are Strength of euerie mans Nature to act Sinne. The Napkins ,    [   Napkins.  ] to make cleane their hands and mouth in eating are the pretended shewes of Vertue, contrarie to these Vices, by some good workes (so they wipe their mouthes, as the Harlot in the Prouerbes) and by some good deede of either one kinde or other outwardly done, and thus they wipe cleane their fingers, and will not be thought to bee the vncleane persons which they are taken for. The Dishes of Meate set before them are onely three.    [   Dishes of meate.  ] The first is the Lusts of the Flesh & this is serued vp   [   1\. Flesh. ] in the Plate of Plasure . Of this Dish feedeth hartily Adultery, Fornication, Incests, and all other of the like nature. The second Dish is Lust of the eyes ,    [   2\. Eyes.  ] and this is serued vp in the Platter of Profit . Hereon feedeth Couetousnesse, Vsurie, Oppression, Bribery, Extortion, Vnhonest gaine and such like. Of one of these two Dishes doe all sinnes taste, except the sinne of Swearing, in which is lewd profannesse of Heart, but neither pleasure nor profit as in other sinnes: though by swearing vngodly men sometimes in buing and selling make gaine vniustly. The third Dish is Pride of Life ,    [   3 Pride.  ] and this is serued vp in the Charger of worldly Estimation . This is a very windy meat which puffeth vp the minde with vaine-glory of an emptie title of some honour, as a bladder is with winde, and yet is very costly feeding. On this Dish feedeth Arrogancie, Pride of spirit, Loue of Eminencie, Desire of Superiority, and Outward Reuerence and such like, for which they are made to pay well. The Drinke which they drinke to make them digest there meate is the Pleasurablenesse of sin for the present.    [   Drinke.  ] The Waiters at this Table to giue attendance that nothing be wanting are the Eleuen Maides ,    [   Waiters.  ] with Will there man. These Harlots humour their guests and are ready at a becke to giue contentment. Where Incontinencie sits, there Wanton-Loue will waite. Where Displeasure is, there Hatred will attend. Where Couetousnes is, there vnsatiable Desire will be. Where Flattery , that base-humoring disposition to get grace and fauour sitteth, there Feare to offend will stand by. Where Impatience takes his place, there Anger is ready waiting to doe his will. Where Inconsideratenesse sits, there Audacity and Foole-hardinesse will waite. Where sullen Malecontentednes sits, there Dispaire will soone giue attendance. Where Iouiality taketh his place, there Ioy will bid him welcome. Where Credulity sits, there Vaine-hope will bee. And thus they attend vpon the Table to giue their guests all content to the vtmost. [   Taking away.  ] After full feeding followes the taking away of these Dishes of Pleasure,   [   Vexation of Spirit.  ] Profit and honour. Now where Vanity was the Table-cloth , what can the taking away bee, but Vexation of Spirit as Solomon speakes:  63 for it is with these, as with guests in an Inne, all merrie and pleasant while they bee eating and drinking, till the Chamberlaine commeth to take away  & giueth them a round reckoning, and then they take to their purses with almost a deepe silence: so vnpleasing is payment on a suddaine. After Supper,   [   Lodging.  ] Mistress Heart prouideth them their Lodging. The place they lye in, is but one roome for all their guests, but it is large enough for all: the roome is Naturall Corruption .    [   Naturall corruption.  ] In this roome lyeth Mistresse Heart , all her Maides , her man Will , and all her guests together, like wilde Irish. With these eleuen Harlots lye these guests in so manie seuerall beds.   [ Seuerall Beds.  ] 1\. In the Bed of Loue ,    [   Of Loue.  ] lie Wanton thoughts, Laciuiousnesse, filthie Communication, Fornication, Adultery, Whoredome, and other sinfull vncleannesses. 2\. In the Bed of Hatred ,    [   Of Hatred.  ] doe lie Mindfulnesse of Wronges, Ill speaking, Backbiting, Slandering, Railing, Quarreling, Fighting, Reuenge, Murther, and such like. 3\. In the Bed of Desire doe lye,    [   Of Desire.  ] Couetousnesse, Theft, Oppression, Robberie, Fraud, Colonage, and such like. 4\. In the Bed of Detestatio lie want of Charitie,    [   Of Detestation.  ] dis union of Spirits, Discord, plotting of destruction, and such like. 5\. In the Bed of Vaine-hope lye violent assaies,    [   Of Vaine-hope. ] to effect what they hope for: some times neglect of lawfull meanes, presumption of mercie, abuse of Gods fauour and prophanenes. 6\. In the bedde of Despaire lyeth Male-contentednesse,    [   Of Despaire  ] Vnbeliefe, seruile Feare and such like. 7\. In the Bed of Feare doe lye Cowardlinesse,    [   Of Feare.  ] Flattery, Faint-heartednes, hypocrisie and dissimulation 8\. In the Bed of Audacitie lye these,    [   Of Audacity.  ] Headinesse, Rashnesse, Daring, desperate attempts, & such like. 9\. In the Bed of Anger doe lye,    [   Of Anger.  ] Impatiencie, Rayling, Back-biting, Quarrelling, Murther, and such like. 10\. In the Bed of Ioy lye,    [   Of Ioy.  ] Wanton delights, foolish iesting, leuity, and a world of vanitie. [   Of Sorrow.  ] 11\. In the Bed of Sorrow lye worldly griefe, Vnquietnes, murmuring, discontentednesse, and such like. Thus are these lodged in Mistresse Hearts Chamber, and there shee lyeth also with the Old-man, and Will her man. The Bed which they lye vpon is Impenitencie ,    [   The Bedde Impenitency couering.  ] and the Couerings are Hardnes-of-heart , and Carnall Security , in which they ly snorting carelesly, till the Chief- Constable come vpon them and attach them all one after another, the greater villains & the lesser thieues not sparing any: Hee feareth not to attach the Capitall, neither passeth he by any of their meanest associates. The attaching of sinne is nothing else but the Apprehension of Gods wrath , Law and our guiltines of the breach thereof. For in this spirituall attaching it is, as in the attaching of Fellons, who knowing themselues guilty of the breach of the Lawes, are stroken with feare, in their apprehension, of death which they know they cannot escape. These Theefes thus apprehended, the Constable carryeth them to the next Iustice by authority of his Warrant. The Iustice is Well-informed Iudgement able to examine euery Malefactor that is,    [   Iustice is Well-informed Iudgement.  ] euery sin, brought before him. A lustice of Peace must bee a man of Wisedome and experience:   [   What a one a Iustice should be.  ] so this spirituall Iustice must bee a Iudgement well-informed, in wisedome and discretion wisely to proceede against sin. It is meete that a Iustice be learned in the lawes to know how to proceede legally: so must this spirituall Iustice be learned both in the Law and Gospell, to know what sins are committed against either of them, and thereafter to proceede. A Iustice is commonly to be one in that Countrie where he is an Inhabitant: so this Iustice must be euery mans Well-informed Iudgement within himselfe, not another mans: for it is not another mans Iudgement, that can sit downe in his soule to trie and examine his heart and waies, but his owne Iudgement. For who knoweth what is in a man sauing the spirit of a man which is in him ?  64 The Iustice Office is to preserue Peace and to see the lawes obserued,    [ What his Office is.  ] and to see to the suppressing of all disorders, routes, ryots, robberies & conspiracies: also to take order for all Vagabonds, stout and sturdie Beggers; yea, to see the reformation of all vnlawfull gaming, and euery misdemeanour whatsoeuer by Law prohibited cotrary to the Peace of our Soueraigne Lord the King, and the quiet of the Weale-publike; so this spirituall Iustice his Office is to see Peace kept betweene God and himselfe; to see the Lawes of God obserued, and to see all disorders in his soule, as vagrant thoughts, sturdie resolutions, riotous behauiour, euery misdemeanour, in thought, word, and deede, forbidden by Gods Law, contrary to the Peace of a good Conscience, and the quiet of the soule; contrarie to the dignitie of a Christian, and the honour of our Soueraigne Lord, the King When a Malefactour is brought before a Iustice, the Iustice is first to examine him, then to set it downe, then to binde some ouer to prosecute against the Fellon at the Assises, and lastly in the meane space to send him to the Goale, if he be not bayleable. 1\. Hee is (as is said) to examine the party apprehended and brought before him,   [   1\. Examine.  ] and to demand his name, then to enquire after the fact and the nature of it, with the occasions, causes and degrees, with the associates, euident signes, the fruites and effects thereof; so this spirituall Iustice is to examine sinne.   [   Examine Sin.  ] 1\. To know the name and nature thereof,    [   Name and nature.  ] and to what Commandement it belongeth, so that hee may consider what Statute of God is broken. 2\. What were the Occasions offered,    [   Occasions.  ] as Dauid by looking out, saw Bethsheba washing her selfe. 3\. What were the Causes mouing thereto,    [   Causes.  ] as Enuie in the Iewes to put Christ to death, and in Caine to kill Abel . 4\. What are the Seuerall Sorts vnder one and the same Capitall Sinne:    [   Kindes.  ] as vnder Theft, Couetousnes and Cousonage; vnder Adultery, Fornication, Selfe- pollution, &c. 5\. What be the Degrees in the same Sinne;    [   Degrees.  ] as in stealing not from the rich, but from the poore: not from a stranger but from a Christian brother, from Father, and Mother: So committing vncleannesse, not onely with one of no kinne; but with one nigh in bloud; in killing not an vnknowne person, but against nature, his Father, Mother, his Wife, his Childe, himselfe. 6\. What Sinnes accompanied the same:   [   Concomitance.  ] as the making of Vriah drunke, and the murthering of him accompanied Dauids Adultery. 7\. What are the Signes thereof,    [   Signes.  ] as the rouling eye, fylthy speech, and wanton dallience are signes of Adultery: all such ornaments & vanities of which Esai speaketh are ensignes of Pride. 8\. What Fruites and effects did follow thereupon:    [   Fruites.  ] as from Will worship & Idolatry commeth ignorance of God: from this liberty to sinne; from this obstinacie; from this contempt of Gods true Worship and sincere professors thereof; and from this at last comes bloudie persecution. 2\. In Examining,   [   2\. Write the examination.  ] the Iustice is to set downe the Examination and Confession of the partie: so this spirituall Iustice after hee hath thus examined his waies, he is to set it downe: This is a Serious Consideration of al his sins and offences, and such a remembrance of them as may make a man to forsake them and to turne his feete vnto Gods Statutes, as Dauid did.  65 The Examination without his will bee in effect as nothing: this must not therefore bee at any hand omitted. 3\. The Iustice is to binde some ouer to prosecute against the Fellon,    [ 3\. Binde-ouer.  ] at the next Assises and Goale deliuery: so doth this spirituall Iustice bind ouer True Repentance to follow the Law and to giue Euidence against this Fellon Sinne ; which he is very ready to doe, for it cannot be (if a mans Iudgement bee Well-informed vpon serious examination with a carefull and considerate remembrance of all his sinnes) but that hee must needes perforce bee made to sorrow for them, and vpon true repentance pursue them to the death with a deadly hatred. 4\. The Iustice finding the offender not bayleable by Law,    [   4\. The Mittimus.  ] hee maketh his Mittimus to send him to the Goale, there to bee indurance to the next Assises: so this spirituall Iustice doeth: for hee knowes by the Law of God, that the reward of Sinne (of what kinde or degree soeuer,  66 greater or lesse,  67 though but in thought) is not baileable by any man.  68 No man is able to answer God for the least deuiation from Gods Law, for if hee continue not in all things which God commandeth he is accursed. Therefore none being sufficient to lay in baile to answer God for the sinne, 69 nor sin in it selfe baileable, hee maketh his Mittimus , and deliuereth it into the Constables hand to carry him to the Goale. The Constable you haue heard, is Illuminated Vnderstanding . The Mittimus giuen him,    [   Mittimus.  ] is the actiue power of the VVell-reformed Iudgement , forcing the exercise of the Vnderstanding against sinne to finde out remedies to keepe it vnder. The Chiefe Goaler is Master Newman ,    [   Chiefe Goaler, Master Newman.  ] placed ouer the prisoners, and made the Goale-keeper by the Shiriffe, for the prison is his,  70 and he is to answer the King for them. The Shiriffe is True Religion wrought in mans soule.    [   Shiriffe is True Religion.  ] The Vnder-Shiriffe is an Holy Resolution to performe    [   Vnder- Shiriff, Holy-Resolution.  ] what the Shiriffe commandeth, and what hee is by his Office to doe. If any Prisoner, Sinne , breake out, the Shiriffe, Religion must 'beare the blame, saying, this is your Religion. The Goale is Subiection :    [   Goale-Subiection.  ] for saith the Apostle (as if he were the Goaler) I keepe vnder , heere is the keeper; my body, heere is the prisoner; and bring it in Subiection, heere is the prison. When sin is brought vnder subiection that it doth no more raigne (as it doth in all naturall men, but not in the regenerate) then it is put in prison, but not before. Now the Chiefe Goaler Master Newman , hath with him three Vnder-Goalers to looke well to the Prisoners,    [   3\. Vnder-Goalers.  ] and all little enough, they bee so many and so exorbitantly vntruly; ready to breake prison daily, if they bee not diligently seene vnto. This Master Newmans three vnder-Goalers are his Hands, his Eyes and his Feete, without which hee can doe nothing, and they are these which are named by Saint Paul in his Epistles.  71 1\. Is Saving Knowledge .    [   1\. Knowledge.  ] This Lookes to these sorts of Prisoners: Ignorance especially wilfull, Error, Vaine opinions, Iangling Sophistrie,  72 false Doctrine, Heresies, Doctrine of diuels and such like. 2\. Is True-holines:   [   2\. Holinesse.  ] he looketh to all the transgressors of the first Table:  73 as to Atheisme, Paganisme, Iudaisme, Turcisme, vnbeliefe, desperatio, presumptio, cofidence in strength, riches, places, policie and multitude: so also to Wil-worship, Imagery meere outward seruice without the inward Papistrie, & all corruption of Gods Worship: likewise to Blasphemie, rash swearing, false swearing, cursing, idle talke of God, contempt of his Word and Workes, a Vicious life. Lastly to Sabboth breaking, neglect of publicke worship, prophannesse, persecution of the truth, and to an infinite number of other sinnes against God and True holinesse. 3\. Is Righteousnesse :    [   3\. Righteousness  ] this lookes to all the sins against the second Table, as to rebellion, disobedience, murther, malice, adultery, fornication, theft, and cousonage, to false-witnesse-bearing, to backbiting, to discontentment, and to all other transgressions many and manifold compreheded vnder these commandements. Now because these prisoners be vnrulie, if there be not a strickt hand kept ouer them: therefore least they should at vnawares breake forth to the danger of the Shiriffe Religion , the Goaler Master Newman hath Fetters, Ginnes, bolts and manacles to hold them in, and to haue them at command. And they are these. Respect vnto the Commandements of God in all our waies:    [   Boulte fetters, &c. ] Holy Meditations ; lawfull Vowes , Religious Fasting , feruent Prayer , and conscionable Practice of our Christian duties to God and man. All these are strong chaines and linkes to keepe vnder, and to fetter the body of sinne and all the fruites thereof, and to hold them in subiection, to keepe the whole man in Obedience vnto God, when they bee fastened and knocked on by the hammer of Gods Word,  74 and the effectuall power thereof. But it is not enough thus to imprison them, and to see them bolted and thus fettered, but also for him to see the Prison bee strong:   [   Prison to be seene to.  ] for the Prisons of the best Keepers that euer were, haue beene broken: Drunkennesse breake out from Noah , rash and vnaduised speeches from Moses , Idolatry from Salomon , Adultery from Dauid , cursing and false- swearing from Peter . Therefore the Goaler Master Newman must looke daily to the Prisoners and to see the prison house sure; and to doe this. 1\. Hee must see the doores which are his Senses,   [   Doores of the prison to be fast locked.  ] to be shut and to haue a care to lock vp taste (that Drunkennesse and Gluttonie breake not out) with the key of Moderation in eating and drinking. To locke vp Hearing , that credulity breake not out, with the key of trying before we trust. To locke vp Seeing , that vncleannesse breake not out, with the key of Continencie, and to barre this dore fast also with Contentation, that Couetousnesse breake not forth. 2\. In the next place he must take heede that no lewd Companions lurke about the Prison house,    [ Lewd Companions.  ] either by day or by night, least they cast in fyles to file off the boults, or picklocks to open the dores to let the Prisoners escape. These lewd Companions are the Diuel, the wicked ,  & our owne Corrupted Reason . Their files and picklockes are Suggestions from Satan,    [ Files and picklockes.  ] euill Counsell from Men, worldly and fleshly Arguments of our owne inuentions, to make no conscience of sinne, but to file off al those bolts, and to open the dores of Senses that sin may breake loose, and get out of subiection to the Goalers ouerthrow and vtter vndoing if diligent watch be not kept. 3\. Hee must see to the Walles of the Prison,   [   Walles.  ] that they bee strongly built with good stones cemented together. These are Morall Virtues and Euangelicall Graces, by which as by Walls our Sinnes and our naturall Corruptions are kept in. Though Master Newman locke and barre the dores, yet if the Walles bee weake, the Prisoners may get out. 4\. And lastly; he must looke well to the Foundation of the house that it be not vndermined. The true   [   Foundation  ] Foundation of Subiection of Sinne is the Power of the death of Christ and of his Resurrection,  75 into whom by Faith through the Operation of his Spirit, by the Word, wee are engraffed. This must not be vndermined by the Popish Doctrine of Free-will, and Abilities of our selues to ouer Master Sinne. All these things well and diligently looked vnto, the Prisoners will bee kept safe in the Goale vnder Master Newman vntill the time of the Assises. And thus much for the first part of my Text, the Searching, the Attaching, and Imprisoning of Sinne. The other part, which is the Tryall , followeth. attended on by the Shiriffe , the Iustices of the Peace, and such as necessarily are to be there, for the dispatch of such businesses, as come to bee tryed and adiudged. The Iudge comming in place, he hath his Seate or Bench , and being set, the Commission is read. The Iudge is a Iudge of Oyere and terminere in the Circuit where he is appointed to sit. The Iudgement here is absolute, without any appeale from his Sentence. The Iudge spiritually vnderstood attended vpon by Religion the Shiriffe, and the Vnder Shiriffe Resolution,    [   Iudge is Conscience.  ] is Conscience From this Iudgement is no Appeale, for he is in Gods steede, therefore must his Sentence stand and wee must submit to it. The Seate or Bench on which this Iudge sitteth is Impartiality ,    [ Bench is Impartiality  ] for Conscience well informed, will iudge in Righteousnesse and Truth without all partiality, without respect of any person. He regardeth not the rich and mighty, no Bribe can blinde him, neither doth hee pittie the person of the poore, to giue for pittie an vniust Sentence,   [   Commission, actiue power of Conscience.  ] but as the truth is, so he speaketh. The Commission is the Actiue Power of Conscience giuen of God by his Word, to condemne the nocent, or to quit the innocent, except this Commission be lost. Sometimes it is lost,    [   Commission lost.  ] as when conscience is dead , as in all ignorant persons, or seared with an hot yron, as some mens haue beene and are;  76 such as fall from the Faith and are past feeling, by reason of the blindnesse of minde, and hardnesse of heart, or else benummed , as in those that fall into some grieuous sin, as did Dauid , who lay therein vntill Nathan found the Commission and acquainted him with it,  77 when hee said, Thou art the man . If the Commission bee lost, the Power of Conscience lyeth dead, seared and benummed, then the Iudge can doe nothing till it bee found, and being found it is read openlie. The reading of this Commission before the whole Countie,   [   Reading the Commission.  ] is Euery mans experimentall Knowledge of the Power of Conscience , by which is acknowledged his Authority, to sit as Iudge ouer euery thought, word, and deed of man. The Circuit of this Iudge is his Owne Soule ,    [   Circuit.  ] he is not to sit and iudge of other mens thoughts, words or deeds, but of the thoughts, words, and deeds of that man, wherein hee is. A mans owne Conscience is Iudge of himselfe; to iudge another is out of his Circuit, neither hath he any Authority from the King of heauen to inable him so to doe. Knowledge may goe out to see and discerne of other mens waies, but Conscience keepeth euer at home, and sits within to iudge of that mans courses whose Conscience he is. Conscience onely troubles a man for his own sinnes, it cannot for another mans, but as farre forth as hee hath made them his owne, and being accessarie to them by commanding ,    [   Accessaries to sinne.  ] alluring, counselling, commending, excusing, defending or winking thereat , when he ought by his place to haue punished the same. This Iudge in this Circuite is Iudge of Oyer and terminere ;    [   Oyer and terminere.  ] He will heare before he doth iudge, and hee will truly then iudge as he heareth, for as hee is impartiall in iudging, so is he prudent and carefull to know what and whereof to giue sentence, before he doth Iudge. This is the Iudge. The Iustices of Peace in the Countie are there,    [   Iustice of Peace. ] and doe sit with the Iudge and are in Commission with him. Of these some are of the Quorum , and of better ranke, some are meaner Iustices and take their place lower. The Iustices of Peace in the Soule of better ranke are Science ,    [ Quorum.  ] Prudence , Prouidence, Sapience : the inferiors are weake Wit , common Apprehension , and some such like. These Iustices haue their Clerkes,   [   Clerkes.  ] there ready with their examinations and recognizances. Iustice Science , his Clerke is Discourse: Iustice Prudence , his Clerke is Circumspection , Iustice Prouidence , his Clerke is Diligence: Iustice Sapience , his Clerke is Experience: Iustice Weake-wit , his Clerke is Conceit: and Iustice Common-Apprehension , his Clerke is onely Sense , a couple of poore Iustices. With the Iudge and chiefe Iustices are in commission the Kings Sergeant , and the Kings Atturney . The Kings Sergeant is Diuine Reason ,    [   K. Sergent.  ] a man of deepe iudgement in the Lawes of his Soueraigne, swaying much with the Iudge. The Kings Atturney is Quicke-sightednesse ,    [   K. Atturney  ] both are excellent helpes and Assistants to search out, and to handle a cause before Iudge Conscience. For Quicke-sightednesse will soone espie an error in pleading, and Diuine Reason will inforce a iust conclusion, and so moue the Iudge to giue sentence according to equity and right. If these should bee wanting, many matters would goe amisse. There is also the Clerke of the Assises ,    [   Clerke of Assises.  ] the keeper of the Writts, that hath all the inditements. This Clerke is Memory ,    [   Memory.  ] which reteineth all those names of euery sinne, with the nature of the Offence: and what God hath in his Word written against them, and what complaintes Repentance hath made against them. Besides this Clerke there is the Clerke of the Arraignement ,    [ Clerke of the Arraignement.  ] who readeth the Inditements. This Clerke is the Tongue ,    [   Tongue.  ] making Confession of our sinnes. Lastly,   [   Cryer.  ] there is the Cryer . This is the Manifestation of the Spirit . Before the Clerke of the Arraignment readeth any Inditement, it is first framed by the Complainant .    [   Complainat.  ] This Complainant is true Repentance or godly Sorrow.    [   Repentance ] The Framing of the Inditement    [   Framing, &c. ] is the laying open of sinne as it may bee knowne and found out to bee sinne according to the true nature thereof. Moreouer, an Enquest or Grand-Iury there must be,    [   Grand-Iury  ] by whose Verdict the Offender is indicted & made a lawfull prisoner, yet is this Inditement no conuiction. What these agree vpon, is deliuered vp in writing to the Iustices. On the backe of this inditement, framed by the complainant, they write either, Ignoramus or Bella vera .    [ Ignoramus.  ] If the former, then the complaint is iudged false, the Iustices teare it in peeces, and the prisoner is not indicted. If the latter,   [   Billa vera.  ] the prisoner is indicted, the indictment read, and the prisoner brought to the tryall at the barre. This Grand-Inquest or Iurie,    [   Scriptures.  ] are the Holy men of God , whose writings are the Holy Scriptures in the Old and New Testament. By the Verdict of these, euery thought, word, and deed of man, is either freed or made a lawfull prisoner. But yet this Verdict is no lawfull conuiction of particular men, till they be rightly applyed. If they write vpon the Inditement or Bill framed, Ignoramus , that is, if the holy Scriptures of God declare it not to be a Sinne, it is no Sinne: for Where there is no Law, 78 there is no transgression . Not the complaintes of all vnder heauen, not all the Lawes of men, Decrees of Councells, the Commandements of Popes, can make that a sinne, which they write Ignoramus vpon. Therefore the Bills of inditemet framed by those false informers before mentioned, Formalitie, Worldly wisedome, Luke-warmenesse, Meere-ciuill honesty, Machiauilian Statisme, Libertinisme, Scrupulositie & Papistry , against Christian Conference, godly Sincerity true Zeale, strict Conuersation, Reformation of disorders and the rest, are false accusers, and haue vpon their complaints written by the Grand-Inquest an Ignoramus , and therefore by these worthy Iustices, Iustice Science , Iustice Prudence , Iustice Prouidence , and Iustice Sapience , are to bee torne in sunder, and Iudge Conscience not to bee troubled therewith, though all the Popes, the whole Popish Church, all Popish Counsells & all the Popishly affected Statistes in the world pleade for them, for that thought, word, or deed, is no sin, no Breach of Gods Law on which these write Ignoramus , Conscience (as is aforesaid) is not to be troubled with such Bill of complaint. But if these write Billa vera , that is, if the holy penmen haue set downe any thought, word, or deed for a sinne, not all the Popes Dispensations and Pardons, not all the subtile Distinctions of the most learned, no custome, nor any thing else whatsoeuer can acquit it from Sinne, but sinne it is, and so must it bee taken as a lawfull prisoner to bee brought to the barre, and indited and put vpon the Iury of Life and Death. The Bill being found true, then they proceed vnto the Arraignement. The Prisoners are brought forth chained together, and set to the barre before the Iudge. The Prisoners are Sins (as you haue heard before) the Old-man with Mistress Heart ,    [   Prisoner's Sinnes.  ] her Maides and Will her man. Their Bringing forth is the Manifestation thereof by the Goaler,    [ Bringing forth.  ] Master Newman , Knowledge, Holinesse and Righteousnesse. They are chained,    [   Chained.  ] for sinnes are linked together, as Adultery and Murther in Dauid ; Pride with Hatred of Mordecay , in Haman ; Couetousnesse and Treason in Iudas ; Couetousnesse, Hypocrisie, and lying in Ananias and Saphira , yea the breach of all the Commandements in the fall of Adam and Euah . They therfore are brought out chained together . The Barre is the Apprehension of Gods Wrath due for sinne.    [   The Barre.  ] After all this, when the prisoner standeth at the Barre, a Iurie for life and death is impanneled, who are for the King, and are sworne to giue in a true Verdict according to their Euidence . This Iury is a chosen Company of excellent Vertues,    [   Pettie-Iury. ] the Fruites of the Spirit deliuered in by the Shiriffe Religion to be called, and to bee of this Iury in the behalfe of the Kings Maiesty Iesvs Christ , to goe vpon the prisoners, the Fruites of the Flesh , which stand at the Barre. Their names being giuen vp they are called, as the Clarke of the Arraignement , the Tongue nameth them;    [   Called by name.  ] then the Cryer, Manifestation of the Spirit , calleth them one by one to appeare as the Clerke names them, and they are these. 1\. Call Faith, Cryer. Vous aues Faith which purgeth the Heart.  79 2\. Call Loue of God.  80 Cryer. Vous aues , Loue of God which is the keeping of the Commandements. 3\. Call Feare of God. Cryer. Vous aues Feare of God,  81 which is the beginning of Wisedome. 4\. Call Charity. Cryer. Vous aues Charity, which reioyceth in the Truth. 82 5\. Call Sincerity. Cryer.  83 Vous aues Sincerity, which makes a true Israelite in whom there is no guile. 6\. Call Vnity. Cryer. Vous aues Vnity, which maketh men to bee of one heart,  84 and is the bond of Peace. 7\. Call Patience. Cryer. Vous aues Patience, which worketh experience,  85 and by which men possesse their soules. 8\. Call Innocencie. Cryer. Vous aues Innocency, which keepeth harmelesse. 9\. Call Chastity. Cryer. Vous aues Chastity, which keepeth vndefiled. 10\. Call Equity. Cryer. Vous aues Equity, which doth right to euery man. 11\. Call Verity. Cryer. Vous aues Verity, which euer speaketh truth. 12\. Call Contentation. cryer. Vous aues cotentatio, which euer rests satisfied. Then the Clerke saith Counte. And so the Cryer saith to them, answer to your names. Then the Clerke nameth them, & the Cryer telleth or counteth them. Faith one. Loue of God two. Feare of God three. Charity fowre. Sincerity fiue. Vnity fix. Patience seuen. Innocencie eight. Chastity nine. Equity tenne Verity eleuen. Contentation twelue. Then the Cryer saith, good men and true, stand together and heare your charge. With all these Graces should the Soule of man be endued to proceede against Sinne, wee should be able to say, that we haue them by the Manifestation of Gods Spirit, and also to know their power and vertue, and distinctly to bee able to reckon them, and so wisely to esteeme them as the good and true gifts and graces of God; which haue a charge giuen them which is euery grace his proper gift, and all conioyntly haue power to discerne of any sinne, and to giue a iust Verdict thereupon. This Iurie thus called and impanneled,   [   Looke on the Prisoner.  ] are commanded to looke vpon the Prisoners at the Barre vpon whom they are to goe. This is when we oppose Vertues to Vices in our meditation, that so by the excellencie of the one, we may see the foulenesse of the other, and so come to the greater loue of Vertue, and to the more deepe hatred of Vice. This is the profitable looking of the Iurie of Vertues vpon Vices the prisoners at the Barre. The Prisoners though they stand together, yet are they to answer one by one. So Sins must distinctly one by one be arraigned, for wee cannot proceed against sin but vpon a particular knowledge thereof. A generall, and so a confused notion of sins (which yet is that which is in most men) will neuer make a man truly to see how his estate standeth with God, and so to bring sinne vnto death. The Prisoners at the sight of the Iurie and naming of them, haue leaue to challenge any of them, if they can giue good reasons against this or that man, they are put off the Iurie, and other chosen in their steed. These Prisoners seeing such a Iurie,   [   Iury Challenged.  ] presently beginne to challeng them. Vnbeliefe he cryeth out against Faith as his Enemie. Hatred of God against the Loue of God as his Enemie. Presumptuous sinning against the Feare of God as his Enemie. Cruelty against Charity as his Enemie. Hypocrisie against Sincerity as his Enemie. Discord against Vnity as his Enemie. Anger, Rage , and Murmuring against Patience as their Enemie. Murther, Fighting , and Quarreling against Innocencie as their Enemie. Wantonnes, Adultery, Fornication , and Vncleannes cry out against Chastity as their deadly Enemie. Cousenage, Theft , and Vniust dealing against honest Equity as their Enemie. Lying, Slandering and False-witnesse-bearing against Verity as their mortall Enemie. And lastly, Greedy desire, Couetousnesse , and Discontentment cry out against Contentation as their Enemie. All these together challenge the whole Iurie, crying out and saying (good my Lord) these men are not to bee of the Iurie against vs, for your Lordship knoweth very well, and none better, that they are all of them our deadly Enemies. Your Honour knoweth that euery one of them hath petitioned the Lord Chiefe Iustice very often, and importunately to binde vs all to the good behauiour, and to cast vs into prison, as wee haue beene by their meanes. They haue made Master Newman the keeper and his vnder-keepers to deale very hardly with vs. It is well knowne (my Lord) that Chastity procured Master Newman almost to famish Incontinencie to death. Good my Lord consider of vs, these are our most bloudie and cruell enemies, we appeale to your Lordship, to God and to all good men that know both them and vs, that it is so. Our humble suite to your Lordship therefore is, that more indifferent persons may be chosen to goe vpon vs, else we are all but dead men. Wee doe know (my Lord) that there are heere many other of very good and great credit in the world fit to bee of this Iurie, men very well knowne to your Lordship, and to Master Shiriffe, and the Worshipfull Gentlemen. These are men of worth (my Lord) of farre more esteeme euery where, then these meane men heere, picked out of purpose by Master Shiriffe. These (my Lord) of the Iurie are men of small reckoning in the Country. These liue scattered heere and there almost without habitation, except in poore Cottages, so as we maruel (my Lord) how they can be brought in for Free-holders, hardly any one of them is of any account with men of great estates and of worth in the land. Good my Lord consider of vs. Then the Iudge asketh them what those men bee of whom they speake, and what are their names? Then they answer,   [   Indifferent Gentlemen.  ] my Lord, they are these, Master Naturalist, Master Doubting, Master Opinion, Master Carelesse, Master Chiuerell, Master Libertine, Master Laodicean, Master Temporizer, Master Polititian, Master Outside, Master Ambo dexter , and Master Newtralitie , all (my Lord) very indifferent men betwixt vs and them. Gentlemen, Free- holders, of great meanes, wee beseech you (my Lord) to shew vs some pittie, that they may bee of the Iurie. The Iudge informed by those worthy Iustices of the Quorum , concerning these men so named by the prisoners, and knowing the honesty and good credit of the chosen Iurie; their exceptions against them are not admitted of, and so these indifferent Gentlemen are passed by. The Clerke therefore is commanded to goe forward, and then he readeth the Inditement of euery one in order, one after another as they bee called forth by name and set to the Barre. The first which is called out,   [   1\. Oldman Arraigned.  ] is the Oldman . Then saith the Clerke , Goaler, set out Oldman to the Barre. Then hee is brought to the Barre, and commanded to hold vp his hand and his Inditement is read.    [   His Inditement.  ] Oldman thou art indited heere by the name of Oldman , of the Towne of Euahs Temptation , in the County of Adams Consent that vpon the day of Mans fall in Paradise, when he was driuen out, thou diddest corrupt the whole Nature of man body and soule, leading all and euerie of his Posterity, comming by generation, with the Body of Sinne; making him indisposed to any thing that is good, framing lets to any holy duty, and polluting his best actions: but making him prone to all euill, bringing him captiue to imperious lusts, and so causing him to liue in continuall rebellion against God, contrary to the Peace of our Soueraigne Lord the King, Iesvs Christ , his Crowne and Dignity. What sayest thou to it? He pleades nor guilty, and so puts himselfe to the Triall. Then the Cryer calleth for Euidence against the Prisoner.    [ Euidence.  ] Then commeth forth Dauid ,    [   Dauid.  ] whose Euidence is this I was shapen in Iniquity ,  86 and in Sinne hath my Mother conceiued me .  87 Iobs is this. He cannot bee cleane that is borne of a Woman. Isaiah , his Euidence is.  88 That all are transgressours from the wombe .    [   Saint Paul.  ] Saint Pauls Euidence is most cleere, for being asked what hee could say? Hee answered, (my Lord) this Oldman hath been the death of very many.  89 I haue wofull experience of him, a wretched man hath he made mee. Hee tooke occasion by the Commandement to worke all concupiscence in me .  90 Hee deceiued me and slew me, wrought Death in me, so that in my flesh dwelleth no good, but when I would doe good, euill is present with me, so that through him, the good I would doe I cannot, and the euill I hate that I doe; Hee maketh warre against the Law of my minde, and bringeth me in captiue to the Law of Sinne . Thus (my Lord) is in me the Body of Death , from which I desire to be deliuered, and this is, that I can say. The Euidence being thus cleere, the Iurie presently being all agreed giueth in their Verdict ,    [   Verdict.  ] and being asked what they say of the prisoner at the Bar, guilty or not, they answer Guilty . Then he asketh what he can say for himselfe, why sentence should not bee pronounced against him? Good my Lord saith he, I am wrongfully accused,   [   Oldmans Plea.  ] and am made the man I am not, there is no such thing as Originall Corruption ,    [   Pelagius & Anabaptists ] Pelagius a Learned man and al those now that are called Anabaptists (who well enough know al these Euidences brought against me) haue hitherto, and yet doe, maintaine it, that Sinne commeth by Imitation , and not by Propagation, and imbred Prauity . Good my Lord, I beseech you, bee good vnto mee,  & cast not away so poore an Oldman (good my Lord) for I am at this day 5555. yeeres old. Then saith the Iudge, Oldman , the Euidence is cleere, those thou hast named are condemned Hereticks; and as for thy yeeres, in respect of which thou crauest pittie, it is pittie thou hast beene suffered so long to doe so great and so generall a mischiefe as these good men doe witnesse against thee. O my Lord, I beseech you then a Psalme of Mercy. Oldman , the Law of the King allowes thee not the benefit of the Clergie, for The reward of Sin is Death ,  91 this is his Maiesties Decree vnchangeable, as the Law of the Medes and Persians. Good my Lord, that is meant onely of Actuall Sinne and not of me. That is not so; for Originall Sinne is Sinne, and all men know that Children die, that neuer sinned by Imitation,  92 nor Actually, after the similitude of Adams transgression. And Death goeth ouer all, inasmuch as all haue sinned . If Sinne were not in Infants, they could not die, Heare therefore thy Sentence. Thou Oldman ;    [   The Sentence.  ] hast by that name beene indicted of these Fellonies, Outrages, and Murthers, and for the same arraigned, thou hast pleaded not guilty, and put thy selfe vpon the Tryall and art found guilty, and hauing nothing iustly to say for thy selfe, this is the Law: thou shalt bee carried backe to the place of Execution, and  93 there be cast off with all thy deeds, and all thy members, daily mortified and crucified with all thy lusts ,  94 of euery one that hath truly put on Christ. This Sentence pronounced, the Shiriffe is commanded to doe Execution; which Religion by his Vnder Shiriffe Resolution seeth throughly performed. The Executioner is hee that hath put on Christ,    [   Executioner.  ] Gal. 5\. 24. This Prisoner thus proceeded against, the Goaler is commanded to set out Mistresse Heart to the Barre,    [   Mistresse Heart tryed  ] who is commanded to hold vp her hand, and then is her Inditement read. Mistresse Heart ; thou art heere indited by the name of Mistress Heart of Soule ,    [   Her Inditement.  ] in the County of the Isle of Man , that also vpon the day of Mans fall in Paradise thou becamest corrupted, accompanying the Oldman ,  95 and also Will thy man, and hast beene so hardned, that thou couldest not repent, and so blinde, that thou becamest past feeling: and hast made men to giue themselues ouer to all laciuiousnesse,  96 to worke all vncleannesse euen with greedinesse, to bee also very slow to beleeue all that the Prophets haue spoken:  97 and to bo so enraged with choler sometimes as to runne mercilesly on Innocents to murther them, and to cause men most cursedly to depart from the liuing God. 98 Thou hast beene, and art also in confederacie with al and euery euill thought, word,  99 and deed committed against God and Man. Thou hast beene a receptacle of all the abominations of euery Sin whatsoeuer,  100 and hast had conference with Satan to lie vnto to the holy Ghost, and for greedy gaine at the diuels suggestion; hast set some on worke to play the Traitors to the shedding of the innocent bloud of our Soueraigne,  101 contrary to the Peace of the King, his Crowne  & Dignity, what saist thou to this Inditement, guilty or not guilty? Shee answers not guilty, and puts her selfe to the Triall. Then the Cryer saith, if any man can giue Euidence against the prisoner at the Barre, let him come, for shee stands vpon her deliuerance: then come in such as can say any thing against her,    [   Hearts accusers.  ] and first is Moses . Moses ,    [   Moses.  ] what can you say against this prisoner, looke vpon her, see if you know her. My Lord, I know her well enough,  102 shee made me and my brother Aron to speake so vnaduisedly with our lips by her passion, that wee could neither of vs be admitted to goe into the land of Canaan .  103 This I can say of her, that euerie Imagination of her thought is onely euill continually & that naught shee hath been from her youth vp. Moses hauing ended, then saith the Iudge, is there any more? To whom answer is made, yes (my Lord) there is Ieremy the Prophet. Ieremy the Prophet looke vpon the Prisoner,    [   Ieremie.  ] can you say any thing on the behalfe of his Maiesty. My Lord, this I can say, that shee is deceitfull aboue all things and desperately wicked: 104 so that no man without Gods speciall assistance can either finde out her deuises or escape her treacheries. And this moreouer I know, that shee hath been sent vnto and forewarned to wash her selfe of her wickednesse: and yet for all this shee doth lodge stil ill thoughts in her house.  105 Yea (my Lord) shee hath seduced many from God,  106 making them to walke after her euill counsels and imaginations to their vtter destructions. And I am truely informed, that there is euer the place where the enemies of their owne soules doe worke their wickednesse and mischiefes.  107 Is there any more Euidences? Yes my Lord, heere is Ezekiel . Ezekiel what can you say? My Lord, I can witnes thus much,  108 Such is her lewdnesse that shee followed after Idols, and after Couetousnes, which is Idolatry, both High Treason and Rebellion against God. Yea so very shamelesly and lawlesly shee carieth her, selfe, that if such lewde companions come not in to her, she wil goe out and follow them. These bee witnesses enough saith the Iudge to condemne her, but is there any other. Yes my Lord, please you heere are more? heer's Saint Mathew . Saint Mathew , what can you say against the Prisoner at the Barre. My Lord,    [   S. Mathew.  ] I haue heard it from the mouth of my Lord Chiefe Iustice himselfe (when I did attend vpon him, hee hauing occasion publikely to speake of her) that out of the heart do come euill thoughts , 109 Adulteries, Fornications, Murthers, Thefts, Couetousnesse, Wickednesse, Deceipt, Laciuiousnes, an euill eye, Blasphemy, Pride and foolishnes . All these euills he witnesseth to come forth of her house: so that it is euident against her by his honours vndoubted testimony, that shee is an harborer of a company of very bad and vnsufferable guests. Saint Marke,    [   Saint Mark  ] heere next me,  110 can witnesse as much. It is very true my Lord. Heere is an Halotry indeed (said the Iudge.) Iurie, if you bee agreed giue in your Verdict, what say you of this Prisoner? Guilty or not Guilty? Wee say guilty my Lord. Woman what canst thou say for thy selfe, that Sentence according to Law should not bee pronounced against thee? Ah, good my Lord: take pittie on mee; a poore weake old woman; These men speake against me the worst that they can,   [   Hearts plea for her life. ] because I would not be ruled by them. They speake of malice my Lord. If I haue misdemeaned my selfe any way, it was by this Oldman my Fathers misleading (my Lord) by whom, I thought, that being a woman I should bee wholy guided. But heere mee (good my Lord) I beseech you, let not these mens testimonies cast mee away. For I did dwell with as good men, and better then they are, or euer were (my Lord) as other can witnes to my great comendations Then saith the Iudge, who are those I pray you? I dwelt (my Lord) with King Dauid ,  111 with King Salomon , and was in their house held to bee a perfect Heart: so was I after accounted in King Asa's house. Yea my Lord, with Abraham the Father of the Faithfull, was I found Faithfull , and such hath beene my credit, that I was well spoken of euen to God himselfe by good King Hezekiah .  112 That all this is true that I say, I beseech you to aske Isaiah the Prophet, as also Nehemiah , and others that haue recorded the same. Besides all these (be pleased to heare me (good my Lord) aske all the Country people, and they will with one mouth speake well of me. They haue (say they) a good Heart towards God and that euer since they were borne, they neuer found mee so wicked as these witnesses are pleased to speake. I hope therefore (my Lord) that you wil be pleased to be good to me, good my lord pitty a very old aged poore woman, as euer you came of a woma. Woman, Woman, for the witnesses against thee, they are without exception, and thy owne mouth doth condemne thy selfe, in that first , thou dost confesse, that thou wouldest not bee ruled by them when these holy men were sent vnto thee, and that with speciall command from his Maiesty to see thee reformed. Againe , that thou doest acknowledge thy selfe to haue beene wholy led by the Oldman , one now most iustly condemned by the Law to be crucified. As touching Dauids heart, Solamons heart, Asa his heart, the faithfull heart of Abraham , and the vpright heart of Hezekiah , neuer an one of these was thy selfe, thou dost lewdly seeke to deceiue by equiuocation, and to beguile the standers by with thy trickes of Iesuiticall cousonage.  113 True it is, that there is great commendations of an Heart , and the same to be an honest and good Heart, an vpright Heart, a faithfull Heart. But woman, this is the heart sanctified and purged by faith in all those that are borne anew of water and the holy Ghost: but this is not that which thou art, the naturall and corrupt heart: Thou art that commendable heart in name onely, but not in quality: therefore thy boasting is vaine, thy pleading subtilty, verifying Ieremiahs euidence of thee, that thou art very deceitfull. As for the vulgar praising of thee, it is through their owne selfe-loue, and foolish selfe-conceit, and their vtter ignorance of thee, that maketh them to speake so well of thee. Thou doest therefore but trifle away the time, and trouble the Assemblie. As for thine age, it procureth thee no pittie at all, because thou hast beguiled, vndone, and bewitched so many. Their age should haue taught thee better things, but thy obstinacie in wickednesse would not suffer thee. Heere therefore this Sentence. Thou Mistresse Heart hast beene indited by the name of Mistresse Heart , of those Fellonies, Murthers, Conspiracies and rebellions, and for the same hast beene arraigned: thou hast pleaded not guilty, hast put thy selfe to the triall, and beene found guilty hauing nothing iustly to say for thy selfe. This is the Law. Thou shalt bee carried backe from whence thou camest, and there liue condemned to perpetuall imprisonment vnder Master Newman the Keeper, without baile or maine prize. Goaler , take her to thee, looke to the prisoner, and keepe this Heart diligently ,  114 and take heed least there be at any time in you, an hart of Infidelity to depart from the liuing God. Master Shiriffe Religion, and the Vnder Shiriffe Resolution, doe see it performed very carefully and speedily, according to the sentence giuen. After this, the Goaler is commanded by the Clerke to set Mistresse Hearts Maides to the Barre with Will her man. But the Iudge commandeth them to Ward againe vnto the next Assises, and chargeth the Shiriffe with them to see them kept close prisoners with Mistresse Heart, till the appointed time, and till they should bee called for. The Reason giuen was for that two great Traitors and Rebels , chiefe amongst the damned crue, were presently to bee arraigned, which would take vp the allotted time before the Court should breake vp and the Bench arise. These two were Couetousnesse and Idolatry , Capitall Theeues, pestilently mischieuous against God, his Worship and Seruice: against the Church and against the Common-Weale. Couetousnes was ioyned with Idolatry,  115 because he is also called Idolatry. Now all other Prisoners remoued, and the Iudge with the Bench ready for these,    [   Couetousnes tried.  ] the Clerke willeth the Cryer to command the Goaler to set Couetousnesse to the Barre, which the Goaler doth forthwith. Then saith he vnto him, Couetousnesse hold vp thy hand and heare the Inditement. Couetousnesse ;    [   His Inditement.  ] thou art heere indited by the name of Couetousnesse , in the Towne of Wante , in the Countie of Neuerfull , that from the day of thy first beeing thou hast been The roote of all euill,  116 hauing made some to play the Theeues, others to commit Treason against our Soueraigne Lord the King; others to murther Innocents for their inheritance. 117 Thou art also heere indited for bribery, extorsion, oppression, vsurie, iniustice, cousonage, vnmercifulnesse, and a multitude of outragious Villanies: besides thy hindering men in holy duties and meanes of Saluation, forcing them headlong to their destruction, contrary to the Peace of our Soueraigne Lord the King, his Crowne and Dignity. What sayest thou to this Inditement, guilty or not guilty? He answereth not guilty (my Lord) and so hee puts himselfe vpon the triall. After this, the parties that can giue Euidence are called in,   [ Euidence.  ] and first Repentance is commanded to produce his witnesses. [   1\. Repentance.  ] Repentance , what can you say? My Lord, since the Prisoner was committed to prison and put into Ward , some of my witnesses are dead, as Achan, Ahab and Iudas . Then saith the Iudge, looke the Records, Clerke , and reade them. My Lord, I reade heere that Achan confessed that by Couetousnesse hee was moued to looke vpon a wedge of gold,  118 and so coueting, stole it, and with it a Babylonish garment to the death and destruction of him and all his. Also I here finde, how through Couetousnesse Ahab longed for poore Naboths Vineyard,  119 and so eagerly, as he fell sicke for it, because he could not haue his will. But Iesabel procured by his leaue and liking the death of Naboth and his sonnes, and so got possession of the Vineyard. Moreouer, I finde heere, that Iudas confessed how hee betrayed the innocent bloud of our Sauiour through Couetousnesse and desire of money. This is all the Confession my Lord in the Records . Then the Iudge willeth the Constable and his Assistants which were at the apprehending of him to bee called, who make their appearance. Constable , what can you say, and those that were with you, against this prisoner at the Barre? My Lord; when wee went to make search for him, hee hid himselfe so close, as wee had much adoe at first to finde him in Mistresse Hearts house. Who had almost perswaded vs that hee had not beene there, vntil I learned it from Dauid the man of God, whom I had found petitioning the Lord Chiefe Iustice for a Warrant of the good behauiour against the Couetousnesse of the Heart. 120 Then thought I, certainely he is heere in this house: for if Dauid feared to haue him in his Heart, that gaue so many Millions of gold and siluer, 3300. Cart-loade of Treasure for the building of the Temple, can I think him not to bee heere? I sought therefore diligently my Lord,  & found him, but before I could attach him, hee was got into a darke corner and attempted to blow out my candlelight, and to haue escaped me. But I, and my Company tooke such diligent heed to him, as he could not get from vs: yet before we could binde him, and bring him away, hee endeuoured to mischiefe as many as came neere him: and would by no meanes obey my Warrant, as the rest heere (my Lord) can tell if you please to heare them. Then began euery one of them to speake. Care complained,    [   Coll. 3. Care.  ] that hee had almost choaked him with the world and worldly businesses, so as he had no leasure to minde heauenly things. Clearing accused him,    [   Clearing.  ] that he had so vndermined his Vnderstanding at vnawares, as almost hee had broken the necke of his good name, and reputation of his profession and Religion. Indignation complained,    [   Indignation  ] that he had well nigh lost his life by him: for whereas before he could not behold Sinne, but with an holy anger, now profit of Sinne, through this cursed Couetousnesse, made him looke cheerefully vpon it, and hartily welcome it for profits sake. Feare complained,    [   Feare.  ] that he did bewitch him: for said he, whereas before I was tender hearted, and trembled at God Word, desire of gaine made me both to loose my commoditie though I got it with Sinne. Vehement Desire did greatly complaine of his violent setting vpon him, hee could hardly take any rest. Zeale complained,    [   Zeale.  ] that hee strucke himselfe hard vpon the head, as the blow made him, in hope of gaine, almost without sence of Gods Glorie, which before he preferred aboue all things in the world. Lastly Reuenge complained,    [   Reuenge.  ] that the Prisoner had attempted to murther him and so wounded him, as whereas before hee could master sinne, now hee was growne so weake, as any gainefull sinne was able to master him, and to bring him vnder command. When these had spoken what they could, the rest were brought to giue euidence, and these also were men of very good account, and of great worth in their Countrie. Master Church: Master Common-Weale: Master Howshould: Master Neighbour-hood: and Master Good-worke : who hauing afterwards to there names, they giue in Euidence one by one. Master Church: what can you say against the prisoner at the barre? My Lord,    [   Master Church.  ] I am not able to reckon the particular mischiefes hee hath done against me. There falleth neuer a Benefice of any reasonable valew, but hee sets many to runne and ride after it, & offer largely for it, and maketh some Patrons theeues, and to admit many an Ignoramus into the charge and cure of Soules: and many a Minister to be a periured Simonist before God. Hee maketh not a few to heape vp meanes, not onely for maintenances but also to make themselnes great and many which come in freely to neglect the care of their flockes and to seek after their fleeces, to care to be rich, and to follow so after the world, as that either they giue ouer to preach, or doe make them preach at home very idlely, seldome, and vnprofitably, though abroad, either for their hire, or applauditie more diligently and commendable. When People come to    [   People.  ] Church (my Lord) hee marreth their deuotion, and haleth their soules out of the Church, to make them to bee walking their grounds, talking with their friends, plotting businesses, potting in Ale-houses, to bee going some iourney, to bee at some Market or Faire; to bee counting their debts, following their debters; reckoning vp their loane vpon Vsurie, their profits and gaine, heere and there, not without feare of losses. And all these things (my Lord) with many other worldly thoughts, whilst their bodies are in church. When people came from the Church,  121 hee choaketh the seed of Gods Word, that it thriueth in very few, and of these few, it is more in talke, then in practise. Hee keepeth (my Lord) many from the Church, causing them to set the Lords day apart, not for his seruice, but for their worldly affaires, because they will not take another time for hindering their profit, in the weeke daies. Much more (my Lord) I haue to say, but I am loath to be to tedious. You Master Church: haue spoken sufficiently and enough to condemne him. Call Master Common-Weale . Master Common-Weale : what can you say on the Kings behalfe against the Prisoner at barre? My Lord;    [   Master Common-Weale.  ] this man hath entred so farre into al businesses, as hee hath almost vtterly vndone mee. Hee propounded Offices to sale, and so maketh the buyers to sell their duties for profit to make vp their monies. He hath monopolized commodities into his hands, inhaunced the prizes of things, to the great grieuance of the Kings Subiects. Hee (as your Lordship well knoweth) hath miserably corrupted the course of Iustice, by bribery, by making many Lawyers pleade more for Fees, then honestly, for the equitie of the cause; by delaying the cause, by remouing it from one Court to another, till men bee vndone. Hee, hath, to get his desire, suborned false witnesses, counterfeited euidences and forged Wills. Good my Lord, let some order be taken with him, else he will vtterly bring mee to ruine and all mine for euer. Call Master Household . Master Household :    [   Master Household.  ] what can you say concerning the Prisoner? My Lord, this wicked Couetousnesse keepes holy exercises out of priuate houses; he will not let parents haue any time to instruct their Children; hee maketh Masters vse their seruants more like beasts then men, they are so wholy imployed in worldly businesses: as for their Soules, their is no care taken, but they are left to liue as soule-lesse men. Hee causeth niggardly house-keeping, and ouer- laboring of seruants. Hee breedeth much contention, chiding, and too much vse of ill language by Mistresses and Dames, yea, betweene men  & their wiues in their Family, to the great griefe & ill example of their children, and seruants. Yea, (my Lord) hee hath made children to bee cruell to their Parents, brethren and sisters to hate one another, neere of kindred and bloud to goe to law one with another, for and about diuiding goods, lands, and inheritances; yea, I can witnes this, that hee hath made them murther one another: Children their Parents, Husbands their Wiues, and one Brother another. It would be to long to particularize, how great euills, and how many waies hee hath iniured mee and all mine. But because other witnesses stand heere by me, I will trouble your Lordship with no more complaints at this time. Call Master Neighbourhood . Friend , What is that you can say touching this prisoner? My Lord,    [   Master Neighborhood.  ] this vnhappie man hath altogether dismitted mens affections, so as in our Towne there is very little loue: hardly will one doe another a good turne freely, but either it must bee one for another, like for like, or in certaine future hope for gaine. This wretch hath almost banisht all frendly society; euery man is so now for himselfe, as he neglecteth his neighbour almost wholy. He maketh them trespasse one another, to rob cunningly one another in buying and selling, and to fall out with bitter rayling, and vnneighbourlie languages for a pennie losse, and causeth many suites and brabbles. Wee are (my Lord) indeed miserablie disquieted, and almost vtterly vndone by him. For (my Lord) wee were a Company of very good neighbours till hee became Land- lord: heere dwelt Amitie, Kindnesse, Gentlenesse, Loue, Peace, Charitie, Patience, Goodnesse, Readie-good-will. Forgetfulnesse of wrongs, Sociablenesse, Good-turnes , and Ioy: but most vniustly by his cruelty and wrong dealing hee hath displaced them, and brought (my Lord) a Companie of infernall spirits, for so I think I may without offence call them: which are these. Hatred, Malice, Enuie, Wrath ,  122 Anger, Churlishnesse, Discord, Nigardlinesse ,  123 Sturdinesse, Strife, Debate, Varience, Emulation, Sedition, Wrangling, Fraud, Deceipt, Malignity, Despite, Vnnaturalnesse, Implacablenes. Vnthankfulnesse, Fiercenes ,  124 Highmindednesse, Selfeloue, Makebate , and Vnmercifulnesse . The best that hee brings in (my Lord) are Costles complement, Fairespeech, How doe you, Good-morrow, Good-euen, Glad to see you well, Word-welcome, Will you drinke, Fare-well, Yours to command and such like, also one Little-good , with another called Sonne-lost , and amongst these No harme is greatly commended,    [   No. harme.  ] but neuer a Good man amongst them much lesse any Too-good to bee found in the Parish, except more in name then indeed. And this is that which I haue to say, my Lord, at this time. Call out Master Good-worke . Master Goodworke ,    [   Goodwork.  ] what can you say touching the prisoner? My Lord, there hath beene so much spoken that I need say nothing: yet none haue more iust cause to complaine then I haue: for he hath endeuoured to his vtmost to roote mee out and all my posterity, Bounty, Liberality , and Hospitality . My Lord, we by reason of him, daily stand in feare of our liues; all the country cryeth out of him, in their loue to vs, who well know, how often he hath attempted to murther vs. Hee hath put out of ioynt both the armes of my son Bounty , and almost broken the backe of my sonne Liberality , that hee hardly at any time goeth vpright, and all know this, that hee hath violently set vpon my sonne Hospitality , and forced him out of doores, and in his steed hath let in Pride of aparell, sumpteous Building, Affectation of vaine Titles , whom he hath made to shut vp dores: perswading them that to maintaine their state, they must increase there reuennewes, by new purchases, by racking of rents, by inhauncing their fines and incomes, all little enough to vphold their outward state, and vaine pompe abroad. And this (my Lord) is that which for the present I haue to say. Then it was asked if all were come in that should giue Euidence? Answer was made: My Lord, heere is onely one man more poore Pouerty brought hither by authority to giue Euidence, may it please you heare him. Call in Pouerty . Pouerty ,    [   Pouerty.  ] What canst thou say against this prisoner at the Barre? Good my Lord: I haue reason to curse the day that euer I knew him, and hee onely it is that hath brought me to this poore state. I was a man of some credit my neighbours well know, till I had to do with him, who would lend mee nothing but vpon Vsurie, and that vpon great bonds and morgage of lands: and so greedy a Wolfe was he vpon his prey, that if I missed but one day of payment, hee would take the benefit of the Morgage, or forfeiture; or if he forbore longer, I payed him by presents and guifts so much with the vse, as made mee to groane vnder the burthen, feeling my selfe in an irrecouerable Consumption. Sometimes to keepe day with him, I was enforced either to buy for time, or else to sell something out of hand to make ready monies: either of which was as bad, or worse then the byting of vsurie: for when William Greedy a brother of his, or also gaine his Cousin perceiued my neede, oh how did hee in selling, for time extorte from me; and in buying for ready money presse mee? So that to escape a whirle-poole, I fell into deuouring gulfes, and thus he vndid me. And not being therewith content (woe vnto him,) when I became Tenant (my Lord) who was before a good Free-holder , he put into our Land-lords heart, to depopulate our whole Parish of Wealth , (for so it was called) and there insteed of many honest Inhabitants and good house-keepers, hee set a Shepheard and his Curre to feede his flockes. This also is hee (my Lord) that maketh men of faire lands (which might liue well on their owne Reuenewes  & demaines) to take Farmes into their hands and to driue out such as had been merciful Relieuers of their poore neighbours. In our poore estate wee haue sought to him for reliefe, but insteed of comfort, hee hath rayled on vs, threatned to whip vs, and to send vs to the House of Correction . Nothing will he doe for vs, but what by Law hee is inforced vnto, though hee keepe his Church, and can sometime also talke of Religion. He beggers all of vs (my Lord,) on worke hee will not set vs, and yet will not suffer vs to seeke abroad for reliefe. He neuer seeth vs, but his heart riseth against vs. He rather wil aduenture his owne damnation then part with one pennie, except it be to goe gaine, to buy and purchase for him and his. Yea, (my Lord) that all may know his mercilesse cruelty when we haue wanted releefe,  & begged of him, hee hath counselled vs to shift for our selues, & steale out of the stackes of Corne in gleaning time for bread, to breake hedges, to steale wood or coale in the night, to make vs fiers, to plucke sheepe or sheere off their wooll for cloathing, to rob orchards for fruit, to steale geese, hennes, ducks, pigges and sheepe for flesh meate, to cousen men that set vs on worke, and to make vs poore people hatefull to God and man. For hee careth not, (my Lord) so as he may not bee charged any way, what we doe or what becommeth of vs. And yet to make vp the hight of vnmercifulnesse, he will bee the first, if wee of meere extreame need doe amisse, that wil cry out against vs and pursue vs to death. This hath euer been his course hitherto, (my Lord) consider rightly of vs, and pittie our case, I beseech you, good my Lord. Pouerty , thy case indeed is to be pittied, Iurie , you haue heard the Euidence of all, what say you of the prisoner at the barre, is hee guity or not guilty. Iurie , Guilty my Lord. Couetousnesse , thou hast heard what al these witnesses haue laid to thy charge, and spoken against thee, what canst thou say for thy selfe, why sentence vpon these honest mens verdict should not be pronounced against thee? My Lord,    [   Couetousnes Plea against Pouerty.  ] I stand for my life, let it please you with patience to heare me. And first touching this impatient ingratefull outcrying fellow Pouerty . It was not I my Lord, when hee was wealthy, but his then daily and onely Companions, Sloath, Carelesnes, Prodigality, Good-fellowship, Goegay, Good-cheare, Wantonnes, Improuidence, Little-worke , and Mani-mouthes , which (my Lord) cast him into a Consumption, and like Canker-wormes consumed him quickly, I confesse he came to me often to borrow, but when I saw his vaine courses of expence, I was very loath to lend him, but that hee so earnestly intreated me, euen with teares in his eyes, oftentimes protesting, that I should greatly pleasure him, yea, and saue him  & his estate from ruine, if I would doe him that kindnes, to lend him in his need. Thus (my Lord) was I moued and drawne on to lend him, according to the Statute, onely I took good Security because I perceiued him to bee wastfull. Aduantage I neuer tooke, but onely when I saw, that he was an idle fellow and carelesse, and would neuer keepe day, then I would onely threaten him to terrifie him, (my Lord) and if hee then brought any kindnesse to my wife, it is more then I know of, and more the I desired of him. Sometimes hee would offer to sell mee the land morgaged to mee, when hee could not pay, and told mee that of necessity hee must sell it, and if I would not, another should buy it. Then I thought my selfe as worthy to haue it as any other in all reason. For my threatning of him and his Companie, when they went a begging; true it is, because I say, that as they had consumed themselues, they thought to relie on mee, and so in like sort to haue eaten me vp too: for idely had they liued, and worke they neither could nor would. And whereas they accuse me that I compelled them to steale, heerein they very much wrong me (my Lord) for it was their Loue to liue idely , and their Pinching necessity , which ledd and inforced them to fall to shifting and stealing, and not I my Lord. Touching their Landlords depopulating of the Towne of Wealth ; they their owne selues were the very cause thereof, for that worthy Knight and my kinsman, Sir Worldly wise : when hee saw how some by suites of Law, others by Drunkennesse and Ryot, others by Pride and Idlenesse did waste their estates, so as they were neither able to till their Land, nor to stock their grounds, hee bought their estates one after another, and so left them to buy or hire for themselues else where. And when thus they had remoued themselues, hee sought the welfare of the Common-Weale , which was to hold vp cloathing (my Lord) the cheefest meanes heere to set the poore on worke: which cannot bee without Wooll,  & wooll cannot be had without Flockes of Sheepe. If this Worthy Knight, and good Common-Wealths man tooke any aduise of me, it was for publike good. Good (my Lord) consider that Pouertie is impatient, euer complaining, and very vnthankful to his best friends, if they doe not alwaies supplie his wants. You know this, (my Lord) to be true and all the Worshipfull Iustices of the Bench. Touching Master Church his accusation;    [   His answer to Master Church.  ] vnworthily doth he lay the faults on me; for when any doe ride post so for Benefices when they be falne, they are set on (my Lord) sometime by Perking Pride ; sometime by Neighbour Need , and all of them by Master Haste to get the liuing and by Master Feare to come short of it. It was neuer I that made them offer such summes of monies to Patrons, (for it is my manner to aduise my Friends to be euer sparing of their purses:) but it was their ouerforward friend, Master Hope-to-preuaile that counselled them to make such proferrs. I am not (my Lord) the cause of any Ministers negligence in his Function , but a couple of base loytering fellowes dwelling with such Ministers, commonly called (my Lord) the Parsons men Ease and Idle , by whom such Ministers are too much led. If the people profit not vnder those that be painefull Ministers (my Lord) the fault is not through me: but the fault is in Inbred Ignorance, Dulnes, Oldman, Mistresse Heart , and Wilfull Will , her man, and Maides , hating to bee reformed,  125 Dislike of Teachers either for their person or doctrine, Want of loue of the Truth, Contentednesse to liue and dye in Ignorance , and the very Deuill himselfe (my Lord) their vtter enemie. These ought to beare the blame (my Lord) and not I. For Master Common-Weale (my Lord) I maruaile,    [   Answer to Common- Weale.  ] that he should thus abuse me, and wrong mee, for (my Lord) hee knowes well, that I haue many waies enriched such as belong vnto him: his Marchants in trading, and his Lawyers in pleading. I haue holpe many a meane man to a great estate, and many a base birth to bee counted of the Gentrie . Forward haue I beene to helpe all sorts of euery estate, of euery profession, and of euery trade and course of life, and must I now be questioned for my life? Concerning Master Household ,    [   Answer to Household.  ] hee hath no reason of all others to blame me; for I taught him how to bee warie in his housekeeping, how to manage his estate for his best thrift, how to aduantage himselfe in buying and selling Corne, and Cattell, how to let and set, and hire grounds, to graze and fat Cattell, and (my Lord) I euer sought his profit in all my courses. Hee hath no cause thus to accuse me to your Lordship. He had neuer gotten vp to haue maintained so great a Family, but by me. I raised his Father from a base Cottage, to be a Free-holder, and so himselfe to bee Master of a great Family and household. If any such euils haue happened vnder him, as hee complaineth of, let him accuse Vnnaturalnes, Impatience, Vnrulie Passions and such like, makebates, and withall the Suggestions of Satan , which doe set men on such mischieues, and not me (my Lord.) For Master Neighbourhood ,    [   Answer to Neighbourhood.  ] hee may of all other be ashamed to accuse mee so, because hee hath liued much better and nothing worse by me (my Lord) for I caused to bee remoued from him and his neighbours, in their often and idle meetings (which they pleased to call Good-fellowship ) a Company of very Vnthrifts, Waste, Ryot, Prodigality ,    [   Bad society.  ] Drunkennes, Gluttonie, Idlenes, Carelesnesse, Needlesse Expence , and a route of very Raskalls, with reuerence be it spoken (my Lord.) I taught him and all such as he is, a better way to liue, and a more thriuing course, to looke diligently to their estates, and to take good courses to saue, to get, and to increase their meanes. As first hauing abandoned such lewd Companie before named, in the next place, I aduised them to put away their bad Menseruants,    [   Bad men seruants. ] Slacke and Sloathfull, Carelesse and Wastfull, Gor-belly and Tospot, Weake and Waiward, Loue-bed and Drowsie, Light-finger and Lurching, Gamster and Goegay, Slipstring and Wanderer, Scape-thrift & Spendal , and such like vnprofitable hindes. And with all to ridde themselues in like manner, of all their bad Maide-seruants ,    [   Bad Maid seruants.  ] such as these Pranker and Prattle, Wanton and Louesick, Sleepie and Slugg, Sweetlip and Dainty, Gadding and Forgetfull, Grene-sicknesse and Tender, Driuill and Slut , also & aboue all the Choare-women , and her daughters Pocketing, and Filch , with all their fellowes. And insteed of these (my Lord) I commended vnto them a Company of Men seruants,    [   Thrifty men seruants.  ] worth entertainement, all one mans children, the sons of mine honest Neighbour Good-husbandry : as Care and Forecast, Makehast and Warie , Thriftie and Pinch, Aduantage and Holdfast, Cunning and Catch, VVatchfull and Toylesome, Homely-fare and Meaneclad, Clouted shoe & Patch, Vp-betimes, & Labour, Last vp and Trusty, Getting & Lockfast, Spend-little and Get-much, Take-time & Loose-naught, Debtlesse and Gaine , with such other profitable seruants. And because I knew that Maide seruants answerable to them were as necessarie, I aduised the best I could to prouide such also,    [   Profitable Maides. ] the daughters of Good-hous-wifery: as Eager and Spare, Quicke and Nimble, Trusty and Timely-vp, Health-full and Chaste, Euer-doing and Silent, Wittie and Pliant , with other of the like nature helpfull to vphold a mans estate. By which good counsel of mine (my Lord) Neighbour-hood liueth now richly, and beggerly, Neede knockes not daily at his dore, either to begg or borrow, as he was wont to do. Concerning the last man Master Good-worke ,    [   Answer to Good-worke ] he hath least cause of all others to complaine for that same which hee pleaseth to call in me Oppression, Vsurie, Extortion , and what not, haue built many a faire Almes-house , many a goodly Hospitall in the land (my Lord) and haue also giuen by VVill , many a large Legacie to the poore and much to publicke vses. My Lord, when I was a Romane Catholique in our Forefathers daies, none was then in more grace and fauour with all the Clergie then my selfe. By mee the holy Father the Pope greatly increased his Treasurie, by my Counsells the Prelates gate vp to such an infinite wealth and to such glorious dignities: by me (they making Religion a Cloake for mee to put on) they got such stately houses, for their dwellings, and for the variety of their orders, built in the best places of euery Nation, and such yearely Reuenewes, as did exceede, for their certaine maintenance. Good my Lord, let it please your Lordship to thinke better of me, then these men procured for witnesses haue suggested, for falsely haue they spoken against me: Good my Lord, good my Lord, doe mee right I beseech you. Stand vp,   [   Iudges speech.  ] stand vp Fellow, I haue heard with Patience these thy verball Apologies: thy subtile shifts to acquit thy selfe: thy faire shewes to winne thee credit, if it were possible, thereby to procure thine owne release. But know, that yet for all that thou haste said, the Inditement against thee stadeth firme, and the Euidence against thee standeth good, which heere my brethren the Kings Sergeant, and the Kings Atturney, and these worthy gent Iustices of this County doe likewise affirme. Its very true which your Lordship saith. Therefore not to driue forth longer the time, and not further to trouble the Court, heare thy Sentence. Couetousnesse ;    [   The sentece against Couetousnesse.  ] thou hast beene indited by the name of Couetousnesse of all the aforesaid Fellonies, Cousonages, Oppressions, and Murthers, and for the same thou hast beene arraigned, thou hast pleaded not guilty, and hast put thy selfe vpon thy triall and beene found guilty hauing no more to say for thy selfe, this is the Law. Thou art to be counted Idolatry before God,  126 and also the roote of all euill, and so damned a sinne, as not to be named amongst Christians, and that such as by thee are made couetous are to be abandoned of all good men,  127 as of God they are abhorred, beeing worthy of eternall death;  128 and haue no inheritance in the Kingdome of Christ and of God:  129 but vpon them must come the wrath of God, as vpon the children of disobedience.  130 Thou art therefore as a rotten member of the flesh to be mortified and cut off.  131 Master Shiriffe , doe Execution which the Vnder Shiriffe seeth performed. Goaler, set Papistry to the Barre. Papistry hold vp thy hand. Papistry :    [   Papistry indicted.  ] thou art heere indited by the name of Papistry , of the Citty of Rome , in the County of Babylon , that thou being a bastard Christian begotten of Heresie, Iudaisme, Paganisme, hast by violent force and armes inuaded the terrritories of the Church of God, and by Gainish Inquisitions, bloudie Massacaeers , stabbing, poysoning , and killing of Kings, Gunne-powder plots, Treasons, Rebellions , and other hellish practizes , vsurped authority and thrust vpon Gods people their humane traditions, inuentions, superstitions, will- worship, Heresies, Iewish Ceremonies, and Paganish Idolatry to the damnation of many Christian soules contrary to the peace of our Soueraigne Lord the King, his Crowne  & Dignity, what sayest thou heereunto, art thou guilty or not guilty? Not guilty my Lord. By whom wilt thou be tried? By God and the Country. But (good my Lord) let me haue another Iurie chosen, I doe not except against the former Iurie, Faith, Loue, Feare, Charity, Sincerity, Patience, Innocencie and the rest, but (my Lord) though they be honest men, and haue well discharged themselues in their Verdict vpon other Prisoners; yet haue they not such Iudgement and Vnderstanding as others haue, to discerne of my case, and the truth of the Euidence which shall bee brought against me. Papistry , because neither thou nor any of thy slanderous Fauorites may say, that thou hast beene proceeded against rigorously  & vniustly without respect to the truth of the cause, I am content to call a new Iurie, if heere we can haue so many, as will make vp the number. I humbly thanke you (my good Lord) God reward your Lordship for it. Master Shiriffe impannell a new Iurie of very substantiall men, the chiefest you can finde, and fittest to goe vpon this Prisoner now at the Barre. My Lord, I supposed, that as he would craue, so from your Lordship vprightnes he should obtaine this fauour, therefore haue I prepared a full Iury to this purpose. It was done wisely of you ( Master Shiriffe ) let them be called. Cryer call in the Iurie . 1\. Call Common Principles ,    [   A lurie against Papistry.  ] Vous aues Common Principles . 2\. Call Apostles Creed , Vous aues The Creed . 3\. Call Second Commandement , Vous aues Second Commandement come in. My Lord I cannot get in. Whats the matter? My Lord (saith the Cryer) the Papists keepe him out. Command to let him in, Vous aues the Second Commandement . 4\. Call Pater noster , Vous aues Pater noster . 5\. Call Holy Scriptures , Vous aues Holy Scriptures . 6\. Call the Apocripha , Vous aues Apocripha . 7\. Call Councells , Vous aues Councels . 8\. Call Antient Fathers for the first 600 yeers after Christ, Vous aues Antient Fathers . 9\. Call Contradiction amongst themselues, Vous aues Contradiction . 10\. Call Absurdity of Opinion , Vous aues Absurdity of Opinion . 11\. Call Consent of their own Men, Vous aues Consent . 12\. Call Testimony of Martyrs , Vous aues Testimony of Martyrs . Countes , saith the Clerke. Then the Crier bids them answere to their names. Common Principles , one: Creede two: Commaundement three: Pater--- noster , fowre: Holy Scriptures , fiue Apocripha , sixe: Councell seauen: Fathers , eight: Contradiction , nine: Absurditie , tenne: Consent of their own men, eleuen: Testimony of Martyrs twelue: Good men and true, stand together and heare your charge. My Lord, here are some more summoned by M r . Sheriffes authoritie. Who be they M r . Sheriffe? Master Lawe with his sonnes,    [   Master Law and his Sons  ] Ciuill, Canon, Common and Municipall . Well, let them attend the Court for the Kings seruice for vse, if need be. Papistry: if thou canst iustly except against anie, I giue thee leaue to challenge any such of the Iury. Good my Lord, onely one of the Iury I except against, which is, Holy Scriptures , except it be our own Translation. Well, sayth the Iudge, I am content it shall be so, let it be either Montanus , or the Rhemist , or the Vulgar Edition , we desire a iust proceeding with all the indifferences that may be. Then the Cryer calleth aloud; If any man can giue Euidence, or can say any thing against the Prisoner at the barre, let him come in, for hee stands vpon his deliuerance. Here is my Lord a worthy Gentleman M r . Verity . M r . Verity come neere; what can you say concerning the prisoner at the barre? My Lord,    [   Master Verities euidence against Papistry.  ] this I am able to iustifie. First, that he hath been a False Teacher from the beginning, fraught with error and heresies, teaching as the false Teachers did,    [   Like false Teachers in Doctrine.  ] such as bee recorded in Scripture, if they were paraleld together, as the Doctrine of Diuels, I Tim. 4\. 1.2. Traditions & Commandements of men, Mat. 15\. 2. Mar. 7, 8, 9. 13. Col. 2\. 22. Veniall sinnes, Mat. 23\. 16.18. Childrens neglect of parents for Churches profit , as they pretended, Mat. 15\. 5. Mar. 7\. 11. Superstitious obseruations in meates and holy daies, Mat. 15\. 11. Col. 2\. 16.21. Laying beauty burthens vpon the people, Luke 11\. 46. Iustification by works , therewith troubling the Churches, Gal. 2\. 18.  & 3\. 2. & 5\. 4. 12. Voluntary Religion and Wilworship , worship , Col. 2. 18.23. The worship of Angels, Col. 2\. 18. Carnall Liberty , 2 Pet 2\. 19. Reu. 2\. 15.20. And Teaching for filthy Lucre, Tit. 2\. 11. Thus are they, as were the False Teachers, as the Scriptures in the New Testament sets them out, in all these things. How like they are (my Lord) to after Heretiques, learned Whitaker in his booke De Ecclesia in the first Question sheweth many particulars. Secondly,    [   Like them in practise.  ] . (my Lord) he hath vsed the very same practices which false Teachers haue vsed: hee doth to make way for his Doctrine, Worship and Aduancement, euen as they did.  a 132 They played the Hypocrites in outward humility in long prayers, and formes of Deuotion, and so misseleade silly women. b 133 They graced their Doctrine with shew of Fore-fathers. c 134 They took away the Key of Knowledge, and neither would enter into life, nor suffer others. d 135 They told the people old wiues Fables , and told lies in hypocrisie.  e 136 They vsed sleights and cunnning coactiues to deceiue. f 137 They boasted of their learning, vsing profane and vaine Babbling, and Oppositions of Sciences, as they termed it. g 138 They pretended Reuelations, Apostolicall Traditions , and alleadged counterfeit writings.  h 139 They had the Propheticall woman and deceiuing Prophetesses. i 140 They had their Miracle-workers, Casters out of Diuels and Dreamers of Dreames. k 141 They would slander mens persons, and the Doctrine of faithfull Teachers and lay to their charge what they could not proue, speaking of them contemptuouslie, and rayling on them. l 142 They boasted to bee the true Church, and that by Succession they were of the Fathers. m 143 They would vse faire and soothing words and teach with intising words, and did striue for excellencie of speech of mans wisedome to deceiue. n 144 When they could not preuaile by faire meanes, then they would suborne false witnesses: they threatned, beate, imprizoned, banished and slew the faithfull Teachers and Christian beleeuers. o 145 They would plot conspiracies to the shedding of bloud, and the Priests must be acquainted heerewith before hand to encourage them heereto. p 146 They would make open Insurrections and stirre vp great personages to take part with them. And what Rebellion, Treasons, Conspiracies insurrections and persecutions this Papistry hath wrought, my Lord Bishop of Chichester hath openly discouered to the world in his Booke of Thankesgiuing for our deliuerance from all these Traitors, Morton, Sandes, Parsons, Campion, Ballard, Watson, Clarke, Garnet (Priests and Iesuites) Stukley, Someruile, Throgmorton, Parry, Babington and his Company: Lopus, Tyrone, Markam, Brooke with others: Percy, Catsby and all the Gunne-powder Plotters, Laicks. And this (my Lord) is not what I could, but what I thought sufficient to restifie at this time, because I would not be tedious. Master Verity : by this you haue vttered, it is easie to see, how this man hath followed, both the false Teachers in Doctrine, and the Enemies of the Gospell in their practises. If there be any mo witnesses, let them come forth. Yes my Lord, heere is Sir Christianity . Sir Christianity: what is it that you haue to say against this Prisoner at the barre? My Lord,    [   Sir Christianity his euidence against Papistry.  ] I was commanded to bee heere to day to giue euidence what I know against this man, and this I am willing to do for the seruice of my Soueraigne. This it is (my Lord) which I haue to say: that this man with his Associates, hath, insteed of Christian Religion, set vp a seruice of Iudaisme and Paganisme, which I am able to proue in a multitude of particulars: but because I am loth to bee tedious in my relation, I I haue brought heere with me Three Bookes , that the Iury may iudge of all the particulars, or they may be reade before the Prisoner, if your Lordship shall be pleased to haue it so. What bookes Sir Christianity? My Lord, one is that,    [   3 Bookes.  ] that is called The Three Conformities   [   1\. The 3 Conformities.  ] set out lately. The other is, De Origine Papatus ,    [   2 De Origine Papatus.  ] set out by one Doctor Morisin , and dedicated to his late Maiesty: and the third is, our learned Countriman Doctor Raynolds his Conference with Hart neuer answered of any Papist to this day,    [   3\. Raynolds and Hart.  ] who sheweth how the Popish seruice is like vnto the Iewish in very manie particulars, and wherein they be more Heathenish, then Iewish. I am content to haue them reade to spare your speech touching the Iewish Seruice. So hauing beene read, the Iudge yet wished Sir Christianity to declare openly how Paganlike Papists bee, and as the Heathenish Idolaters in Israel and Iudah were, and onely out of the vndoubted Testimonies of Scripture, and the Apocripha bookes, because those learned Authors had omitted it. My Lord, I shall (saith Sir Christianity ) performe this taske with as great breuity as I may: that this Prisoner (if it be possible) may see how wickedly hee hath dealt with mens soules to set vp insteed of Gods Seruice,    [ Papists like Pagans in many things.  ] an Idolatrous, Paganlike Worship. a 147 These Pagans set forth God like a Man. b 148 The Idolatrous Israelites had a Queene of Heauen. c 149 They had Images of gold and siluer, brasse, yron, wood, and stone, and some of clay: molten, some carued and grauen, some portrayed vpon walls, and other Pictures. Some were like men, Dan. 3\. 1. 1 Sam. 5\. 3.4. and some like Women, Act. 19\. 27. 2 Macab. 1\. 13. 1 Sam. 31\. 10. some like Beasts, like S. George and the Dragon, Exod. 34\. Wisd. 11\. 15. They adorned them with siluer and and gold, Ier. 10\. 4. and set Crownes vpon some of their heads, couering them with costly garments and of diuers colours, Deut. 7\. 25. Hab. 2\. 19. Baruch. 6\. 8, 9.14, 15. 29, 39, 50, 55, 58. Ezek. 16\. 18. Wisd. 13\. 14. carrying a Scepter in the hand, or a dagger or an axe, Baruch 6\. 14.15. They set them vp with great deuotion  & solemnity, with musick and melodie, Dan. 3\. 3. with singing dansing and other delights, Exod. 32\. 5. They built Temples for these Images, Ioel. 3\. 5. 2 Machab. 1\. 13.15. Baruch. 6\. 18. which were the houses of their Gods, Iudg. 17\. 4. 1 Samuel 5\. 2. and called them Sanctuaries, Isai. 16\. 12. They had Chappels for them, Amos 7\. 12. Yea, they set them vpon tops of hills, 1 King. 14\. 23. 2 King. 17\. 10. They had them in priuate houses, Iudg. 17\. 4.18. in chambers, Ezek. 8\. 12. and in secret places, Deut. 27\. 15. They had their pleasant groues planted, Ier. 17\. 2. 1 King. 14\. 23 and there also had their Images, 1 King. 15\. 13. 2 Chron. 15\. 16. 2 King. 17\. 10. They had their standing Pillars and Images, as the Papists their Crosses, Deut. 12\. 3. & 16\. 22. 2 King. 17\. 10. Leuit. 26\. 1. these were in the head of High- waies and Streets of Cities, Ezek. 16\. 31. Ier. 11\. 13. The multitude were allured by the gorgeous decking of them, Wisd. 14\. 20. & 15\. 5, 6. Yea, they doted vpon them, Ezek. 8\. 10.11. They worshipped them, bowed vnto them, and fell downe before them, Dan. 3\. 2. Isa. 44\. 17. Ios. 23\. 16. They would lift vp their eyes vnto them, Ezek. 33, 25. Pray vnto them. 1 King. 18\. 26. Hab. 2\. 19. Isa. 44\. 17. Kisse them, Hos. 13\. 2. 2 King. 19\. 18. set vp candles before them, Baruch. 6\. 19. Make vowes to them, Baruch 6\. 35. and goe on Pilgrimage to some of them very farre, Ier. 51\. 44. expecting some miraculous cure from the Image, Ba. 6\. 41. in entering into their Temples they sprinkled themselues with water, Alters they had of stone, Isa. 65\. 3. they vsed vaine repetitions in their prayers, Mat. 6\. 7. They measured their Religion  & goodnes thereof by plenty, Ier. 44\. 7. They had their sacrificing Priests, Act. 14\. 13. and they were shauen Priests, Baruch 6\. 31.32. Sometimes they were of the basest of the people, 1 Kings 12\. 31. whosoeuer would, might for monie or for monie worth, make himselfe a Priest, 1 King . 12. 31. 2 Chron. 13\. 9. And some serued for base wages, Iudg. 17\. They had their Concubines, Baruch 6\. 11. Hos. 4\. 14. Some of them would weare haire cloathes and torment themselues, 1 King . 18. 26.28. Zach. 13\. 4. and of a Deuotion in a Will-worship macerate their bodies, punishing  & not sparing their bodies, Col. 2\. 23. Their Teachers taught for hire, Micha 3\. 11 2 Pet. 2\. 13.15. Reu. 2\. Tit. 1\. 11. For guifts, they would promise life  & peace, Ezek. 13\. 22. Ier. 23\. 14.17. In their seruice they had variety of Musick, Dan. 3\. their set holy-daies, Exod. 32\. 2 King . 13. They had their holy women attending the Idol seruice, Exek. 8\. 14. working for them, 13.18. 2 King . 23. 7. and prophecying lyes, Ezek. 13\. 22. and were great worshippers of the Queen of heauen, Ier. 7\. 18. & 44\. 19. They had also their seueral gods for their seueral Countries as Papists haue their Saints, 2 King . 17. 29. & 18\. 34. They would pray to these and sweare by them, Ier. 5\. 7. & 12\. 16. Gen. 31\. 53. 1 King . 19. 2. 2 King . 17. 35. Zeph. 1\. 5. Some in Israel which fell to Heathenish Idolatry were like Church Papists; for they would worship Idols and yet goe to Gods house and heare his Prophets, Ier. 7\. 8. 10. 2 King . 17. 41. Ezek. 14\. 3.7. & 20\. 1. 31. & 23.29. When Idolatry was cast out of the Church (as wee haue done the Idolatry of Rome) the Idolaters would condemne it, as an ill act in them, and speake against the seruing of God aright, as Papists do against vs, 2 King. 18\. 22. They worshipped towards the East, Ezek. 8\. 16. They were very superstitious, Acts 19\. They liued in very grosse ignorance of the truth, and in liberty of sinning, Isa. 44\. 18, 19. & 45\. 20. Ephes. 4\. 18, 19. Wisd. 14, 15, 16, 17. They worshipped they knew not what, Ioh. 4\. 22 Their Festiuals after their Idol-seruice they spent in eating, drinking, singing, dancing, Exod. 32\. 6. 18, 19. They had their reuellings and meetings full of excesse ryot, 1 Pet. 4\. 3. And would wonder at,  & speake ill of such as would not be like them. They had Brothel houses, Ezek. 16\. 24. 2 King . 23. 7. 1 King . 15. 12, 13. & 14\. 24. & 22\. 26.They had amongst them Coniurers, Wizards, Charmers,  150 Obseruers of times, Southsayers, Astrologers, Starregazers and such like. To these the people resorted  & consulted with, 2 King . 21. 6. 1 Sam. 5\. 2. 1 Chron. 10\. 13. Hest. 3\. 7. & 9\. 24. Deut. 18\. 14. Isa. 19\. 3. & 47\. 12, 13. Hos. 4\. 12. Ezek. 21\. 21. Ier. 8\. 17. Act. 8\. 10. They sacrificed to Nets, and burnt incense to Draggs, Hab. 1\. 16. They beleeued that some of their Images were approued of their great God from heauen, Act. 15\. 35. They were cruell and bloudily minded against all that were against their Idolatry, Hos. 10\. 14. & 13\. 16. 2 King . 21. 15.16. Iudg. 6\. 30. 2 Chron. 24\. 18.21. The Idolaters in Israel and Iudah brought in the Heathen as Gods plague vpon them to punish them for their Idolatry, 2 Chron. 24\. 23. & 21\. 16, 17. & 33\. 11. & 30\. 6. 10, 17. 2 King . 17. 18. as the Papists haue brought the Turkes vpon the Christian world by their Imagery and Idolatry, Reu. 9\. They were stupid and without vnderstanding in their Idol-making and in setting them vp to worship them, Isa. 44\. 14.20. and so continued therein obstinate as the Papists doe. And thus haue I shewed what I can say (my Lord) touching the Heathenish Idolaters and their practises. Your euidence is so cleere (Sir Christianity ) as heereby all may see, how Pagan-like Papists bee in their Imagery,    [   Master Atturney Generall, his euidence against Papistry.  ] Priests and Temples. Is there any further euidence? Then stands M r . Atturney Generall: & did proue him to be guilty of high-treaso both against the person and the lawes of his Soueraigne. My Lord, (saith he) this fellow vnder pretence of Religion (for all must be couered with his shadow) hath set vp another spiritual Head ouer the church, besides Christ, (euen Antichrist his greatest enemy) as is sufficiently proued. He hath set vp also Mediators of intercession besides Christ: also in his rebellious pride of heart he hath exalted mans Merit , and made him a party Sauiour of himselfe, by satisfactory punishments either heere or in their feigned Purgatory. Thus is he a Rebell and an Abettor of Rebels against Christ. Againe, the Law of Christ (the holy Scriptures) he hath notoriously corrupted and abused many waies. 1 Hee maketh it no perfect rule . 2 Hee teacheth blasphemously that the Originall is corrupt and so shaketh the faith of all such as rest on the Scriptures. 3 He hath added to them mens writings called Apocrypha , to make them Canonicall . 4 He hath feigned a traditionall word & equalleth the same with the Scriptures. 5 He debarred for a long time the translating of Gods Word into a knowne tongue to keepe the people from the vnderstanding thereof. 6 Being enforced at length to translate it, hee hath of purpose done it corruptlie , and with many vncooth & obscure words, hath hidden the truth still, to keepe the people in blindnesse. 7 Yet this their so corrupt and obscure Translation is not admitted indifferently to all , but to some, and to these vnder license, for which they pay money. 8 These parties, though they may read the Scriptures, yet must it bee with the Popes Spectacles , and may not see farther then the false Teacher pleaseth, nor conceiue otherwise of the Sense, then he suggesteth, though the Text be neuer so cleare of it selfe. 9 They blasphemously publish that the Scriptures are a Nose of Wax , a dead letter, sowterly Inke, dumbe Iudges and a blacke Gospell, inkie Diuinity and may haue one sense one time, and another at another time,    [   Causanus in his Epist. log. Bohem.  ] according to the Churches state & condition. 10 They set vp a corrupt Latine Translation , for as authenticall as the Originalls in the Hebrew and the Greeke. 11 And Lastly, they brought into the Church insteed of the holy Bible a booke of Lyes to be read. Thus is this wicked wretch guilty of High-Treason against our Soueraigne. Besides that, hee hath counterfeited his Maiesties Broad Seale, inuenting new Sacraments neuer of Christs institution, and hath conspired and plotted the death of an innumerable multitude of his Maiesties Subiects in a most cruell and bloudy manner, My Lord, he is no way longer to be indured: for wee shall neuer bee at Peace as long as hee may haue liberty to liue; for he is a ranke Traitor to our King and State: an vnderminer of Religion and the true Church of Christ, and an enemie to our peace  & welfare in the Common-Wealth. Gentlemen , (saith the Iudge) you of the Iury haue heard Master Atturnyes witnes, also what both Master Verity and Sir Christianity haue spoken against him: now that you haue heard the euidence so fully: what say you touching the Prisoner, is he guiltie or no? Then the foreman in the name of all the rest answereth guilty, my Lord. Whereupon the Iudge turneth to the Prisoner & saith, Papistry thou hearest what grieuous iniquities, foule and filthy abominations, murthers, and massacres haue beene laid to thy charge; thou hast heard the Verdict of these so learned, and well approued Gentlemen, chosen without all partiality to go vpon thee. And they in their iudgement, vpon their consciences, haue found thee guilty. What canst thou say for thy selfe, that sentence of death should not bee pronounced against thee. My Lord,   [   Papistries appeale.  ] the Iurie assuredly is corrupted by some meanes or other, else would they neuer haue found me guilty: for our learned men haue cited many of these in my behalfe, and therefore I appeale from them to a Generall Counsell , for the Triall of their honestie in this Verdict . Vpon this lewd surmise and brazen-faced accusation, all the Iury fell a murmuring, being much grieued to be taxed of faithlesnes and periurie. The worshipfull gentlemen the Iustices and Sheriffs began to speak in their behalfe, but the Iudge standing vp, staid them and made answer for them. Papistrie: to be briefe with thee, thou art shamelesly impudent to accuse these worthy Gentlemen: for iustly proceeding according to the cleere Euidence to thy face. For thy learned men, they haue only cited the names of some of these, but without their knowledge or consent. Yea, many testimonies they bring vnder their names, which indeed are proued to be counterfeits, abusing their vnaduised Readers in their vniust defence of thee. As for thy Appeale to a Generall Counsell , its but to set a good face vpon an ill cause; for thou knowest that we haue long desired a Free General Counsell , but not a gathering together; like the lewd Conuenticle of Trent . But art thou not ashamed to conceit the bringing of these mens verdict to the tryall? We must by them be tried,  & not they by vs. By what canst thou trie the Principles of Religion? wilt thou deny them? must Fathers, Councelles, Scriptures & al be brought vnder our Iudgements? Thou haddest no cause to taxe the Iurie; if any had bin in fault, it should haue been the Witnesses: but canst thou tax Verity of lying, or Christianity of falsehood? As for M  r . Attourney , his speech is no more then your owne words, writings and practise doe testifie. Heare therefore thy Sentence, iustly deserued before God and men. Papistry ; thou hast bin indictted by the name of Papistry , of all these former treasons, rebellions, cospiracies, gun-powder plots, murthers, massacres, falsehood, heresies, Iudaisme  & Paganisme, and of that thy detestable Idolatry, and for the same, hast been arraigned, thou hast pleaded not guilty, hast put thy selfe vpon thy triall, and beeing found guilty, hauing no more to say for thy selfe, this is the Law. That thou the Mystery of Iniquitie ,    [   Papistry condemned.  ] with the old Serpent , called the diuel , or Sathanas ,  151 thy farther, with thy lewde mother, that great Whore , drunk with the bloud of the Martyrs of Iesvs , which sitteth vpon a Scarlet-coloured Beast, as also with that false Prophet the sonne of Perdition , thy guide and gouernour shall bee cast aliue where the Dragon is, into the Lake of fire , 152 burning with brimstone, there to be tormented with all thy marked ones in the presence of the holy Angells, and in the presence of the Lamb, without rest day  & night, the smoake of which torment shall ascend vp for euer and for euer, without mercy or hope or redemption. After this Sentence,   [   The Court breaketh vp.  ] there is made an Oyes , and so the Court breaketh vp; the Iudge ariseth, the Iustices and Gentle men attend him, the Sheriffe with the Vnder-sheriffe and his seruants going before with the sounding of a Trumpet, and so doe conduct him to his Lodging , and there doe leaue him with rest and peace. 
