 Not omitting that Ancient forme of beginning Tales: Once vpon a Time it was my chance to trauaile into that noble County of Kent, the weather beeing wet and my two-legd horse being almost tyred (for indeede my owne leggs were all the supporters that my body had) I went dropping into an Ale-house, there found I first a kinde well-come, next good lyquor, then kinde strangers, (which made good Company) then an honest Hoast, whose loue to good liquor was written in red Caracters, both in his nose, cheekes and forehead; an Hoastesse I found there too, a woman of very good carriage, and though she had not so much colour (for what she had done) as her rich husband had, yet all beholders might perceiue by the roundnesse of her belly, that she was able to draw a pot dry at a draught and ne're vnlace for the matter. Well to the fire I went where I dryed my out-side, and wet my inside; the Ale beeing good, and I in good Company, I lapt in so much of this nappy liquor, that it begot in mee a holdnesse to talke and desire of them, to know what was the reason that the people of that Country were called Long-tayles. The Hoast sayd, all the reason that euer hee could heare was, because the people of that Country formerly did vse to goe in side skirted Coates: There is (sayd an old man that sat by) an other reason that I haue heard, that is this. In the time of the Saxons Conquest of England, there were diuers of our Countrymen slaine by Treachery, which made those that suruiued more carefull in dealing with their enemies, as you shall heare. After many ouerthrowes that our Country-men had receiued by the Saxsons, they dispersed themselues into diuers Companies into Woods; and so did much damage by their suddaine assaults to the Saxons, that Hengist their King hearing the damage that the did, (and not knowing how to subdue them by force) vsed this Policy. Hee sent to a Company of them, and gaue them his word for their liberty and safe returne, if that they would come vnarmed and speake with him: This they seemed to grant vnto, but for their more secursity (knowing how little hee esteemed oathes or promises) they went euery one armed with a shorte sword hanging iust behind, vnder their garments, so that the Saxons thought not of any weapons they had but it prooued otherwise: For when Hengist his men (that were placed to cut them off) fell all vpon them, they found such vnlooked a resistance, that most of the Saxons were slaine, and they that escaped wondring how they could doe that hurt hauing no Weapons, (as they saw) reported that they strucke downe men like Lyons with their Tayles, and so they euer after were called Kentish Long-Tayles. I told him this was strange, if true, and that their Countries honor bound them more to beleeue in this, then it did me. Truly Sir, sayd my Hoastesse, I thinke wee are called Long-Tayles, by reason our Tales are long that wee vse to passe the time withall, and make our selues merry: Now good Hoastesse sayd I, let me entreate from you one of those Tales: You shall (sayd shee) and that shall not be a common one neither, for it is a Long-Tala, a merry Tale, and a sweete Tale, and thus it beginnes. Once vpon a Time, a great while a goe, when men did eate more, and drinke lesse, then men were more honest, that knew no knauery, then some now are, that confesse the knowledge, and deny the practice: About that time (when so ere it was, there was wont to walke many harmelesse Spirits called Fayries, dancing in braue order in Fayry Kings on greene hills, with sweete Musicke, (sometime inuisible) in diuers shapes; many mad Prankes would they play, as pinching of sluts black and blew, and misplacing things in ill ordered houses, but louingly would they vse Wenches that cleanly were, giuing them siluer, and other pretty toyes, which they would leaue for them sometimes in their shooes, other times in their pockets, sometimes in bright Basons and other cleane vessels. Amongst these Fayries, was there a hee Fayrie, whether hee was then King or no, I know not, but surely hee had great gouernment, and commaund in that Country, as you shall heare: This same hee Fayry did loue a proper young Wench, for euery night would hee with other Fayries come to the house, and there dance in her Chamber, and oftentimes shee was forced to dance with him, and at his departure would hee leaue her siluer and iewels, to expresse his loue vnto her: At last this mayde was with childe, and being asked who was the father of it? She answered, a man that nightly came to visit her, but earely in the morning he would go his way, whither she knew not, he went so suddainly. Many old women that then had more wit, then those that are now liuing, and haue lesse sayd, that a Fayrie had gotten her with childe, and they bid her be of good comfort, for the childe must needes be Fortunate, that had so noble a Father as a Fayry was; and should worke many strange Wonders: To be short, her time grew, on and she was deliuered of a man childe, who (it should seeme) so reioyced his fathers heart, that euery night his mother was supplied with necessary things, that are befitting a woman in child-birth, so that in no meane manner neither, for there had shee rich imbrodered Cushions, Stooles, Carpits, Couerlets, delicate Linnen: Then for meate, shee had Capons, Chickins, Mutton, Lambe, Phesant, Snite, Woodcocke, Partridge, Qualie; The Gossips liked this fare so well, that she neuer wanted company: Wine had shee of all sorts, as Muskadine, Sacke, Malmsie, Clarret, White and Bastard; this pleased her Neighbours well, so that few that came to see her, but they had home with them a medicine for the Fleaes: Sweet meates too had they in such aboundance, that some of their teeth are rotten to this day; and for musicke shee wanted not, or any other thing she desired. All praysed this honest Fayry for his care, and the childe for his beauty, and the mother for a happy woman. In briefe christened hee was, at the which all this good cheare was doubled, which made most of the women so wise, that they forgot to make themselues vnreary, and so lay in their cloathes; and none of them next day could remember the childs name but the Clarke, and hee may thanke his Booke for it, or else it had beene vtterly lost: So much for the birth of little Robin. When Robin was growne to sixe yeeres of age, hee was so knauish that all the neighbours did complaine of him, for no sooner was his mothers backe turned, but hee was in one knauish action or other, so that his mother was constrained (to auoyde the complaints) to take him with her to market, or wheresoeuer shee went or rid: But this helped little or nothing, for if hee rid before her, then would hee make mouthes, and ill-fauoured faces at those hee met, if he rid behind her, then would hee clap his hand on his Tayle: So that his mother was weary of the many complaints that came against him, yet knew she not how to beat him iustly for it, because she neuer saw him doe that which was worthy blowes: The complaints were daily so renewed, that his mother promised him a whipping, Robin did not like that cheere, and therefore to auoyde it, hee ranne away, and left his mother a heauy woman for him. After that Robin Good-fellow had gone a great way from his mothers house, hee began to bee a hungry, and going to a Taylors house, hee asked something for Gods sake: the Taylor gaue him meate, and vnderstanding that hee was masterlesse, hee tooke him for his man, and Robin so plyed his worke, that he got his Masters loue. On a time his Master had a Gowne to make for a Woman, and it was to bee done that night, they both sate vp late, so that they had done all but setting on the sleeues by twelue a clocke: this master then being sleepy sayd, Robin, whip thou on the sleeues, and then come thou to bed, I will goe to bed before; I will sayd Robin: So soone as his master was gone, Robin hung vp the gowne, and taking both sleeues in his hands, hee whipt and lashed them on the gowne, so stood he till the morning that his master came downe: His master seeing him stand in that fashion, asked him what hee did: Why quoth hee as you bid mee, whip on the sleeues: Thou Rogue sayd his Master, I did means that thou shouldest haue set them on quickly and slightly: I would you had sayd so sayd Robin, for then had not I lost all this sleepe, to bee short his master was faine to do the worke; but ere hee had made an end of it, the woman came for it, and with a loud voyce chafed for her Gowne: The Taylor thinking to please her, bid Robin fetch the remnants that they left yesterday (meaning thereby meate that was left) but Robin to crosse his Master the more, brought downe the remnants of cloath that was left of the Gowne: At the sight of this, his master looked pale but the woman was glad, saying, I like this breakefast so well, that I will giue you a pint of wine to it: she sent Robin for the wine, but hee neuer returned againe to his master. After Robin had trauailed a good dayes iourny from his masters house, hee sate downe, and beeing weary hee fell a sleepe; no sooner had slumber tooken full possession of him, and closed his long opened eye-lids, but hee thought hee saw many goodly proper personages in anticke measures, tripping about him, and withall hee heard such musicke (as hee thought that Orpheus ) that famous Greeke Fidler (had hee beene aliue) compared to one of these, had beene as infamous as a Welch-Harper that playes for cheese and Onions; as delights most commonly last not long, so did those end sooner then hee would willingly they should haue done: and for very griefe he awaked and found by him lying a scroule, wherein was written these lines following in golden letters. Robin my only Sonne and Heire, How to liue take thou no care, By nature thou hast cunning shifts, Which Ile encrease, with other gifts: Wish what thou wilt, thou shalt it haue, And for to vex both foole and knaue: Thou hast power to change thy shape To horse, to hog, to dog, to ape. Trans-formed thus by any meanes, See none thou harm'st but knaues and queanes: But loue thou those that honest be, And helpe them in necessity: Doe thus and all the world shall know The prankes of Robin Good-fellow: For by that name thou cald shalt be To ages last posterity: If thou obserue my iust command, One day thou shalt see Fayry Land; This more I giue, who tels thy prankes, From those that heare them, shall haue thankes. Robin hauing read this, was very ioyfull, yet longed he to know whether he had this power or not, and to try if hee wished for some meate, presently it was before him: Then wished hee for Beere and Wine, he straight way had it: This liked him well, and because he was weary, he wished himselfe a Horse, no sooner was his wish ended, but he was transformed, and seemed a Horse of twenty pound price, and leaped, and curueted as nimble as if he had beene in stable at racke and manger a full moneth: Then wished he himselfe a Dog, and was so, then a Tree, and was so: so from one thing to another, till hee was certaine and well assured that hee could change himselfe to any thing whatsoeuer. he spake in this manner: Friend (quoth he) what is a Clocke? a thing (answered the Clowne) that shewes the time of the day: why then (said Robin Good-fellow ) bee thou a Clocke, and tell me what time of the day it is; I owe thee not so much seruice (answered hee againe) but because thou shalt thinke thy selfe beholding to mee, know that it is the same time of the day, as it was yesterday at this time. These crosse answers vext Robin Good-fellow, so that in himselfe hee vowed to be reuenged of him, which he did in this manner. Robin Good-fellow turned himselfe into a Bird, and followed this fellow; who was going into a Field a little from that place to catch a Horse that was at grasse: the Horse being wilde ran ouer Dike, and Hedge, and the fellow after, but to little purpose, for the Horse was too swift for him: Robin was glad of this occasion, foor now or neuer was the time to put his reuenge in action. Presently, Robin shaped himselfe like to the Horse that the fellow followed, and so stood before the fellow, presently the fellow tooke hold of him and got on his backe, but long had he not rid, but with a stumble he hurld this churlish Clowne to the ground, that he almost broke his necke, yet tooke he not this for a sufficient reuenge for the crosse answers he had receiued, but stood still and let the fellow mount him once more. In the way the fellow was to ride, was a great plash of water of a good depth, thorow this must he of necessity ride: no sooner was hee in the middest of it, but Robin Good-fellow left him with nothing but a Pack-saddle betwixt his leggs, and in the shape of a fish, swome to the shore, and ran away laughing, ho, ho, hoh: leauing the poore fellow almost drowned. they were hindred from inioying each other by a cruell old leacher, who would not suffer this louing couple to marry: Robin pittiyng them, went to them and sayd: I haue heard your complaints, and do pitty you, be ruled by me, and I will see that you shall haue both your hearts content, and that suddainly if you please: After some amazement the maiden sayd, alas Sir how can that be? my Uncle because I will not grant to his lust, is so streight ouer me, and so oppresseth me with worke night and day, that I haue not so much time as to drinke or speake with this young man, whom I loue aboue all men liuing: If your worke bee all that hindreth you (sayd Robin ) I will see that done, aske mee not how, nor make any doubt of the performance, I will doe it: Go you with your loue for 24 houres I will free you, in that time marry, or doe what you will, if you refuse my proffered kindnesse, neuer looke to enioy your wished for happinesse. I loue true louers, honest men, good-fellowes, good huswiues, good meats, good drinks, and all things that good is, but nothing that is ill; for my name is Robin Good-fellow; and that you shall see that I haue power to performe what I haue vndertooke, see what I can do, presently he turned himselfe into a horse, and away he ran: at the sight of which they were both amazed, but better considering with themselues, they both determined to make good vse of their time, and presently they went to an old Fryer, who presently married them: they payd him and went their way, where they supped and lay, I know not, but surely they liked their lodging will the next day. Robin when that he came neere the old mans House, turned himselfe into the shape of the young maide, and entred the house, where after much chiding he fell to the worke that the mayde had to do, which hee did in halfe the time that another could do it in: The old man seeing the speede he made, thought that she had some meeting that night (for he tooke Robin Good-fellow for his neece) therfore he gaue him order for other worke, that was too much for any one to de in one night: Robin did that in a trise, and playd many mad prankes beside ere the day appeared. In the morning hee went to the two louers to their bed-side, and bid God giue them ioy, and told them all things went well, and that ere night he would bring them one 10 pounds of her Unckles to beginne the World with: They both thanked him, which was all the requitall that hee looked for, and beeing therewith well contented, hee went his way laughing. Home went he to the old man, who then was by, and marueiled how the worke was done so soone. Robin seeing that sayd, Sir I pray maruaile not, for a greater wonder then that this night hath happened to me, good neece what is that? (sayd the old man:) This Sir, but I shame to speake it yet I will: weary with worke I slepe, and I did dreame that I consented to that which you haue so often desired of me (you know what it is I meane) and me thought you gaue me as reward 10. pounds with your consent to marry that young man that I haue loued so long: Diddest thou dreame so? thy dreame I will make good, for vnder my hand wrighting, I giue my free consent to marry him, or whom thou doest please to marry: (and withall writ) and for the 10. pounds goe but into the out Barne and I will bring it thee presently: How sayst thou (sayd the old leacher) wilt thou? Robin with silence did seeme to grant, and went toward the Barne, the old man made haste, told out his money, and followed. Being come thither, hee hurled the money on the ground, saying: this is the most pleasing bargaine that euer I made; and going to embrace Robin, Robin tooke him vp in his armes and carried him foorth; first, drew he him thorow a Pond to coole his hot blood, then did he carry him where the young married couple were, and said, Here is your Uncles consent vnder his hand, then here is 10. pounds he gaue you, and there is your Uncle, let him deny it if hee can. The old man for feare of worse vsage, said, all was true: Then am I as good as my word said Robin , and so went away laughing: The old man knew himselfe duly punished, and turned his hatred into loue, and thought afterward as well of them as if shee had beene his owne. The second part shall shew many incredible things done by Robin Good-fellow, (or otherwise called Hob-Goblin ) and his Companions, by turning himselfe into diuers sundry Shapes. FINIS. THE SECOND PART of Robin Good-Fellow, commonly called Hob-Goblin: With his mad Prankes, and merry Iests. LONDON, Printed for F. Groue dwelling on Snow-hill ouer against the Sarazens head. 1628. helpe the Maydes to breake Hempe, to bowlt, to dresse Flaxe, and to spin and do other workes, for hee was excellent in euery thing; One night hee comes to a Farmers House where there was a good handsome mayde, this mayde hauing much worke to do, Robin one night did helpe her, and in sixe houres did bowlt more then she could haue done in twelue houres: The mayde wondred the next day how her worke came, and to know the doer, shee watched the next night that did follow: about twelue of the Clocke in came Robin, and fell to breaking of Hempe, and for to delight himselfe, he sung this mad Song: And can the Physitian make sicke men well? And can the Magician a fortune Deuine? Without Lilly, Germander, and sops in Wine? With sweet-bryer, and bon-fire, and straw-berry wyer, and Collumbine. Within and out, in and out round as a ball, With hither and thither, as strait as a line, With Lilly, Germander, and sops in wine: with sweet-bryer, and bon-fire, and straw-berry wyer, and Collumbine. When Saturne did liue, there liued no poore, The King and the Begger with rootes did dine, With Lilly, Germander, and sops in wine: with sweet-bryer, and bon-fire, and straw-berry wyer, and Collumbine. The Mayde seeing him bare in clothes, pittied him, and against the next night prouided him a wast-coate: Robin comming the next night to worke as he did before) espied the wast-coate, whereat he started & said: Because thou lay'st me himpen, hampen, I will neither bolt, nor stampen: 'Tis not your garments new or old That Robin loues, I feele no cold: Had you left me milke, or creame, You should haue had a pleasing dreame; Because you left no drop, or crum, Robin neuer more will come. So went hee away laughing ho, ho, hoh: the mayde was much grieued and discontented at his anger, for euer after she was faine to do her worke her selfe, without the helpe of Robin Good-fellow. A company of young men hauing beene making merry with their sweet hearts, were at their comming home, to come ouer a Heath: Robin Good-fellow knowing of it, met them; and to make some pastime, hee led them vp and downe the Death a whole night, so that they could not get out of it, for hee went before them in the shape of a walking fire, which they all saw and followed till the day did appeare, then Robin left them, and at his departure spake these words: Get you home, you merry Lads, Tell your Mammies and your Dads, And all those that newes desire, How you saw a walking fire. Wenches that doe smile, and lispe, Vse to call me willy Wispe; If that you but weary be, It is sport alone for me: Away vnto your houses goe, And I'le goe laughing ho, ho, hoh. The fellowes were glad that he was gone, for they were all in a great feare that hee would haue done them some mischiefe. but those that did wrong to others. It was his chance one day to goe thorow a Field where he heard one call for helpe, hee going neere where he heard the cry, saw a lusty Gallant that would haue forced a young maiden to his lust: but the mayden in no wise would yeelde, which made her cry for helpe: Robin good-fel-low seeing of this, turned himselfe into the shape of a Hare, and so ranne betweene the lustfull Gallants legges: this Gallant thinking to haue taken him, hee presently turned himselfe into a Horse, and so perforce carried away this Gallant on his backe; the Gentleman cryed out for helpe, for he thought that the Diuell had bin come to fetch him for his wickednesse, but his crying was in vaine, for Robin did carry him into a thicke Hedge, and there left him so prickt and scratched, that hee more desired a playster for his paine, then a wench for his pleasure. Thus the poore mayde was freed from this Ruffin, and Robin Good-fellow to see this Gallant so tame, went away laughing, ho, ho, hoh. keeper. In this Country of ours there was a rich man dwelled, who to get wealth together, was so sparing, that hee could not find in his heart to giue his belly foode enough: In the Winter hee neuer would make so much fire as would roast a Blacke-pudding, for hee found it more profitable to sit by other mens: His apparell it was of the fashion that none did weare, for it was such that did hang at a Brokers stall till it was as weather-beaten as an old signe: This man for his couetousnesse was so hated of all his neighbours, that there was not one that gaue him a good word. Robin Good-fellow grieued to see a man of such wealth doe so little good, and therefore practised to better him in this manner. One night the Usurer being in bed, Robin in the shape of a Night-Rauen came to the Window, and there did beate with his wings, and croaked in such manner, that this old Usurer thought hee should haue presently dyed for feare. This was but a preparation to what he did intend, for presently after hee appeared before him at his Beds-feete in the shape of a Ghost with a Torch in his hand, at the sight of this the old Usurer would haue risen out of his bed, and haue leaped out at the Window, but he was stayed by Robin Good-fellow, who spake to him thus. If thou stirre out of thy bed, I doo vow to strike thee dead. I doe come to doe thee good, Recall thy wits and starkled blood: The mony which thou vp dost store, In soule and body makes thee poore: Doe good with mony while you may, Thou hast not long on earth to stay, Doe good I say, or day and night, I hourely thus will thee affright. Thinke on my words and so farwell, For being bad, I live in hell. Hauing said thus, he vanished away, and left this Usurer in a great terror of mind; and for feare of being frighted againe with this Ghost, hee turned very liberall, and liued amongst his neighbours as an honest man should doe. haue drowned him. One day Robin Good-fellow walking thorow the streete, found at a doore sitting a pretty woman, this woman was wife to the Weauer, and was a winding of quils for her Husband: Robin liked her so well, that for her sake he became seruant to her Husband, and did daily worke at the Loome: but all the kindnesse that hee shewed was but lost, for his Mistres would shew him no fauour, which made him many times to exclame against the whole sex in Satyricall Songs; and one day being at worke, he sung this: To the tune of Reioyce Bag-pipes. Why should my Loue now waxe Vnconstant, wauering, fickle, vnstayd? With nought can she me taxe, I ne're recanted what I once said. I now doe see as Nature fades, And all her workes decay: So women, all Wiues, Widdowes, Maydes, From bad to worse doe stray. As hearbs, trees, rootes, and plants, In strength and growth are daily lesse, So all things haue their wants, The heauenly signes mooue and digresse; And honesty in womens hearts Hath not her former being, Their thoughts are ill like other parts, Nought else in them's agreeing. I sooner thought Thunder Had power or'e the Laurell Wreath, Then shee womens wonder Such periurd thoughts should liue to breathe: They all Hyena like will weepe, When that they would deceiue: Deceit in them doth lurke and sleepe, Which makes me thus to grieue. Young mans delight farwell, Wine, women, game, pleasure, adieu: Content with me shall dwell, I'le nothing trust but what is true. Though she were false, for her I'le pray, Her false-hood made me blest: I will renew from this good day, My life by sinne opprest. Moued with this song and other complaints of his, shee at last did fancy him, so that the Weauer did not like, that Robin should bee so saucy with his Wife; and therefore gaue him warning to be gone for hee would keepe him no longer. This grieued this louing couple to parte one from the other, which made them to make vse of the time that they had. The Weauer one day comming in, found them a kissing: at this hee said, but vowed in himselfe to bee reuenged of his men that night following: night being come, the Weauer went to Robins bed and tooke him out of it, (as hee then thought) and ran apace to the Riuer side to hurle Robin in; but the Weauer was deceiued, for Robin instead of himselfe had laid in his bed a sack full of yarne, it was that that the Weauer carried to drowne, the Weauer standing by the Riuer side said: Now I will coole your hot blood Master Robert, and if you cannot swimme the better, you shall sincke and drowne, with that he hurled the sack in, thinking that it had bin Robin Good-fellow. Robin standing behind him said: For this your kindnesse Master I you thanke, Go swimme your selfe, I'le stay vpon the banke. With that Robin pushed him in and went laughing away, ho, ho, hoh. of the sport that he had there. On a time there was a great Wedding, to which there went many young lusty Lads, and pretty Lasses: Robin Good-fellow louing not to bee out of Action, shaped himselfe like vnto a Fidler, and with his Crowd vnder his arme went amongst them and was a very welcome man. There played hee whilst they danced; and tooke as much delight in seeing them, as they did in hearing him: at dinner he was desired to sing a song, which hee did, to the tune of Watton Townes end. It was a Country Lad That fashions strange would see, And he came to a Valting Schoole, Where Tumblers vse to be: He lik't his sport so well, That from it he'd not part, His Doxey to him still did cry, Come Busse thine owne sweet heart. They lik't his Gold so well, That they were both content, That he that night with his sweet heart Should passe in merry-ment: To Bed they then did goe, Full well he knew his part: Where he with words, and eke with deedes, Did Busse his owne sweet heart. Long were they not in Bed, But one knockt at the dore, And said, Vp, rise, and let me in: This vext both Knaue and Whore: He being sore perplext, From Bed did lightly start, No longer then could he indure To Busle his owne sweet heart. With tender steps he trod To see if he could spye The man that did him so molest, Which he with heauy eye Had soone beheld, and said, Alas my owne sweet heart, I now doe doubt if er'e we Busse, It must be at a Cart. At last the Bawd arose And opened the dore, And saw Discretion cloth'd in rug, Whose Office hates a Whore: He mounted vp the stayres, Being cunning in his arte, With little search, at last he found My youth and his sweete heart. He hauing wit at will, Vnto them both did say: I will not heare them speak one word, Watch-men, with them away; And cause they lou'd so well, 'Tis pitty they should part: Away with them to new Bride-well, There busse your owne sweet heart. His will it was fulfild, And there they had the Law: And whilst that they did nimbly spin, The hempe he needs must taw: He grownd, he thump't, he grew So cunning in his arte, He learnt the trade of beating hempe, By bussing his sweet heart. But yet he still would say, If I could get release, To see strange fashions Ile giue o're, And henceforth live in peace: The Towne where I was bred, And thinke by my desert, To come no more into this place, For bussing my sweet heart. They all liked his Song very well, and said that the young man had but ill lucke: thus continued hee playing and singing Songs till Candle light, then hee beganne to play his merry trickes in this manner: First hee put out the Candles, and then being darke, hee strucke the men good boxes on the eares, they thinking it had beene those that did sit next them, fell a fighting one with the other: So that there was not one of them but had either a broken head, or a bloody nose: at this Robin laughed heartily, the women did not scape him, for the handsomest hee kissed, the other hee pinched and made them scratch one the other, as if they had beene Cats: Candles being lighted againe, they all were friends, and fell againe to dancing, and after to supper. Supper beeing ended, a great Posset was brought forth, at this Robin Good- fellowes teeth did water, for it looked so louely, that hee could not keepe from it: To attaine to his wish he did turne himselfe into a Beare, both men and women (seeing a Beare amongst them) ranne away and left the whole Posset to Robin Good-fellow, he quickly made an end of it, and went away without his money: For the sport hee had was better to him then any money whatsoeuer. The feare that the Guests were in did cause such a smell, that the Bride-groome did call for perfumes: and in stead of a Posset he was faine to make vse of cold Beere. There was a Tapster, that with his pots smalnesse, and with frothing of his drinke, had got a good summe of money together: This nicking of the pots he would neuer leaue, yet diuers times he had bin vnder the hand of authority, but what money soeuer hee had for his abuses, hee would be sure (as they all doe) to get it out of the poore mans pot againe. Robin Good-fellow hating such knauery, put a tricke vpon him in this manner. Robin shaped himselfe like to the Tapsters Brewer, and came and demaunded twenty pounds which was due to him from the Tapster: the Tapster thinking it had beene his Brewer, payd him the meney, which money Robin gaue to the poore of that Parish before the Tapsters face: the Tapster praysed his charity very much, and said, That God would blesse him the better for such good deedes: so after they had dranke one with the other, they parted. Some foure dayes after the Brewer himselfe came for his money, the Tapster told him that it was paid, and that hee had a quittance from him to shew: Hereat the Brewer did wonder, and desired to see the quitttance; The Tapster fetched him a writing which Robin Good-fellow had giuen him in stead of a quittance, wherein was written as followeth, which the Brewer read to him. I Robin Good-fellow, true man and honest man, doe acknowledge to haue receiued of Nicke and Froth the Cheating Tapster, the summe of twenty pound, which money I haue bestowed (to the Tapsters content) amongst the poore of the Parish, out of whose pockets this aforesayd Tapster had picked the aforesaid summe; not after the manner of foisting, but after his excellent skill of bombasting, or a pint for a peny. If now thou wilt goe hang thy selfe, Then take thy Apron-strings. It doth me good when such foule birds Vpon the Gallowes sings. Per me Robin Good-fellow. At this the Tapster swore Walsingham, but for all his swearing, the Brewer made him to pay him his twenty pound. King Obreon seeing Robin Good-fellow doe so many honest and merry trickes, called him one night out of his Bed, with these words, saying: Robin my Sonne, come quickly rise, First stretch, then yawne, and rub thy eyes, For thou must goe with me to night, To see and taste of my delight: Quickly come my wanton Sonne, 'Twere time our sports were now begunne. Robin hearing this, rose and went to him, there were with King Obreon a many Fayries all attyred in greene silke, all these with King Obreon did welcome Robin Good-fellow into their company. Obreon tooke Robin by the hand and led him a dance, their Musician was the little Tom Thumb, for hee had an excellent Bag-pipe made of a Wrens quill and the skin of a Greene-land louse: This Pipe was so shrill & so sweete that a Scottish pipe compared to it, it would no more come neere it, then a Iewes-Trump doth to an Irish Harpe. After they had danced, King Obreon spake to his Sonne Robin Good-fellow in this manner: When ere you heare my Piper blow, From thy bed see that thou goe, For nightly you must with vs dance, When we in circles round doe prance. I loue thee Sonne, and by the hand, I carry thee to Fairy Land; Where thou shalt see what no man knowes, Such loue thee King Obreon owes. So marched they in good manner (with their Piper before) to the Fairy Land, there did King Obreon shew Robin Good-fellow many secrets which hee neuer did open to the world. shoulder, and cry chimney sweepe, but when any one did call him, then would he runne away laughing Ho, ho, hoh: Somtime hee would counterfeit a Begger begging very pitifully, but when they came to giue him an almes, he would runne away laughing as his manner was: Sometimes would hee knocke at mens doores. and when the seruants came, hee would blow out the Candle if they were men, but if they were women, hee would not onely put out their light, but kisse them full sweetly and then go away as his fashion was, ho, ho, hoh: Oftentimes would hee sing at a doore like a singing man, and when they did come to giue him his reward, he would turne his backe and laugh. in these humors of his, hee had many prerty Songs, which I will sing as perfect as I can. For his Chimney sweepers humors he had these Songs: The first is to the tune of, I haue beene a Fiddler these fifteene yeeres. Blacke I am from head to foote, And all doth come by chimney soote: Then maydens come and cherrish him, That makes your chimnies neate and trim. Hornes haue I store, but all at my backe, My head no ornament doth lacke: I giue my hornes to other men, And ne're require them againe. Then come away you wanton wiues, That loue your pleasures as your liues: To each good woman Ile giue two, Or more if she thinke them too few. Then would he chang his note and sing this following. To the tune of, What care I how faire she be? Be she blacker then the stocke, If that thou wilt make her faire, Put her in a Cambricke smocke, Buy her paint, and flaxen haire. One your Carrier brings to Towne, Will put downe your City bred: Put her on a Brokers Gowne, That will sell her mayden-head. Comes your Spaniard proud in minde, Heele haue the first cut or else none: The meeke Italian comes behind, But your French-man pickes the bone. Still she trades with Dutch and Scot, Irish and the Germaine tall: Till she get the thing you wot, Then her end's and Hospitall. A Song to the tune of the Spanish Pauin. When Vertue was a Country maide, And had no skill to set vp trade, She came vp with a Carriers lade, And lay at racke and manger. She whipt her pipe, she drunke her can. The pot was nere out of her span, She married a Tobacco-man, A Stranger, a Strangerr. They set vp shop in Hunney-lane, And thither flyes did swarme amaine, Some from France, some from Spaine, Traind in by scuruy Panders: At last this huney pot grew dry, Then both were forced for to fly To Flanders, to Flanders. Another to the tune of the Coranto. I peeped in at the Wooll sacke, O what a goodly sight did I Behold at mid-night chyme: The wenches were drinking of muld-sacke, Each youth on his knee that then did want A yeere and a halfe of his time: They leaped, and skipped, They kissed, and they clipped, And yet it was counted no crime. The Grocers chiefe seruant brought sugar, And out of his leather pocket he puld And kuld some pound and a halfe: For which he was sufferd to smacke her, That was his sweet-heart, and would not depart, But turn'd and lickt the Calfe: He rung her, and he flung her, He kist her, and he swung her, And yet she did nothing but laugh. Thus would he sing about Cities and Townes, & when any one cald him, he would change his shape, and goe laughing ho, ho, hoh: For his humors of begging, he vsed this Song to the tune of, The Iouiall Tinker. Good people of this mansion, Vnto the poore be pleased To doe some good, and giue some food, That hunger may be eased: My limbes with fire are burned, My goods and lands defaced; Of wife and child, I am beguild, So much am I debased: Oh giue the poore some bread, cheese, or butter, Bacon, hempe, or Flaxe, Some pudding bring, or other thing, My need doth make me aske. I am no common Begger, Nor am I skild in canting: You nere shall see a wench with me, Such trickes in me are wanting: I curse not if you giue not, But still I pray and blesse you, Still wishing ioy, and that annoy May neuer more possesse you: Oh giue the poore, some bread, cheese, or butter, Bacon, hempe, or flaxe, Some pudding bring, or other thing, My need doth make me aske. When any came to releeue him, then would he change himselfe into some other shape, and runne laughing ho, ho, hoh. Then would hee shape himselfe like to a singing man, and at mens windowes and doores, sing ciuill and vertuous Songs: one of which I will sing, To the tune of, Broome. If thou wilt lead a blest and happy life, I will describe the perfect way: First must thou shun all cause of mortall strife, Against thy lusts continually to pray. Attend vnto Gods word. Great comfort 'twill afford, 'Twill keepe thee from discord, Then trust in God the Lord; for euer, for euer, And see in this thou perseuer. So soone as day appeareth in the East, Giue thankes to him and mercy craue, So in this life thou shalt be surely blest, And mercy shalt thou find in graue. The conscience that is cleere, No horror doth it feare, 'Tis voyd of mortall care, And neuer doth despaire: but euer, but euer, Doth in the Word of God perseuer. Thus liuing when thou drawest to thy end, Thy ioyes they shall much more encrease: For then thy soule, thy true and louing friend, By death shall find a wish't release. From all that caused sinne, In which it liued in: For then it doth beginne, Those blessed ioyes to win: for euer, for euer, For there is nothing can them seuer. Those blessed ioyes which then thou shalt possesse, No mortall tongue can them declare: All earthly ioyes compar'd with this are lesse Then smallest mote, to the world so faire. Then is not that man blest, That must inioy this rest? Full happy is that guest, Inuited to this feast, that euer, that euer, Indureth, and is ended neuer. When they opened the window or doore, then would hee runne away laughing, ho, ho, hoh: Sometimes would be goe like a Bell-man in the night, and with many pretty verses delight the eares of those that waked at his Bell ringing: his verses were these. Maydes in your smockes, Looke well to your lockes, And your Tinder-boxe, Your wheeles and your rockes, Your Hens and your Cockes, Your Cowes and your Oxe, And beware of the Foxe, When the Bell-man knockes. Put out your fire and candle light, So they shall not you affright: May you dreame of your delights, And in your sleeps see pleasant sights: Good rest to all both old and young: The Bell-man now hath done his song. Then would he goe laughing, ho, ho, hoh, as his vse was, thus would he continually practise himselfe in honest mirth, neuer doing hurt to any that were cleanly or honest minded. they shewed him their seuerall conditions. Tom Thumbs braue Bag-pipe: he remembring the sound (according to the command of King Obreon ) went toward them: they for ioy that he was come, did circle him in, and in a ring did dance round about him. Robin Good-fellow seeing their loue to him, danced in the midst of them, and sung them this Song to the tune of, To him Bun. Round about little ones, quicke, and nimble: In and out wheele about, run, hop, or amble: Ioyne your hands louingly, well done Musition: Mirth keepeth man in health like a Phisicion. Elues, Vrchins, Goblins all, and little Fairyes That doe filch, blacke, and pinch, mayds of the Dairyes, Make a ring on this grasse, with your quicke measures: Tom shall play, and Ile sing, for all your pleasures. Pinch, and Patch, Gull, and Grim, Goe you together, For you can change your shapes Like to the Weather, Sib, and Tib, Licke, and Lull, You all haue trickes too, Little Tom Thumb that pipes, Shall goe betwixt you, Tom, tickle vp thy Pipes, Till they bee weary, I will laugh ho, ho, hoh, And make me merry. Make a ring on this grasse, With your quicke measures: Tom shall play, I will sing, For all your pleasures. The Moone shines faire and bright, And the Owle hollows, Mortals now take their rests Vpon their pillows: The Bats abroad likewise, And the night Rauen: Which doth vse for to call, Men to Deaths hauen. Now the Mice peepe abroad, And the Cats take them: Now doe young Wenches sleepe, Till their Dreames wake them. Make a ring on the grasse With your quicke measures: Tom shall play, I will sing, For all your pleasures. Thus danced they a good space, at last they left and sat downe vpen the grasse: and to requite Robin good-fellowes kindnesse, they promised to tell to him all the exploits that they were accustomed to doe. Robin thanked them and listned to them, and one begun to tell his Trickes in this manner. After that wee haue danced in this manner as you haue beheld, I that am called Pinch, do goe about fro house to house: sometimes I find the dores of the house open, that negligent seruant that left them so, I doe so nip him or her, that with my pinches their bodyes are as many colore as a Mackrels backe: then take I them & lay them in the doore, naked or vnnaked I care not whether there they lye many times till broad day, ere they waken: and many times against their wills, they shew some parts about them, that they would not haue openly seene. Sometimes I find a slut sleeping in the chimney corner, when she should be washing of her dishes, or doing something else which she hath left vndone: her I pinch about the armes, for not laying her armes to her labor: some I find in their Bed snoring and sleeping, and their houses lying as cleane as a nasty doggs kennell, in one corner benes, in another eg-shells, behind the doore a heap of dust, the dishes vnderfeet, and the Cat in the Cubbord: all these sluttish trickes I doe reward with blue legges, and blue armes, I find some slouens too as well as sluts, they pay for their beastlinesse too as well as the women-kind; for if they vncass a slouen & not vnty their points, I so pay their armes that they cannot sometimes vntye them if they would: those that leaue foule shooes, or goe into their beds with their stockings on, I vse them as I did the former, and neuer leaue them till they haue left their beastlinesse. But to the good I doe no harme, But couer them, and keepe them warme: Sluts and slouens I doe pinch, And make them in their beds to winch: This is my practice, and my trade, Many haue I cleanely made. About mid-night do I walke, and for the trickes I play, they call me Pach. When I finde a slut asleepe, I smuch her face if it be cleane, but if it be durty, I wash it in the next pisse-pot that I can finde, the Balls I vse to wash such sluts withall is a Sows pan-cake, or a Pilgrimes salue: Those that I find with their heads nitty and scabby, for want of combing, I am their Barbers, and cut their hayre as close as an Apes Tayle: or else clap so much pitch on it, that they must cut it off themselues to their great shame: Slouens also that neglect their masters businesse, they doe not escape: Some I find that spoyle their masters horses for want of currying, those I doe daube with grease and soote, that they are faine to curry themselues ere they can get cleane: others that for lasinesse will giue the poore Beasts no meate, I oftentimes so punish them with blowes, that they cannot feed themselues they are so sore. Thus many trickes I Pach can doe, But to the good I ne're was foe: The bad I hate, and will doe euer, Till they from ill themselues doe seuer: To helpe the good Ile run and goe, The bad no good from me shall know. When mortals keep their Beds, I walke abroad and for my prankes am called by the name of Gull: I with a fayned voyce doe often deceiue many men, to their great amazement: Many times I get on men and women, & so lye on their Stomackes, that I cause their great paine, for which they call me by the name of Hagge, or Night-mare: Tis I that doe steale children, and in the place of them leaue Changelings: Sometime I also steale milke and Creame, and then with my brothers Patch, Pinch, and Grim, & sisters Sib, Tib, Licke, and Lull, I feast with my stolne goods: our little Piper hath his share in all our spoyles, but hee nor our women Fayries doe euer put themselues in danger to doe any great exploit. What Gull can doe, I haue you showne, I am inferior vnto none: Command me Robin, thou shalt know, That I for thee will ride or goe: I can doe greater things then these Vpon the land; and on the Seas. I walke with the Owle, and make many to cry as loud as she doth hollow: Sometimes I doe affright many simple people, for which some of them haue termed me the Blacke dog of New-gate: At the meetings of young men and maydes I many times am, and when they are in the midst of all their good cheare, I come in, in some fearefull shape and affright them, and then carry away their good cheare and eate it with my fellow Fairies: Tis I that do like a Scritch- Owle cry at sicke mens windowes, which makes the hearers so fearefull, that they say, that the sicke person cannot liue: Many other wayes haue I to fright the simple, but the vnderstanding man I cannot mooue to feare, because he knowes I haue no power to do hurt. My nightly businesse I haue told, To play these trickes I vse of old: When candles burne but blue and dim, Old folkes will say, Here's Fairy Grim: More trickes then these I vse to doe, Hereat cry'd Robin, Ho, ho, ho. To walke nightly as do the men Fayries, we vse not, but now and then we goe together, and at good Huswiues fires we warme and dresse our Fayry children: if wee finde cleane water and cleane Towels, wee leaue them money either in their basons or in their shooes: but if wee find no cleane water in their houses, we wash our children in their pottage, milke, or beere, or what-ere we finde; for the sluts that leaue not such things fitting, wee wash their faces and hands with a gilded childs clout or els carry them to some riuer and ducke them ouer head and eares: we often vse to dwell in some great Hill, and from thence we doe lend money to any poore man, or woman that hath need; but if they bring it not againe at the day appointed, we doe not only punish them with pinching, but also in their goods, so that they neuer thriue till they haue payd vs. Tib and I the chiefest are, And for all things doe take care: Licke is cooke, and dresseth meate, And fetcheth all things that we eate: Lull is Nurse and tends the cradle, And the babes doth dresse and swadle:
