 gabble in Tinkers Rhetoricke, ( Tara-ring-tinck? ) I will please you, though I beat out the bottome of a Kettle, for the Parish Kettle-Drum, was my intention, and all Musicke came from the Hammer. Is not a Tincker a rare fellow then? He is a Scholler, and was of Brazen-Nose Colledge in Oxford : an excellent Carpenter, for hee builded Copper-Smiths Hall: He is a Doctor too, can cast any water out of a skillet, that is crazey, and set him vpon his legges againe. A Souldiers March, was taken from the sound of my Bason, when I beate an Allarum on the bottome of it, with my nimble-rapping Hammer, which to me is a Drum-sticke. Be you all then, (my Brother-strowlers, and Padders on the High way,) as Iouiall as I am. Liues not a merry-man longer than a sad? Has not a Tincker lesse care than a Tamberlaine the Great? Is not an houre in honest mirth, worth a Vintners Hogshead (that has no doings) full of Melancholy? Why were Tavernes painted with red Lattices, but to tell Gallants there's high-colour'd Wine within; And why has a Tinckers face a Vermillion Nose, but to shew, that he loues that Ale-house best, which washes his Cheekes with the strongest Nippitaty. For, I ( Trotter the Tincker) haue beene sowc'd ouer head and eares in the Mediterranean Sea of Metheglin , and all other sorts of Liquors: As Ale? The Autenticall drinke of England , the whole Barmy-Tribe of Ale-Cunners neuer layd their lips to the like. The best that euer wash'd my throat, was at an old fat Hostesse of mine, called mother Twattle-bum, at the signe of a Tinker whipping the Cat: of her Ale, the custome was to set before me two little Noggins full, and then she bad me take heed, how I angred her Waspes, for foure of them would sting my Braines to death: and shee sayd true, for no Ale that euer I lick'd my Lips at, was like it: yet I haue thrust into my Guts Dagger-Ale, Steeletto-Ale, Pistoll-proofe-Ale, Pimblico-Ale, Mother-Bunches Ale, Labour in vaine Ale, Darby Ale, Ale of Gottam , (which make the men there, Fooles) I haue drunke double-lanted Ale, and single- lanted, but neuer gulp'd downe such Hypocrenean Liquor in all my life. I asked her who brew'd that Nectar , whose Malt-worme so nibled at my Peticranion; and she said her selfe; for old Mother Elianor Rumming was her Grandam, and Skelton her Cozen, who wrote fine Rimes in praise of her High and Mighty Ale. But now to the Tinkers Tales, which were told in the Barge betweene Billinsgate and Grauesend : Herein following the steppes of old Chaucer , (the first Father of Canterbury -Tales:) These comming as farre short of his, as Bragget goes beyond the Pigs wash or small Beere. If I knocke any words out of ioynt, lay the blame on the Tinkers Hammer, which in mending and stopping one hole, thrusts out the Kettles thin bottome, with his Thumb, and makes two. Here's a Gallimawfry of all sorts: The wayting Wench has Iests to make her merry, and Clownes, plaine dunstable Dogrell, for them to laugh at, till their Leather buttons flye off. A Farmer sitting in's Chayre, and turning a Crab in the fire, may here picke out a Tale, to set his Chops a grinning till his belly akes. Old wiues, that haue wedded themselues to Robin Hood, Clim a the Clough, Tom Thumb, Fryer and the Boy , and worthy Sir Isenbras , may out of this Budget finde something to maintaine a Gossiping: Mum then for that. Fall to and so Farewell. and he deceiuing those three againe. Of the Prior of Canterbury , and a Smith of Saint Austins . Of a Iealous Cobler, cunningly made Cuckold by a Smith. Of a Scholler, of Cambridge abus'd by a Wench he loued and his reuenge vpon her. Of two Sycilian Louers, and of their sundry strange misfortunes, ending well. Of a young couple married together, the Wifes pratling tongue bringing her Husband to the Gallowes, and a Sonne (being but adopted) offring to bee his Fathers Hangmans. --- 1 An ouer-growne Cuckold. 2 A Cuckold and no Cuckold. 3 A Horne-mad Cuckold. 4 A Winking Cuckold. 5 An Extempore Cuckold. 6 A Iohn Hold-my-Staffe Cuckold. 7 A Cuckold in Graine. 8 An Antedated Cuckold. OR, Canterburie Tales. Sitting in the Barge at Billinsgate, expecting when the Tide would serue for Grauesend, diuers Passengers (of all sorts) resorted thither to goe downe: At last, it begun to Ebbe, and then they cryed away; when I ranne to the stayres; though I was resolued to goe in a Tiltboat, yet seeing what a crew of mad Companions went in the Barge, and perceiuing by the Wind there was no feare of Raine, I step'd into the Barge, and tooke vp my Seat amongst the thickest. With that, the Barge-men put from the stayres, and hauing a strong Ebbe, because much Rainwater had falne before, they went the more merrily downe, Scarce had we gotten beyond Saint Katherines , but a Perry of Wind blew something loud, so that the Watermen hoysed vp Sayles, and layd by their Oares from labour. Being thus vnder Sayle, And going smugly downe, it made vs all merry, insomuch euery one began to chat, some of one thing, some of another, all of myrth, many of Knauery. As thus, euery man was striuing to passe away the time pleasantly, a Tinker of Turuey , being in the Barge to solace himselfe rather than any other, set out a throat and fell a singing, playing very handsomely, first on the bottome of a small Kettle with his Hammer: His voyce (though a Base) was so good, so lowd, and so pleasing, that all held their tongues and listened to him. Here sits a Iouiall Tinker, Dwels in the Towne of Turuey , I can mend a Kettle well, Though my Humors are but scuruy: Yet will I sing, Tara-ring, Tara-ring, Boyes, Roome for a Iouiall Tinker, Ile stop one hole, and make three, Is not This a Noble Tinker? The Musicke of my Kettle, Braue sound, which forth is sending, Makes fine Girles cry, come Tinker come, We ha many holes lacke mending. Yet will I cry, &c. We are the merriest fellowes, That by a Trade get moneys, And when we peice vp broken wares, Wee are pay'd by pretty Cunneys, Yet will I sing, &c. From Faire to Faire wee Amble, Our Doxies pranking by vs, And haue whole Chauders of strong Ale, When any Tinkers spy vs. Yet will I sing, &c. The Martches which each Morning, Our Hammer-heads are beating, Make Girles thinke, Tinkers well can strike, And long for such a Heating. Yet will I sing, &c. The Viall, Lute, Bandora, The Kit, welsh Harpe, and Citterne, Make not the Wenches so looke out, As does a Tinkers Gitterne. Yet will I sing, &c. The Bason euer ringing, When Baudes and Whores are carted Is to my Pan, that Hellish din, To heare which, Feinds haue started. Yet will I sing, &c. Here, a gust came, and stop'd this Tinkers mouth, but faire weather shewing her face presently, my Maisters (qd. he) I haue begun our Grauesend voyage with a Song to the Tune of my Kettle; if any man will follow me, let him: if none will, lets passe away the time in telling of Tales, and because I thinke most of vs are for Canterbury , we will call them Canterbury Tales : Agreed cryed all: who shall begin? Who but the Tinker (quoth one) because tis his owne motion: hereupon, (lustily first beating his Kettle) he settled to begin: but first behold the Picture of this Tinker. His blacke Lockes dangling downe, Curld, and Knotty, muzzeld beard, To maken Country Fooles afeard, Grimy face, all smutted ore. His tan'd hide tough as wild Boare, His broad backe, Letherne Pilch did couer. A greazy bonnet hung his eyes ouer, By his side, a whinyard hung, A Budget fastened with a Thong And brazen Buckle, wherein are All his Tooles, and Tinkery ware, Like a Souldiers Knapsacke, round A crosse his shoulders was py-bound. That he lap'd strong nappy Ale Shew'd his Nose, that nere look't pale, For he crimson'd it so well, It glissen'd like a Carbunckle, Hee Tobacco eke coud Snuffe, Whose smoake he out would puffe, In Clunches eyes, and if they grumbled, Them into the Mire hee tumbled, Many a Purse from many a Swaine, Had he thrashd, on Salsbury -Plaine, With no noyse can his Tale be drown'd, For hee on Kettle it does sound. Of a rich Country Pedlar, being Cozen'd by three, and deceiuing them againe. Not farre from Gottam in Nottinghamshire , in a Uillage dwelt an old rich Pedlar, that had vs'd to sell Wares, at most of the Faires round about in those Countries. In his House he kept no body but a good stirring nimble- tongu'd Wench, of some 30. yeares old, to whom hee promised all he had when he dyed, for looking so well to his House and him; her name was Gillian . Shee, greeuing to see the good old Pedlar, euery day to harnesse himselfe, with a Hamper and other Tromperies tyed to his backe, and in a high paire of clouted startups to trot on foot, to so many Faires and Markets, councell'd him to buy a good strong lusty Horse, to carry him, and his luggage. And so both to ease his body, and lengthen his life; for sithence he had money enough, this would not much hurt his estate. He layd carefull Gillian o'the lips for her learned, and Physicall Councell, and said he would doe as shee wish'd him. The next day, there being a Faire where great store of Horses were to be sold, the old Pedlar trauailes on foote, with good store of money in his Purse, with intent to come home againe, with more ease than he went forth, and then to say, God a mercy Horse. Purblind he was, and hardly could he iudge, eyther of the Colour or Conditions of a Beast, but men wondring to see him busie, to buy a Prancor, that neuer had bestrid an Horse in his life, many offered in good will to helpe him, least the cheating Horse-coursers and Hackny-men should cozen him, And so by their aduice, he bought a pretty handsome Horse for three and twenty Nobles. Three mad colts, that had watched the Pedlar, still as hee beat his Market, (The one was a Butcher, the other a Currier, and the third (one of the Gentle Craft) a Cobler) layd their heads together, how to get this Horse from the old mop-ey'd Pedlar: tis impossible said two of the Conny-catchers, but the Coblers wit, being made of reaching Leather, told them, that the Butcher had no more braines than a Calfe, (but not halfe so good,) and that the Curriers conceipt, stunke like new Tand Leather; if they would ioyne with Mounsieur Cobler, he would clap such a patch on the Pedlars shoulder, that they three would cozen him, and share the Beast amongst them: How quoth one! No more but thus said the Solemender, let vs all three part, and be distant one from another some quarter of a Mile, in the way that he is to ride, and falling into some by-talke with him, view the Horse well, and say tis a handsome Mare, thats all, and maintaine it to be a Mare, for I know his old foolish Pedling Conditions, and then see what followes vpon this. They three part: and first, the Butcher saluting the Pedlar as he rode, enquired how the Market went at the Faire, marry sayes the Pedlar, all things very deare, and therefore I bought nothing but this beast; what thinke you my Horse cost me? Which Horse sayes the Butcher? This on which I ride, answered the Pedlar: Alas Father (quoth the other) you are cozen'd this is a Mare: a very Mare: a Mare, quoth the Pedlar! You haue good skill in Horse-flesh and so rode away, laughing aloud at the Butchers simplicity. Then the Pedlar ouertaking the Currier, who stayd of purpose for him, on the High-way, and spying him come, did then set forward, blesse you Father cryed the Currier, from whence come you? From the Faire (quoth the old Pedlar,) you haue a pretty Mare vnder you sayes the other: how? A Mare? Put on your Spectacles, looke better vpon't, take your eyes in your hands, and you shall finde tis a Horse, (sayes the old Pedlar.) So am I, or you an Asse replyed the Currier, And away spurr'd the old Lad, wondring to see men so out of their wits, but remembring with himselfe, they were Gottam breed, he car'd the lesse; and knew for all his dimnesse of sight, he could not be so mistaken. At last, he spyed a third man, in the High-way before him, and that was the Cobler, whom ouertaking, O Gaffer Pedlar, (sayd the Cobler) this is strange to see you mounted, you haue beene at the Faire, any good doings there? Any fine Girles there! Any store of Pigs there! How goes Leather! What lusty coyle keepe they there! Nay (quoth the Pedlar) I lookt after no coyles, no Pigs, no Sowes, no fine Girles not I; all that I minded was my selfe, and my Horse, that I bought there: well said Father, can you jeere your poore friends in your old Age? Ieere! Why! Why sayes the other! Ist not a jeere to tell me you haue bought a Horse, when tis as plaine a Mare, as you and I are a man: What trade art thou, quoth the Pedlar? A Cobler said he, so I thought (said the Pedler,) high thee home, set thy Coxcombe of an vpright last, liquor thy braines better, patch vp thy wits, bore a hole or two more in thine eyes, then lift vp my Horses tayle, and with thy Nose tell me whether it be a Mare or a Horse. The Cobler (being a fellow that would sweare any thing) rap'd out an oath, and swore twas a Mare; Alas Father (said he) why should I sweare? What Rogues are these to cozen you! To cheat an old man! O fie! As I am true Cobler and an honest man, this beast is a Mare, a meere flea-bitten Mare, and nothing but a Mare. Swearest thou (quoth the Pedler) and ist a Mare? Where are mine eyes? But alas, I am purblind: I now begin to smell that I am ridden like a Iade, for two men besides you, told me tis a Mare: a Mare cryes the other, as I am true Cordwainer, body and bones. If sayes the Pedlar it be a Mare, I would not ride her for all the Cowes in Nottinghamshire , for I neuer bestrad any one Beast in my life but a Mare, and riding through a Market Towne, the Stone- horses leapd me as if I had beene a Mare; one with his fore-legs, stradled ouer my shoulders, another gaue me three palts on the head, my Scull was crack'd, and I taken vp for dead; when I came to my selfe, I wishd I might breake my necke, when next I backt any Mare; And for feare my wish ouertake me before I get home, (being not farre) here honest Cobler, take my Mare, ride her, run her, spur her, and hang her; I know thee when I see thee againe, and pay me when thou seeest thy time, what thou thinkest shee's worth. Nay sayes the Cobler, come the next Market day to Gottam , there I dwell, my name is Yerker , (the onely Cobler of Gottam ) and you shall not loose much by the Beast. A match cryed the Pedlar. Away rides the Cobler to his Companions, who laughing at the old Fooles simplicity, and what an Asse they had made him, sell the Horse and share the money. The Pedlar being come home, his Maid clapping her hands with admiration to see him (as shee said) come moaping home on foot; what bought you, at the Faire? I bought (said he a Horse) a Horse (quoth she) where is he? Is hee put to grasse already? You haue sent him to run on the Diuels Commons, haue you? Peace Gillian (quoth hee) I would haue pawn'd all the Pedlary packes, that euer I carried, I had bought a pretty Horse, payd for a Horse, rode him for a Horse, but three seuerall men on the High-way, one after another, fac'd me downe it was a Mare, and I fearing some mischiefe might fall vpon me, for cursing my selfe (as thou knowest) about the other Mare, I parted with it to a Cobler of Gottam . A Coxecombe of Gottam like your selfe, (said she) some that knew you had but weake eyes haue fool'd you, out-fac'd you, and Cunny-catch'd you: would I haue beene Cunny-catcht so. O that I knew those three Cheates; would I could finger this Cobler, Ide coble him, Ide make him swallow his Last. Peace Gillian (said the Pedlar) the next Market day I shall know whether they be Knaues or no; for now I haue flesh'd them with a Horse, they will bite at any thing: Be thou quiet, and if I fry not in my Brain-pan something or other that shall make them swallow a Horse- plum, say I'm no Pedlar. Prouide me therefore within these two dayes, a very good Dinner, for I shall haue friends come to visit me: let me haue a breast of Ueale, a Pig, halfe a dozen of Chickens, and a couple of Rabbits. She said it should be done. Now the Pedlar had two very faire Goates, in his ground: one of them he takes (on the day appointed for the Dinner) which he tyes to a Hedge, leauing it sufficient to feed vpon: The other he leades in a Cord with him to the Market. The Goates were of one bignesse, one colour, and so like one another, it was not possible to distinguish them. The Pedlar was no sooner come into the Market, but the three sharkes that liu'd vpon cheating came to him, ask'd how he did, and how he lik'd his Mare they met him vpon; O said hee, I found your words true, that I was cozend, and I rid my hands of her. But why (sayd one of them) doe you walke vp and downe the Market thus with a Goat tyed in a string? Can he doe any trickes? Trickes said he? I would not loose my Goat for twenty such Mares: to tell you true my Bulleys, I looke for Guests this day, if you will Dine with me you shall be welcome; when I haue bought my Meat, then you shall see what trickes (if you call them trickes) my Goat can doe. So, the Pedlar hauing bought his Prouision of Ueale, Pig, Chickens, Rabbits, Oranges, spices, and other things, tyed them all very handsomely to the Goates backe, and sayd, Sirrah hye you home to Gillian , bid her dresse Dinner with all hast and hauing taken these things from your back, request her to tye you to a Hedge, for else I know you will be rambling. The Goate runnes away, as fast as he could, none stopping him, as thinking it had beene his quality to carry prouision, but being got out of the Towne, hee ran into a Wood, and what became of him, the Pedlar neuer knew. In the end, after he and our three cheates had drunke together in the Market, Dinner time drawing nigh, they all foure came to the Pedlars House. He no sooner step'd within doores, but winking at Gillian , ask'd her if shee had done as the Goat instructed her, she being as wily as he, conceited his meaning, and sayd, yes: good cheere was at fire, dinner was ready, and the Goate tyed to a Hedge in the backside was shewne them: At which they blest themselues, and secretly conspired to steale the Goate from him. Dinner being set on the Boord, they all sit downe, eate, and welcome, and wondrous merry: whilst their Teeth are going, their tongues are not idle, but wonder at the strange condition of the Pedlars Goate; asking what Country Goate it was, hee told them of Brecknockshire : you may sayd hee, well enough wonder at the conditions of my Goate; they are strange ones indeed; and there is a reason they should be strange, for it has cost me aboue fiue yeares his teaching: you will more wonder, if I tell you that I dare send him into Wales wt a packet of letters to my friends, and he shall bring their answeres; for he neuer trauailes in the day time, but all by night: if he goes abroad with me (as oftentimes hee does) and spyes any Pedlar of my acquaintance, he will leape, dance, fawn vpon him, and lay his horns gently in his Lap when he sits downe. They rise from Dinner, and hauing an exceeding desire to get the Goat, resolue to steale him, hoping much money might be gathered by shewing him, in other Countries, but the old sole of the Coblers Conscience, being somewhat mended, because he had cozend him of his horse would by no means steale this from him too, but let vs (quoth he) rather all 3. buy him. They aske his price: price sayes the Pedlar? He's worth his weight in gold: a Lord offred me once 50. peices for him, but I refus'd it; I can to morrow morning haue 30. And lesse I will not take. They three make vp the mony between them, lead the Goat with them, and away they are gone. Being come home, they shew to their wiues, what a rare outlandish Beast they had bought, which they would carry to London first, and so all ouer England , and get a world of mony by him, the women calld them puppies and fooles to beleeue any such lyes as they bragd of: But for tryall of the truth, they charged their wiues to dresse such good cheere, as presently they would send by the Goate, and so, all to bee merry: to the Market they goe, buy excellent meats, and send it by the Goate, bidding him, to tell their wiues they must dresse it presently, for they and some friends were to come to dinner. The Goat hauing his errand, hastens away, hyes through the Market, then into the Feilds, and at last (as the other) into a Wood, and was neuer more heard of. The 3, wise husbands comming home, askt if dinner were ready? What dinner replyed their wiues: did not the Goat bring home victuals? The Goat! Cryes one of the women: the Calfes head: said another; the Asse-head? Quoth the third, an Oxe-head: vpon this the men lookt blancke, saw they were guld, for bulling the old Pedlar: one of their Wiues laught, to see her Husband made such a Ninny, the other scolded, the third cryed for madnesse: in a short time all the Towne was in a Hoobub; other mens wiues clap'd their hands at them, their Neighbours hissed at them, boyes howted; They hid their heads, cursing the Pedlar, and vowing reuenge. But the shame of so beeing fool'd, guld, fetch'd ouer, and cheated, they being Cheaters themselues; they left their owne Towne & came to London , the Butcher tooke a Tobacco-shop in Ram-Alley , the Currier an Ale-house by London- Wall, and the Cobler sets patches on old Shooes, at this houre in Roague -Lane at Westminster . The Pedlar at euery Faire was commended, for ouer-reaching them, that outstripd him, and Gillians wit extoll'd beyond the wisedome of all the Wenches in Gottam . The Tinker hauing thus ended, a Cobler in the Barge, grumbling that the Tinker made a Cobler one of the three Cheaters, would needs tell his Tale next, so silence being cryed, he began to speake, but I thinke you were best, looke vpon him, and note what a spruce Lether-Pergo it is. His limbs well set withall, Of a strong bone and a broad chest, He was wide and wildsome in the brest, His forehead hie and a bald pate, Well I wot he was a mate That loued well a bonny Lasse, For the Clownes eyes were as gray as glasse: And oft haue I heard my Mother say, The wanton eye is er'e most gray. He loued well a cup of strong Ale, And his nose was nothing pale, But his snout and all his face, Was as red as Ruby or Topace: A voyce hee had cleare and loud. And well he can sing to a crowd. Hee was a stout sturdy Squire: And loued eke day good compire: Drinke he would with euery man, In Cup, Cruze, Glasse, or Kan: And what euery day he got Hee hoorded vp in the Ale-pot, That all Canterburie gan leere, To talke of this merry Cobleere: Therefore now marke me well, For thus his Tale began to tell. Contayning the jests that passed betweene the Prior of Canterburie , and a Smith of Saint Austins . The Prior of Canterbury had a Couent of Fryars Augustines , that were endued with great liuings from the King, and hee himselfe had great reuenewes, that he liued like a Potententate, and he was had in great estimation, throughout all the Citie: Liuing thus at ease, pampred vp with delicates and idlenesse, the two nurses to Lechery, hee minded not so much his Book, but that passing one day through the streets, he glanced his eyes to see where hee might finde some handsome Trull that might be his Paramour: many he saw, and many he liked, but at last comming by a Smiths Forge, he spyed a proper tall woman meanly attyred, after the Pouerty of her Husband, but of such a beautifull visage, and faire countenance that she pleased greatly the Priors eye, that he thought her the fairest in all Canterburie , he returned home that way he went out, because he would haue another looke at the Smiths wife, and as he passed by, hee gaue her a curtesie for his farewell. Well, home he went to his Chamber, and there bethought him of his new Loue, and cast in his mind a thousand wayes how he might come to his purpose: At last, he sent for the Smith to come looke vpon his Horse, who very hastily hied him to the Priory, where the Prior welcommed him, and entertained him with great curtesie, kissing the Nurse (as the old Prouerbe is) for the Childes sake, and making much of blacke Vulcan for faire Venus sake, the poore Smith very carefully lookt to the horse, and where ought was amisse, amended it: The Prior and all his Couent gaue him great commendations and thanks, and bad him to Breakfast, where he had good cheere and store of strong drinke, which made the Smith passing pleasant: as they sate at Breakfast, the Prior told him, sith they had made experience of his skill, and that he was cunning about Horses, he was content to make him Farrier of the Priory. At this the Smith was very glad: nay more, quoth the Pryor, because thou shalt haue more gaines out of the Dorter, seeing thy wife is a good cleanly woman, she shall be Landresse for me and the whole Couent. The Smith hearing this, perceiued by the weathercocke, which way the wind blew, shakt the head, and began to smile: the Prior demanded of him why he laught? Mary sir, quoth he, seeing wee are at meat, and myrth is good for digestion, I will tell you a merry iest. There was such a poore man as my selfe, that dwelt (as I doe) hard by a Priory, and he had brought vp in his house a little Lambe which growing to a sheepe would wander all abroad, and returned home safe at night without any hurt: at last, this little sheepe being the poore mans treasure, seeing the Priorie gate open, and the yard full of grasse, went in, and fed there. The wanton Fryars that were idle, would often sport with the Lambe, and play withall, and pulled off the wooll off the backe, that it had almost left nothing but the bare pelt: which the poore man espying, kept vp his sheepe, and would not suffer it to goe any more abroad: yet it had gotten such a sweet sauour in the Priorie yard, that assoone as it brake loose, it would thither, where the Prior and Fryers spying it againe, consented, and eate it vp all: The good man came to aske for his sheepe, and they laughing at him, gaue him no other amends but the hornes: so my Masters, if my wife should be your Laundresse, I warrant you if I came to enquire for her, I might haue such fees as the poore man had for his loue: No no, I am well I thanke you, if my selfe may serue for a Farrier, so it is, but my wife (of all men) shall not haue to deale eyther with Prior or Fryars. At this they all laught, but the Prior not willing to giue ouer the chase thus, made this answere. Why Smith (quoth hee) thou art a foole, thou mayst haue a prouiso for that, for though she wash our cloathes, yet she shall neyther fetch them nor bring them home, neyther shall there euer a Friar come at thy house, onely the Scull of the Kitchin, and I hope thou fearest not him. No quoth the Smith, they be these breechlesse Yeomen that I stand so much in doubt of: but vpon these conditions aforesaid, that shee shall neyther fetch them, nor carry them home, shee shall be your Laundresse. Upon this they agreed, and the Smith went to his House and told his wife all. Shee that was a wily Wench, thought with her selfe, that whatsoeuer her Husband fisht for hee should catch a Frogge; and that dealt he neuer so warily, yet shee would make him one of the head men of the Parish, as well as his Neighbours. Shee conjecturing thus with her selfe: the next morning came the Scull earely (by that the Smith was vp and at his worke) with foule cloathes. God speed Sir quoth hee, I haue brought your Wife the Priors linnen; ah welcome good fellow (quoth he) goe thy wayes vp to the Chamber to my wife, she is aboue, and I thinke a Bed: the Scull trotted vp the staires and saluted the woman: Mistris (quoth he) the Prior hath sent you his clothes and prayes you that they may bee done on Wednesday next: they shall bee done (quoth she) with all speed: and (quoth the Scull) his worship wild me in secret to giue you a Ring for a token, and to desire you to thinke that he loues you as heartily as any woman in the World; the poore woman seeing a gold Ring, and hauing neuer had any before in her life, held her selfe a proud woman, and bethought her what good guifts she should dayly haue if shee had such a Louer as the Prior: wherefore she returned him this answere by the Scull, that shee had euer thought well of him, but her Husband was a jealous foole, and watcht her narrowly wheresoeuer she went, but as farre as shee might shee was at his command. Home went the Scull, and the Prior was risen by that he returned, and askt him what newes: what newes, quoth the Scull? Marry thus Sir, assoone as I came to the doore, I found the Smith hard at his worke, and I saluted him by the time of the day, and asked him where his wife was, saying, I had brought the Priors Linnen, goe vp the staires good fellow (quoth he) for I thinke my wife is in Bed, and sir, there indeed I found her, and surely sir, if you will beleeue mee, me thought she lay too louely in her Bed to lye with a Smith; so sir, I gaue her your token, and told her what you bad me, and she made answer, that your worship was the man who shee had euer thought well of, but her Husband was a jealous foole, yet as farre as she could, she was at your command. This satisfied the Priors expectation: and on Wednesday morning when the Scull should goe for his cleane linnen, the Prior compounded with him, and gaue him a brace of Angels to keepe his counsell saying, Tom (for so was the Sculs name) thou knowest all flesh is frayle, and we are men as well as others, though our profession bee more holy, therefore Tom so it is, that I haue loued the Smiths Wife a long time, and now may I haue opportunity to fill my desires, I will this morning take thy cloathes and besmeere my face, and with the basket hie for the cleane clothes, onely I care for nothing, if thou keepe my counsell. Feare not that sir (quoth the Scull) but I will be so secret as you can desire; with that the Prior was briefe, because hee longed to bee there, and on with the Sculs ragges, and taking the Basket on his necke, hasted him very orderly to the Smiths House, by that time day did appeare, where he found him hard at worke, Good morrow Sir, quoth the Prior, I am come for the Linnen, goe vp the stayres fellow quoth the Smith, thou commest very early my wife is yet in Bed. Up trudged the Pryor, and there he found his Paramour in a sweet sleepe, the Prior stepd to her and kist her, and with that wee awakt, and seeing the Scull, why how now sir sawce (quoth she) can you not speake before you come vp? My Husband is a wise man to send such Companions vp into the Chamber where I am in Bed, twere no matter and the match were equall to make him weare the horne for it. Oh, be content good Loue, quoth the Prior, for know thou, that I am not Tom Scull; but the Prior himselfe that sent thee the Ring, who for thy sake is come thus disguised, with that he discouered himselfe, and she perceiued it was he, and blusht: hee kist her, and so conjured her, that whiles the poore Smith was knocking at the Smithy, he had dubd him knight of the forked order, and for feare of suspicion, putting his linnen in the Basket, away hee went, bidding the Smith farewell. Thus the Prior and the Smiths wife contented, and enioying their hearts desire, the poore Smith loued her not a whit the worse, neyther did he suspect any thing: for the blind eates many a flye, and much water runs by the Mill that the Miller wots not of: so playd it with this Smith: for twice a weeke came the Prior in his Sculs apparell, to his Lemmon. Thus it continued, till on one morning the Prior was not well, so that he could not goe, but Tom Scull after his wonted manner, went to carry forth the Linnen: and as he went by the way, he began to thinke with himselfe what a fayre woman the Smiths wife was, and how faine he would be partaker with his Master. Hammering this in his head, on he went to the Smiths house: Now Smith (quoth he) good morrow, is thy wife vp? No quoth the Smith, but she is awake, goe vp and carry your linnen a Gods name: vp came the Scull and rushing in at the Chamber doore, threw downe his basket, and seeing the Chamber darke that hee could not be discouered, slipt to bed, and entred Commons with the Prior, and with that got him away without saying one word: The Smiths wife maruailed at this, and supposed he had heard some rusling, and for feare of her Husband, had gone away so hastily. Well, within two dayes after came the Prior againe, and after his accustomed manner went vp with his basket, and saluted her after the old fashion: I pray you tell me master Prior, quoth she, what meant you the other morning, that you came so quiet, and slipt away with such silence after you got out of Bed? By this the Prior perceiued that the Scull had cut a shiue on his loafe, and so thought to dissemble the matter. Faith sweet heart quoth he, I heard a noyse, and thought it had beene thy Husband that had come vp: so I coniectured, quoth the Smiths wife, and therefore after you were come, seeing you were frighted with your owne shadow, I laught heartily: thus as long as they durst they chatted, but at last the Prior vp with his basket and away. When he came home, in a great chafe he sent for the Scull, and made inquiry of the matter, the poore fellow afraid of sore threatnings, confessed the matter, and craued pardon: but the Prior forgetting his pacience, fell vpon poore Tom the Scull, and beat him so sore, that he had almost kild him: and afterwards swearing him on a Booke, if euer after he went with any Cloathes, he should goe no further then the Chamber doore. The Scull agreed to this and confirm'd it with a solemne oath: but the remembrance of his sore blowes, bred in him a mind to reuenge: whereupon resoluing to doe any mischiefe to the Prior that he might, one day he went very orderly to the Smith, and carried him to the Ale-house, and there after a long protestation of silence, reuealed the whole matter vnto him, how the Prior euery day came in his apparell to his wife, and so made him weare the hornes, while he was busie about his hammers: at this the Smith fetchd a great sigh: alas quoth he, and am I a Cuckold? Why not you quoth the Scull as well as your betters? Indeed quoth the Smith, and that is all the comfort that I haue, that my betters haue had as hard hap: for the Abbot of Saint Peters that is an holy man, had but one Lemmon; and yet she was not content with twenty morsels: and I am a poore Smith and a lay man, no maruaile then if my fortune be as forked as the rest: but by the holy Roode of Rochester quoth he, I will be so reuenged on the Prior , that after I haue taken him, he shall hate Lechery the worse while he liues, I quoth the Scull, take heed thou plaguest not me in steed of the Prior . To auoyd therefore all insuing danger, if I come to morrow, thou shalt know me by this token, I will aske thee whether thou hast drunke this morning or no: if thou hearest no such watch-word, then know it is the Prior. So be it (qd. the Smith) and vpon this they drunke their drink and departed. The next morning the Smith was earely at his worke, and the Prior that longed to be with his Lemmon, was as soone awake, and vp he got, and on with the Sculs apparell, and to the Smiths house, and after his accustomed manner bade him good morrow, and vp the staires. The Smith perceiuing it was the Prior, because he wanted his watch-word, hied vp presently after him, and tooke the Prior in Bed with his wife: why how now Scull quoth he? Will no worse meat goe downe with you then my wife? Before you and I part, I will learne you how to make Vulcan of me, without you were more like Mars then you be. Wherevpon his man and he (two lusty knaues) stepd to him, and puld him out of Bed, and thrust him into a great sacke, wherin he was wont to put chaffe: when he had done, carried him into the street, and layd him downe before his doore, and then made his wife take a flaile in her hand, and thresh as hard as she could: but because he perceiued her strokes were layd on with fauour, himselfe stood behind her with a great Carters whip, and euery time she fainted in her blowes, hee lent her a lash that he fetcht the bloud through her Petticoat: the people that came by, maruailed at this Antike, and askt the Smith what hee was a doing: killing of fleas, quoth the Smith, that I found this morning in my bed, and because my wife is too idle and will not strike home, I stand with my whip to whet her on. Neighbours therefore giue good eare, and marke the end, and see when my wife hath beaten them enough, and see what foule fleas they be, and by my example learne whensoeuer you take such great fleas in your wiues bed, to put them to the like punishment. The people flocked together to see this sport, and although the Prior was almost bruysed to death (though for fauouring of him the Smiths wife bore many a lash) yet he durst not cry, for feare of further discredit, but lay still and suffered all with patience. At last a multitude of people flocking together, it chanced that vpon serious businesse, the Abbot of Saint Peters came by, who seeing such a throng, sent one of his men to know what the matter meant. Oh may it please your Lordship, quoth the Smith, such a sight as you neuer saw, wherefore for Christs sake, I aske it, that you would take so much paines, as to come ouer the way and see: the Abbot stept ouer the Channell, and when hee came and saw the Smiths wife with her flaile, and him with his whip, hee wondred, and the Smith told him as the rest, that it was a flea he tooke in his wiues bed: all this while lay the Prior with a heauy heart, for feare the Smith would shake him out of the Sacke: wishing to abide twice so much torment, so hee might escape vnknowne. As the Abbot, about this matter, stood questioning with the Smith, the Scull that mist the Prior that past his houre, thought the Smith had playd some mad prancke with him, went and put on the Priors apparell, and his Coule ouer his head that he might not be knowne, and went downe to the Smiths house-ward, where seeing a concourse of people, he hasted him thither, At last the Smith spyed him and cryed, Oh my Lord Abbot, yonder comes the Prior of Saint Austins , it was one of his fleas. Well knew the Smith it was Tom Scull, but his wife supposing it to be the Prior, and that hee in the Sacke was the Scull that had deceiued her, in despight for reuenge layd on such blowes, that she needed no whipping to amend her stroakes. When the Prior came, and after most humble manner had saluted the Abbot, he desired to know the cause of that sight: Marry quoth the Smith master Prior, I may thanke you for this, for a flea of your Priorie hath leapt from the Dorter to my wiues Bed, and finding it there this morning, I put it into a sacke, and caused my wife to thresh it, and for that both you and Master Abbot, and all my Neighbours shall see what parlous fleas oft happen into womens beds, I will shake him out before you all, and with that vnbound the sacke, and he threw out the Prior , who being in the Scul apparell, was so besmeared and so bloudy, that hee could not be knowne: Looke here master Prior , quoth the Smith , here is the Scull of your Priorie . Oh notable knaue, knaue quoth Tom Scull to discredit our house. What thinke you of this my Lord Abbot? Is this a sufficient punishment or no? Considering by this fault he shall giue occasion of slander to the whole Priory ? He is quoth the Abbot, within the Iurisdiction of your censure, and therefore deale with him as you list. Mary quoth the Scull , then thus: because it is an open fault, it shall haue a more open punishment, for if it be smoothered vp thus, they will say that I am a fauourer of sinne: with that he cald to certaine of his Couent, for most of the Monkes of the Priory were come thither, how say you brethren qd. he, is it not best that he stand all this forenoone on the Pillorie, and haue a Paper written on his head, containing the whole matter of his offence? And the Smiths wife shall stand vnder him with her flaile, and the Smith with his whip: and so quoth the Smith , shall all Canterbury laugh at me, that come into the Market-place, to prooue my selfe a Cuckold. No good man Scull quoth he, it shall not be so, and with that he puld off his Coole, and said Masters and Neighbours, see, heere is the Scull of the house, and this, beaten in the sacke, is the Prior himselfe, that came to my wife in the Sculs apparell: at this all the people clapt their hands, laught, and made good game to see how simply the Prior stood, and in what a maiestie the Scull sate in the Priors abiliments. At this sight the Abbot abasht, and the Fryers were asham'd: but the Scull nothing amazed, began afore all the people to say thus: My masters quoth he, I was once a Scholler, though I am now a Scull, and then I learned this old saying in Latin, Caute, si non Caste . Liue charily, if not chastely. Be not so forward in your follies, that you discouer your faults to the whole world: and especially was this spoken to men of the Church, for in that they know much, and doe dehort others from vice, the people looke their liues and their learning should agree: but when they offend so grosely as master Prior through his ill example, to bring a whole house in slander, then are they worthy of double punishment: For we know Fryers are men, and I warrant you, there is a great many in England haue done as much to others as hee hath to the Smiths wife, and yet haue scap'd without discredit: I hope my Lord Abbot, if you enter into your owne conscience, you can verifie as much, and therefore seeing he was so carelesse of his credit, let him for euer after (to auoyd perpetuall infamy of the House) he banisht out of the Priory . To this they all agreed, and the people that heard this collation, said Tom Scull was worthy to be Prior , whereupon the Abbot and the Fryers consenting, and seeing hee had good learning, turned away the old Prior and made Tom Scull Prior in his roome: thus was the Prior punisht for his Lechery, the Smith reuenged for his Cuckoldry, and the Scull for his blowes, stumbled on a good promotion. At this merry tale of the Cobler, all they in the Barge laught, and said the Smith was well reuenged: yea but quoth the Cobler, so he was made a Cuckold, and with a heauy head was the poore Smith faine to goe to his hammers, being euer after noted for a Cuckold through all Canterbury . There sate a Smith hard by, who grieued at this, that he should descant thus vpon his occupation, and the rather perchance he tooke Pepper in the nose, because he was of the same fraternitie, if not with a Prior , yet with some other good fellow, and therefore in a snuffe he began thus to reply. Why Cobler quoth he, doest thou hold the Smith in such derision because he was a Cuckold? I tell thee Cobler, Kings haue wore the hornes: and tis a fault that Fortune exempteth fro a one: yea the old Writers haue had it in such question, that they haue set downe diuers degrees of Cuckolds: there be 8. degrees,  & that I can prooue. At this there was a great laughter, and euery man desired him to tell what they were, that I will quoth the Smith, they be these: --- 1 An ouer-growne Cuckold. 2 A Cuckold and no Cuckold. 3 A Horne-mad Cuckold. 4 A winking Cuckold. 5 An Extempore Cuckold. 6 A Iohn hold-my-staffe Cuckold. 7 A Cuckold in graine. 8 An Ante-dated Cuckold. These are the colours grinded, to draw the Cuckolds faces by, now behold the faces themselues. An ouer-growne Cuckold, is a gray Cuckold, an old Ram-headed Cuckold, whose hornes in their turning are so heauy and crooked, the very tips of them almost run into his eyes. His Cornuto-cap has kept his head warme, some 30. or forty yeares: (for so long his wife has beene an Upholster, and dealt in Feather- beds:) It was a pretty Tit then, the Beast has a racking pace still. If all the Cuckolds in a Parish were to be impaneld vpon a Iury, this is their foreman. In a voyage to Cuckolds-Hauen, he steeres the ship, and lands first, the precedence being giuen him, for the antiquity of his forked crest, as hauing beene a Cuckold euer since he entred into the married-mens order. A Cuckold & no Cuckold , is he whose wife is handsome, faire, and well- fauour'd, yet very honest, yet this Bull-calfe feares he has Bumpes, yet none can see them: he still feeles for knobs on his fore-head, but finds none. One that thinkes better of hornes, than they doe of him. A conceited Cuckold . A horne-mad Cuckold , is a wild Bull, bellowing and roaring still after his Cow, as if she had a Bree in her tayle, and ran vp and down as mad as he. This Cuckold is a meere Tom of Bedlam : if in the Shambles a boy cry but ptrooh, hee starts, stares, and lookes about him, as if his wife were behind him: he sleepes not in quiet, wakes not in quiet, eates nor drinkes in quiet; if his wife puts but two fingers daintily into a dish of mince-meat, he sweares she makes hornes at him. He cannot endure to heare of Saint Lukes day, nor of S. Thomas his night, when the Templers and Iane-a-Courts-men, blow their hornes, vnder mens windowes. A Sow-gelder makes him looke pale: if he passes by a Horners dore, he swounds, and must drinke Aqua vitae : this is the foole of Cuckolds, and most worthy to be laught at. A winking Cuckold , is he, that sees a Cock-Sparrow tread his Hen, yet goes away and sayes nothing, An honest, patient asse, that carryes his hornes as willingly, as a Tanners horse carries his masters hides from Leaden-hall market. A meere hum-drum- Iohn -a droines: who if he peepes in at key-hole; and sees his wife curuetting, goes sneaking away like a Dog, with his tayle betweene his legs, with this onely in his mouth, Ah ha, are you there with your Beares. An Extempore Cuckold , is no riming Cuckold but such a Block-head, that his wife on her very Wedding day puts him to spell his name in the Horne -booke. This is a Mellow Cuckold . A Iohn hold-my-staffe-Cuckold , has his horns so high, they run through his hat; A rascall-Deere: the basest in the whole Herd of Cuckolds; A Stagge in a City, a Rhinoceros for his hornes in his Parish, a Pander in his house, a slaue euery where. A Cuckold cryed vp , is a peeuish, snappish, quarrelsome Ninny-hammer, who so wearies his wife with causelesse jealousie, that in the end she giues him cause: He vpon the least suspition, runnes snuffing vp and downe, and hauing found his game, (taken the poore whore, his wife, in the manner) what does he, but cry his hornes vp; Arrests his halfe-sharer, (his fellow-Commoner) sweares he will make him stand in a white sheet, (when he had done that already) and for his wife he will firke her soundly. In the end, when all the Courts in the Ciuill Law, haue his name, his head, and his hornes, vpon Record, then hees quiet, takes his wife againe, and euery night lockes his Chamber-doore with his owne shooing horne. An Antedated Cuckold , is a fruit no sooner ripe, but rotten, this is a harmlesse young Codhead, who fooles himselfe into hornes: the Night-mare rides him, the first houre hes married: for the poore credulous Nicodemus , thinking, he has a sweet white grape, is falne vpon a sowre one; no wine is giuen him at his Wedding-dinner but Bastard; and of that his Bride has begun to him in a Bowle or two, And at night he may pledge her; if he has no maw, no matter, hes sure of a good Cooke, that can bring vp his meat pyping-hot, to his Table. He needs feare no poysoning, for hee has two or three tasters. Thus quoth the Smith you haue heard my degrees, and their exposition: and because I will be quit with the Cobler for the Tale of the Smith, giue me leaue a little and you shall heare a merry jest, but because I will let you know what manner of man he was, before his Tale heare his description. As merry as Bird on Brier. Iocund and gleesome at euery sith, His countenance aye, buxome and blith, His face full coaly and full blacke, Hued like vnto a Colliers sacke, Or as if it had beene soile in the mire, Full of wrinkles was his cheekes with the fire, Well he could sweat and swinke, And one that aye loued good drinke, For hard by his Forge alwayes stood A stond of Ale nappy and good: Which made the colour of his nose Like to fire when it glowes: His head great, his browes broad, Able to beare a great Load, As no man might hold it scorne, On his head to graft a horne. His coates were fit for the weather, His pilch made of Swines Leather: So was his breech, and before A dusty apron he wore: Wherein not to faile Was many a Horshooe nayle, And for to fit him euery tide, Hung a hammer by his side: Thus attyred the Smith gan say, What befell on a Summers day. Containing a pleasant Iest of a jealous Cobler, and how for all his suspition, he was cunningly made Cuckold. In Rumney Marsh by the Sea coast, there dwelled a Cobler, a merry fellow, and of his middle age: who was wont on working-dayes, to chant it out at his worke, and on holy-dayes, to be stir his stumps in the Church-yard so merrily after a crowd, that he was well beloued of all the Country wenches, and noted for the flower of good-fellowship throughout all the Parish. This Cobler keeping shop for himselfe, had in house with him an old mother of his, who being as it were his seruant, desirous to liue more at ease, wisht him to take a Wife: the Cobler was loath to be perswaded to marriage, and the reason was, for that he feared to be a Cuckold: yet at last hee cast his eye on a Country Lasse, that was a blith and bonny wench, and the chiefe of all the Maides in old Rumney : to her was this jolly Cobler a suter, and after a little wooing (as women must be got with praises and promises) the Cobler caught her, and married they must bee in all hast: which done, they liued pleasantly together, as fooles doe presently after their wedding: but after the hony-moone was past, she like a good huswife, fell to her worke, to spin, and card, and such other deeds of huswifery, as belonged to the profit of her house: the Cobler loued her well, and she wanted nothing that might satisfie her humour, onely she was charged by her husband, not to goe abroad a gosiping with her neighbours: insomuch that eyther on working dayes or on holy-dayes, when all the wiues in Rumney went to be merry, she was faine (as a poore prisoner) to keepe home: which although she passed ouer with silence and patience, so yet seeing his jealousie was without cause, she vowed with her selfe if euer a friend and opportunity serued to her mind, to make him weare the horne an inch longer than any of his neighbours: but he kept her short for that, for euery day when she was at home, she sate by him in the shop, where he sung like a Nightingale, hauing his eye neuer off his wiues face, or if she sate within, her mother in law, an old jealous woman, bore her company, if she went to fetch water, her mother was at her elbow, whatsoeuer shee did, or whither soeuer she went, to be briefe, her husband, or his mother was at one end, which greeued the yong woman: So suspicious and jealous was the Cobler, that all Rumney talked of his folly: and to vexe him as they passed by, would say to him; Ah neighhour, good morrow, now that you haue gotten a faire wife, wee hope to haue you one of the Brotherhood, and that the Cuckow in Aprill , may sit and sing on your house as well as with your poore Neighbours, I feare not that (quoth the Cobler) let her doe her worst, I will giue her leaue meaning that he kept such narrow watch ouer her, that he could not bee deceiued, and therefore euery day his Wife sitting by him when hee was yerking of his shooes, and she at her wheele, then hee would chant out this Song: Their mansion houses and stately bowers: And with stone and timber make Hospitals free: Then the Cobler of Rumney a Cuckold shall be. When Gentlemen leaue off their Peacockly sutes, And that all their workes are charities fruites: Tendring the poore which needy they see, Then the Cobler of Rumney a Cuckold shall be. When Vsurers run vp and downe with their gold, And giue it to them from whom it was pould: And Colliers sacks ouer great you doe see, Then the Cobler, &c. When Westminster -Hall is quite without Benches, And Southwarke Bankeside hath no pretty wenches, When in Smithfield on Frydayes no Iades you doe see, Then the Cobler, &c. When Maides hate marriage, and loue to liue chast, Virgins forsooth till fourescore be past, And loue not that yong men their beauty should see, Then the Cobler, &c. When wiues are not wilfull but needs will obay, When silent and speechlesse they sit a whole day: When Gossips doe meet, and no words will be, Then the Cobler, &c. When womens tongues doe cease for to wagge, And shoomakers giue not their master the Bagge: When Cuckolds and Keepers want hornes for their fee, Then the Cobler, &c, When Tapsters and Ale-wiues from Barwicke to Douer , Fill thirdindeall pots till the drinke doe run ouer, When the quart is so full that no froth you can see, Then the Cobler, &c. When Smiths forsweare to drinke off strong Ale, And liue without liquor while their nose looke pale: When in Vintners wine no mixture you see, Then the Cobler, &c. When Dutch -men hate Butter, and the Spaniards pride, When Cardinals doe want a Trull by their side: When the Pope like Peter humbled you see, Then the Cobler of Rumney a Cuckold shall bee. Euery day did the Cobler vse to sing this song, and there dwelled next vnto him a Smith, that was a tall and a young lusty fellow proper of personage, of a comely visage, courteous, gentle, and debonary, such a one as this Coblers wife could haue wished to her Paramour, if time and opportunity would haue fauoured her fancie: and the Smith seeing what a smicker wench the Coblers wife was, and what a jealous foole she had to her Husband, sorrowed at the good fortune of the Cobler, that he had so faire a wife, and wished that hee could find meanes to haue such a one his friend. Upon this, being next Neighbours, and their houses joyning together, the Smith would oftentimes (when his leysure serued him) come to the Coblers shop and talke with him; where betweene the Smith and the Coblers wife passed such glances, that he perceiuing there was no want but place and opportunity to fulfill their desires. One day amongst the rest, Fortune so fauoured this yong couple, that the Cobler went forth to buy Leather, and left his wife and his Mother in the shop: the old woman not hauing slept the last night, was heauy and fell asleepe, and the young woman sate singing at her worke. The Smith perceiuing this, layd by his hammers, and went to the Stall, where he saluted his Neighbour, and she returned him the like curtesie. At last, seeing the old Beldame was sure, he began to reueale vnto her, how long he had loued her, and how he was sorry that she was combred with such a one, as for his jealousie aboue all other men deserued to be made a Cuckold: sundry speeches passed betweene the Smith and the Coblers wife, till at last she rose, and gaue him her hand, that she loued him better than any man in the world: and would (if any occasion would serue) to content him. Then sweet heart (quoth he) doe me but this fauour, faine to morrow some occasion to goe to your mothers, and come on the farther side of the way, fast by such a doore, and then let me alone for opportunitie to satisfie both our desires. To this she agreed, and the Smith went to his shop: presently the old woman awaked, the Cobler came home, and all was well. At night, when they were in Bed taking him about the necke, she kist him, and told him that certaine of her friends met to morrow at her mothers, and that she would faine goe and see them, I pray you good husband (quoth she) let your mother and I goe together, I will not part out of her sight, neither will we make any long tariance: the husband for shame could not deny this request, but granted it: whereupon the next morning she got her vp, and on with her holy day apparell, and made her as fine as might be: the Cobler seeing his wife so trickt vp in her cleane linnen, began to bee jealous, and called his mother aside, and charged her by that loue she bare him, not to let his wife part out of her company till she came home againe, which she promised with an oath: so away they went, and the Cobler he sate him downe and began to sing. The Smith that all this day was not idle, had compounded with an old woman, by whose house she must passe, to fauour them with house roome, and reuealed vnto her all the matter: whose wife it was, and how hee would haue his purpose brought to passe: by my troth Sonne (quoth she) I haue heard much talke of that jealous Cobler, and I would doe my endeauour to make the Asse weare a horne: vpon this they resolued, and she likt well of his policie, and said loue had many shifts: at last, the Smith spyed his mistresse all in her brauery, comming with her mother in law, the old wife was ready, and as she past by the doore, threw a great bowle full of bloudy water, right vpon her head, that all her clothes and cleane linnen was marred, being so bewrayed that shee could goe no further. Alas mistris (quoth the old woman) I cry you mercy, what haue I done? Full sore it was against my will: but for Gods sake come into the house, and shift you with cleane Linnen: if you haue none at home I will lend you of the best that I haue: goe in Daughter (quoth her old Mother in Law) it is a chance, and against a shrewd turne sometime, no man may be: Ile goe home as fast as I can, and goe fetch you cleane linnen, the whiles dry you your gowne, and make all things else ready. I pray doe good mother (quoth she) and then away goes her mother in Law: and as soone as shee was out of doores, the old woman led her into an inward Parlour where the Smith was, and there these two Louers by this policie made the jealous Cobler weare the horne. Whiles thus they were solacing themselues, the olde Wife she came stumbling home, and for haste had like to breake her necke ouer the threshold, her fall made the Cobler start: and when he saw it was his mother, and that he missed his wife, he was halfe mad, asked his mother hastily where she was, the old woman short winded, was almost out of breath, and for a good space sate puffing and blowing to fetch Wind; at last she cryed out: alas deere Son such a chance as neuer was heard off: as we went through old Rumney , hard by the Church, a Woman threw out a bowle of bloody water right vpon your Wiues head, which hath so bewrayed her linnen and her gowne, that she could go no further, and so I as fast as I could, came running home for cleane clothes: oh for the passion of God mother (qd. he) hie to her chest, and get her clothes ready, for it may be a fetch to make the poore Cobler a Cuckold; a horne mother is soone grafted: with that the old woman got all in readinesse, and away ran the Cobler and his mother together. Well the two Louers out at a little hole kept good Watch and ward, that anon they spyed where the Cobler and his mother came trudging, in went his Wife, and sate her downe by the fire, where the Cobler found her onely sitting with the old woman in her petticoat, drying her gowne, assoone as she saw him she wept: and he although he grieued at the mischance, yet for that he spyed her in no company, he was satisfied, and wisht her to be content, and sent for a pot of beere or two to make her drinke: and after he had seene all well, and his Wife in her cleane apparell, setting them a little on the way; home hee went againe to his shop, and his Wife went to her Mothers, where an houre or two she past away the time in chat, and then returned home with her mother in Law. Thus the Cobler was not suspicious of his Wiues being abroad, but tooke her misfortune for a chance, and the Smith euery day acording to his woonted custome, would come and chatte with his Neighbour the Cobler, and sometime found opportunity to talke with the Wife, but neuer out of the Shop: on a day the Cobler being from home, and the old Woman within peecing her Hose, the Smith came to the Shop, and finding her alone, began to lay a Plot, how to make her Husband a Cuckold, while hee held the doore, shee promised if hee would deuise it, shee would put it in practice, and so agreed, they concluded between themselues, and they brought it cunningly to passe, thus: It chanced within a fortnight after, that as the Cobler and his wife lay in bed, she fell on a great laughter, her husband demanding the cause, she made him this answere, I will tell you husband a strange thing: so it is, that this other day, when you went to buy Leather, my mother and I sate in the shop, and she fell fast asleep, your neighbour the Smith, he (as his custome is) came to the window, and seeing my mother a sleepe, began to court me with faire words and large promises, and told me, that if I would find the meanes, that when you were out, I would let him lye with me, hee would giue me forty shillings. I shakt him off as well as I could, but he would haue no nay at all, but threw foure Angels into my lap, whereupon I tooke the gold, for me thought they were foure faire peeces, and promised him that to morrow you went foorth and my mother too, and then he should find mee alone in the Chamber. Upon this he went away, and left mee the gold, and therefore if it please you, to morrow I thinke good you should faine your selfe to goe abroad and my mother too, and then hide you in a Chamber hard by, and assoone as he is come in, you may stand at the doore, and heare all our talke: and when you heare me consent, then breake in, and take the Smith and swinge him well, and I warrant you husband, there will diuers commodities rise of it: for not onely wee shall haue this gold, and get more for amends, but euer after be rid of such a knaue. This motion pleased the Cobler well, and the rather because the Smith profest to be his great friend, and yet would seeke to doe him this disgrace: vpon this conclusion they resolued and so fell a sleepe. The next day in the afternoone, the Cobler fained himselfe to goe out, and his mother with him, and after comming home, at a backe doore went vp into the next chamber and hid themselues, By and by according to promise came the Smith: and went roundly vp to the chamber where he found the Smiths wife: wherefore strait shutting the doore with a bolt on the inside, he fell to set vp plumes on the Coblers head-peece, the Cobler he very easily got to the doore with a great Pollaxe in his hand, and began to listen: with that he heard the Smith offer faire to his Wife: nay quoth she, I haue kept promise with you, for I onely promised to let you vp into my Chamber: Tush (quoth he) this is but a cauill, and many words past betweene them: the Cobler and his mother standing at the doore, with her nay, and his yea, till the Cobler had a new brow-antler growne out of his old hornes, and then she answered him, seeing nothing would content him, he should haue his pleasure: with that the Cobler was ready to rush in, but that his mother stayd him, and bid him heare further: and doest thou meane good faith, quoth the Smith? yea, wherefore else (quoth the Coblers wife) came we into this place: why then (quoth the Smith) heare what I will say to thee: Doest thou thinke though we be heere in secret, that our faults will not be seene openly: that though thy husband knowes not of it, and that it is kept close from the world, that there is not one aboue that sees all, and will reuenge it: yes vilde strumpet as thou art, and for this cause came I to try thee: thou hast an honest man to thy Husband, who loues thee more dearely then himselfe, and workes hard to sustaine thee that thou shalt not want, and wilt thou in his absence wrong him? Thinke if euer thou dost, it will come out, and thou shalt be punished with open shame: I am thy Husbands deerest friend, with whom I am dayly conuersant, and dost thou thinke I could find in my heart to offer him such iniurie? No, and then art not thou more to blame, that being the Wife of his bosome, wilt betray thy Husband, who is dearer to thee, then all friends? Fie vpon thee vild woman, fare thee well and amend: I will not tell thy Husband, vnlesse I spy thee proue light, but I shall neuer thinke well of thee while I liue, and with that he opened the chamber doore, and the Cobler chopt in, and taking the Smith by the hand, said, Neighbour I thanke you for your good counsell, I haue heard all the communication that past betweene you and my wife, and truely, and with that the Cobler wept, I am heartily glad I haue such a trusty friend, to whom in my abseuce at any time, because my mother is an old woman, I may commit the ouersight of my wife: and truly neighbor (qd. he) I pray you thinke neuer the worse of her, for she told me the whole matter, and appointed me to stand at the doore, that when you should haue offered her any discurtesie, I might haue rusht in and haue taken you: so that I perceiue you are as honest as she, and she as honest as you, and that your meanings were both alike. I am glad of that (qd. the Smith) that you haue so vertuous a wife, I hope I done the part of a friend to pleasure my neighbour: you haue done so (quoth the Cobler) and therefore ere we part weele drinke a quart of wine. So the Cobler bestowed good cheere on the Smith, and euer after accompted him for his friend, & whensoeuer he went out of Towne, committed the charge of his Wife to the Smith, who at all times had free egresse and regresse to the Coblers house, without suspicion. This Tale of the Smith made all the company to laugh, and the Cobler he was starke mad for anger, saying: that if it had bin his case, he would haue giuen him wine with a cudgell: tush Cobler (qd. the Smith) neuer thinke but our Art can surpasse yours in such wenching matters and that the Smith can sooner make a Cobler a Cuckold, then a Cobler a Smith: vpon this they fell to jarres, and from words had falne to blowes, if they of the Barge had not parted them: so at last they were quiet, and made friends. And then the Cobler he began to intreat that they would goe forward in their merry exercise, whereupon a Gentleman sitting by, said masters, it is so good to passe away the time, that to continue so honest a sport, I will be the next: & thus therefore I will describe him. Well joynted and of a good strength, Siken writes report to vs, Was that Troian Troylus : For he was of a comely visage, And his manners of a courteous vsage. His haire in curled lockes hung downe, And well I wot the colour was nut browne And yet it was full bright and sheene, Such wore Paris I weene, When he sayled to Gr aecia , To fetch the faire Helena , His front was of a siluer hue, Powdred thicke with veynes blue. His eyes were luminous, Chrystalline and beauteous, Gray and sparkling like the starres, When the day her light vp sparres. His cheekes like the Lillies white, Or as Luna being bright: And yet comely thereupon, Was shadowed colour Vermillion, That gazers all woulden suppose, How the Lilly and the Rose, Did maken warre each with other. His suercoat was of Satten blew, Like vnto a Louer true: His Hose were garded along, With many broad and veluet thong, His cloake grew large and wide, And a faire whinniard by his side, The pummell gelt and on his head, He had a bonnet cullor'd red: An alder leefer Swaine I weene, In the Barge there was not seene: And then thus he began to tell, What in Cambridge a Scholler befell. Containing the contrary fortunes that a Scholler of Cambridge had in his loues. In the Uniuersitie of Cambridge , in Peters Hottell, there liued a Scholler famous for his Learning called Rowland , who being placed there by his friends, so profited, that hee grew to be one of the fellowes of the House, being in great estimation for the honestie of his Life, and excellency of his learning: he was a man as well proportioned as he was qualified, and had as well bona corporis as he had bona animi , and could as well play the wagge  & the wanton abroad, as he could apply his bookes and study at home: amorous he was, and one that delighted to feed his eye with euery faire face, which after turned to his great prejudice, thus. It fortuned on a day in the Summer season, that for recreation he walked as farre as Cherry-hinton , to eate a messe of Creame, where being very pleasant, as he sate jesting with his Hostesse, there came in a Gentlemans Daughter in the Towne, a mayd of exceeding beauty, so well proportioned in the lineaments of her face, that nature seemed to cry in her an experiment of her cunning. This girle, as wise as she was faire, and as wanton as she was witty, came in and questioned with the Hostesse about some businesse: Rowland seeing such a Nimph come sweeping in, thought either Venus or Diana had come in their Country weeds to bewitch mens fancies: he cast his eye vpon the excellency of her Phisiognomy with such a piercing looke, that Loue entring by the eye, so wroong him at the hart, that forsooth fancy her of force he must. Now my yong Scholler could doe nothing but gaze vpon her, for court her he could not, vnlesse he should haue begun to wooe her with some words of Art, or some Axiomes of Philosophie. The yong Gentlewoman seeing the Scholler looke so earnestly vpon her, began to blush, and so taking her leaue of the Hostesse, went her way. The Scholler seeing her gone out of doores, thought of the old Prouerbe: Faint heart neuer won faire Lady : and therefore called to her thus: Faire Gentlewoman (quoth he) you may see we Schollers haue little manners, that holding the Pot in our hands, will not make such a Saint as you drinke: how say you Gentlewoman, will it please you pledge me? The wily wench hearing such a Scholler-like gratulation, seeing by this salute, that Schollers had read of Loue, more then they could say of Loue: and though they could tell what was Latin for a faire woman, yet could neyther wooe her, nor win her, turned back againe, and with a low curtesie thanked him. He off with his corner Cap, (for he was a Bachelour in Arts) and with a glauncing looke drunke to her: She like a wanton pledgd him with a smile. Rowland at this taking heart at grasse, stept to her, and tooke her by the hand, beginning thus to hold her in chat. Your Towne here (forsooth) of Cherry-hinton , hath made me oft play the Triuant, to come hither for Cheries, and as mine hostesse can tell, full many a messe of Creame haue I eaten in her house, for we Schollers are good companions, and loue to be pleasant, especially if we might haue the company of such a faire Gentlewoman as your selfe: Therefore Mistris, if I chance to come to towne to eat a pound of Cheries (if I may be so bold) I would trouble you to take part with mee; and if I meet you at Cambridge , the best wine in the Towne shall be your welcome: the wench (that had much adoe to keepe her countenance) thought to feed him with her faire speeches, till she made him as fat as a foole, and therefore made him this reply. Truly Sir, indeed many Schollers come to Cherry-hinton to eat Cheries: but Sir, you are the first man that euer I dranke withall: for Schollers bee so full of their Learning, and fine tearmes, that country wenches cannot vnderstand them, but I for my part, at the first sight like of you so well, that if my leisure serue, whensoeuer you come and please to send for me, I will as long as I dare beare you company, but now forsooth time cals me away, and I must begon. With all my heart quoth Rowland but truely we must not part without a kisse, which shee willingly tooke at his hands, and went home: where as soone as she came, she reuealed all to a yong Gentleman that lay in her Fathers house, who was sure to her: they laughing heartily at the Schollers courting, resolued to make good sport with him ere they had done. But Rowland hee that thought euery smile was a fancy, and euery maid that laught on him loued him, coniectured assuredly by the familiar curtesie of the Gentlewoman, that she was greatly affectionated towards him: whereupon he began to enquire of his Hostesse whose Daughter she was, of what wealth her Father was, what Children he had, and what Dowrie the mayd was like to haue to her portion, as a man resolued, the woman was already wone, because she had giuen him gracious fauours. The Hostesse as well as she could, told him all: which done, he payed his shot, and went to Cambridge , where he began altogether to muse on the beauty of his Mistresse, and to lay an hundred plots in his head what were best to be done: at last he resolued to send a Letter to her to signifie his loue: or else to goe himselfe, and to carry two or three of his fellowes with him, and so to discourse vnto her how he loued her; but at the last, he fully determined with himselfe to write vnto her: wherefore taking Pen and Inke in his hand, wrote a Letter to her to this effect. Mistris Marian , Aristotle the great Philosopher; for all his wit, was in loue with Hermia : and Socrates the sage, could not so farre subdue his passions, but that he fell in liking with Zantippa : Schollers as they read much of loue, so when they once fall in Loue, there is no hoe with them till they haue their Loue. The finest glasse is most brittle, and the best Schollers soonest ouergone with fancie. For an instance, was not Ouid as deepe in Loue, as he was excellent in Learning? I bring in these companions, Mistris Marian , because the other Sunday being at Cherry-hinton , and seeing your sweet selfe, I was so ouertaken with your beauty and good behauiour, that euer since the remembrance of your face could neuer out of my fancie: nor I thinke neuer shall although I should be drencht in forgetfull floods of Lethe . Seeing then my affection is so great, I pray you consider of mee, and be not vnkind, but let mee haue Loue for loue: and though here in the Uniuersitie you see me simple, yet my Parents at home are men of good Parentage, and what I want in wealth, I shall supply in Learning: Ponder with your selfe, and read but the liues and answers of the Phylosophers, and see how they vsed their wiues, with what curtesie, how euer the women were the most masters, and had the Soueraignty, which they desire. Thus hoping you will consider of my Loue, desiring you to send me answere, I bid you farewell. Yours in dust and ashes, Rowland . When he had thus finished this Letter, he thought to shew himselfe somewhat poeticall, and thought a Letter was not worth a rush vnlesse there were some verses at the latter end, and therefore he affixed as a Post-script this amorous ditty. My vaine in Verse to bend: Dame Chryseis which gau'st Homer sucke, Thy tender teats me lend. Alcmena thou which Joue didst rocke, In Cradle full of Ioy: Eke swathe me in those swadling clowts, Account me for thy boy. Yea Naiades and pretty Nimphs, That on Parnassus dwell: Lend me your Muse that I may now, My Mistris beauty tell. How that in Beauty shee doth passe, Uenus the Queene of Loue: To whom, if I doe gaine her grace, I will bee Turtle Doue. Therefore my Deere conceiue my griefe, And thinke how I doe loue thee: And in some lines send mee reliefe, For Time and Truth shall proue me. Thus hoping Pen and Paper shall Thy minde to me short tell: But Loue mee as I doe loue thee, And so my deere farewell. Thus hauing both finished his letter and his verse, he sent them by a conuenient messenger the next Saturday to Cherry-hinton , and that forsooth was his Hostesse: who very orderly sent for the Gentlewoman to her house, and deliuered the letters to her, with earnest comendations from sir Rowland . The Gentlewoman in outward shew seemed to accept them as gracefully, as he sent them louingly, and so hyed her home: where presently she called for her new betrothed husband, and other Gentlemen her friends, and reuealed vnto them how she had receiued letters from her new Louer the Scholler. All they flocked about her, to heare what excellent stuffe was contained in so learned a mans letter: but when they heard how like a Philosophicall foole he writ, they all in a Synode peremptorily concluded, that the greatest Clarkes were not the wisest men: and I maruell of that, quoth one of the company, for two reasons: for the one, I haue heard this old said saw, that Loue makes men Orators, and affections whetteth on Eloquence: secondly, there was none more amorous then Ouid (yet a profound Scholler) in so much that hee writ three Bookes De arte Amandi , and so did Anacreon, Tibullus , and Propertius . Yea but, quoth another, as they were schollers so were they well brought vp in the Court, and knew as many externall matters, as they did inward Principles: but beware my masters, when a Scholler is once brought vp in the Uniuersities, and hath no other bringing vp but plaine Ergo to plod in, nor conuerseth with none but his Bookes, and then hap to fall in Loue, trust me hee will be as ignorant to wooe, as the Plough-man to dispute, thinking that womens fancies are won with figures, and their thoughts ouer-reacht with the quiddities of Art: but of all that euer I heard write, this setteth downe his mind the most simply: and therefore quoth Marian , shall hee be answered as foolishly, for I my selfe will be Secretary. Nay quoth diuers of the Gentlemen, we will put in our verdict with you: No quoth shee, try but a womans wit: that's knauish enough quoth one of them, and stepping to her Standish shee wroth thus. Sweet Sir Rowland , I receiued your letters, wherein I perceiue that Schollers in Loue are like to a Sow with pig vnder the Apple-tree, which either hastily must haue a drab, or else loose their litter. If I bring in a Country comparison blame me not, in that I am a country wench, and haue none but plaine country Logicke, but whatsoeuer I write, I meane well. Indeed rightly you say, that the finest glasse is most brittle, and the best Schollers soonest pinched with Loue, which I thinke to be true: for assoone as euer I saw you, how your eyes waited vpon my face, as an obiect of your delight, I tooke you to be too wise, kind and amorous: and therefore seeing euer since you haue beene passionate, it were great pittie that you should not haue for your paines (euen as wee vse in a homely prouerbe) A country sackfull of Loue: and the rather you induce me to think well of you, that you bring in the examples of Aristotle and Hermia , and of Socrates and Zantippa , whereby you seeme to promise, that I shall as they had, enioy the Soueraignty; and that if I be like them in conditions, you will be as suffering as they in patience: yet will I neyther be so proud towards you as Hermia , for she rid Aristotle with a snafle, like a horse: nor so waspish as Zantippa , for she crowned Socrates with a Chamber-pot, but betweene both: and so wishing you hope the best, I bid you farewell. Yours neuer, if not euer, Marian of Cherry-hinton . After she had done her Letter, that she might seeme to bee no whit behind him in any good will: shee leaned her head on her hand, and in a Poeticall fury writ her Louer these verses. For they are passing sower: And sometime sweet as hony Comb, And all within an hower. Like to a Sunne-shine Summers day, When Phoebus shewes amaine: And yet ere night from tawny Clouds, Doth fall a shower of raine: So whatsoeuer chance betide, Or whatsoeuer fall: If Father frowne, or Mother chide, Yet you must beare with all. For why? the Cuckow doth not come, In Aprill Month more sure, Then I will fixe my Loue on thee, For euer to endure. Thus wishing thee to thinke on me, In Study or in Street: I bid you heartily farewell, Till we in Cambridge meet. Hauing thus ended her Song and the Letter, she calld the Conuocation of the merry Gentlemen, and shewed them her humour in prose, and her vaine in verse: asking if shee had done it knauishly enough: yea quoth her betrothed husband, and so exceeding well that you shall stand for foure and twenty knaues till Christmas next. Tush quoth another, womens wits are like Sheffield kniues, for they are sometimes so keene as they will cut a haire, and sometime so blunt as they must goe to the grindstone. That is (quoth the second) when you perswade them to silence or obedience, talke with them but in that doctrine, and they are meere dunces. Thus they began to descant of womens wit: but the Gentlewoman wily enough, left them all, and went and layd vp her Letters till Saterday Market: then she went to his Hostesse, and deliuered them to her, earnestly intreating her, if she saw sir Rowland to conuay that packet to him. The Hostesse promised her to doe it faithfully, and effectually: and away to Cambridge she went, where scarce she was set with her butter and her milke, but she spyed Sir Rowland come flinging downe the Marked hill in his wide sleeued gowne, and his corner Cap, she needed not to call him, for he straight found her out, and she as soone deliuered him the packet: sir Rowland thankt her: and away he went to his study to read the contents: but it was too farre to Peters Hostell, and therefore he cald in at a Tauerne by the way for a pinte of wine, and there he opened the Letter, which when he had read, he perceiued by the contents she loued him: for hee being simple, perceiued not how shee bobd foole with him: taking euery jest for a sentence, he thought himselfe the master of all worldly content, and that Fortune could not aduance him higher on her wheele, then to haue so faire a mayd to his Paramour. Then viewed ouer her verses, and in a sweet passion praised her Poetry, commended her wit: saying, for stature she was Iuno , for beauty Venus , for Learning and qualities Pallas : thus in meditation of his letter, and his Loue, sate poore sir Rowland , from eight a clocke, till eleuen, and then hearing the Hostell Bell ring to dinner, for feare he should loose his halfe-penny chops, he put vp his letter into his pocket, and went his way. After dinner he fell to his old vaine: got alone to be solitary, and then sate ruminating on the good successe of his loues, accompting it rather to his profession, then his fortune, for he thought none so faire, chast, nor rich, but a scholler might win with his Logicke: thus he passed ouer day by day, in sending of letters to his loue, and diuers times resorting thither, but seldome could he speake with her, for that she fained some excuse; onely when she ment to laugh, then she was for his company. But it fell out, that one Saturday aboue the rest, sir Rowland met her in Cambridge , and finding her with other of her neighbonrs, saluted her, and would needes welcome her to the Towne with a pint of Wine, which she tooke very kindly, that shee might sooth him vp still in his vaine hope, and forsooth to the Tauerne shee and her companions went with him, where they had good game at our Cambridg wooer: but Marian taking him aside, told him that her father and her mother had intelligence of their loues, and as farre as shee could coniecture, it was by his hostesse: therefore she wild him not to make her priuie to his secrets any more; nor to come to Cherry-hinton but when she sent for him, which should bee as often as opportunity would serue, hoping, though her father now were not forward, yet in time he would consent,  & specially if he saw him master of Artes: with this the scholler rested satisfied, & they dranke their Wine and departed. Thus betweene them passed on all the Summer, till the deepe of winter, about Christmas, when she on a time and the rest of the Gentlemen, desirous to be pleasant, determined to haue some sport with the Scholler, and so caused Marian to send a letter for him, that he should come that night & speake with her: which she did, and he (poore soule) no sooner receiued it, but in all hast hied him in the frosty euening to Cheryhinton , where when he came, he straight spake with Marian , and she wisht him to stay in an old Barne, while her Father was at Supper, and then she would conuey him into a backe Court, where he should walke hard vnder the Chamber doore, and then when her father were in bed she would let him in. The Scholler stood there a while, and Marian came strait and conducted him into a square Court, where Rowland rested him till her father should goe to bed. The night grew darke, and with that passing cold, so that Rowland waxed weary of his standing, and wisht that her father were in bed: there stood the poore Scholler shaking and trembling in his joynts, till it was eleuen of the clocke: then saw he light at the doore, and he heard Marian call him: oh blessed houre thought hee, that now I shall goe both to a good fire and to my Loue. Sir Rowland (quoth she) be still a while, my father and my mother is gone to bed, but my brother and two Gentlemen more, are vp at Cards, and they haue but a set to play, and then they will to their rest: alas sweet heart (quoth he) I am almost starued for cold, yet the hope that I haue to enioy thy presence, doth comfort me, that I take all things with patience. The Gentlemen that stood hard by and heard all this, laught at the Scholler, and vp they went againe to their Chamber to be merry, but still walkt poore Rowland , beating his hands about him for cold, and expecting still whe his Louer should call him: well, there he trauerst his ground still like a Pery-patecian , and only had the sight of the Heauens to contemplate, till it was about one of the clocke, and then came they all downe again to laugh, and assoone as he saw the Candle at the chinke of the doore, he began to be comforted, and came thither, shaking and beating of his teeth so sore, that he could not speak. Where are you sweet hart (qd. she) alas, how sorry am I for thy distresse, thinke that the hart in my belly is as cold for griefe, as thy joynts are with the frost, faine would I haue thee come in, but the loosers will not part play, and so they sit still, therefore I hope thou wilt weigh my credit. Oh Marian (qd. he) & his teeth jarred one against another, that they could scarce vnderstand him, I am like to perish with cold, yet were it twice as frosty, & the night thrise as long, I would walk here rather than procure thy disparagement: gramercy sweet loue (quoth she) and with that we bid him be still a while, and the Gentlemen all fell a laughing, to heare how kind a foole the Scholler was, and with what patience he bid Penance: Oh, quoth the one of them, that is but an experiment of his Phylosophicall principles, for he reades in Tully :  Non oportet sapientem in aduersit dolore concidere. I (quoth the second) and Mimus Publius giues him this Counsell.  Aduersis proba, vt fortunam, cum necesse fuerit, Patienter insultantem feras. You say well (quoth the third) but let him for me make instance of himselfe for such axiomes, I will rather be a warme foole, than so cold a Philosopher. Thus they gan descant vpon the poore Schollers misery, till the Clocke strooke three, and then as they were comming downe, they heard a noyse at the doore, which was this poore Rowland , creeping vnder the shade for warmth, his teeth beating so lowd, yt they might heare them easily vp the staires, all this mooued not my yong Mistresse to pitty, but encreased their laughter. Assoone as he heard them come down the staires almost dead, he called out, who is there? Oh sweet heart, it is thy Marian , quoth she. Then for Gods sake, quoth Rowland , take pitty of my life, for I am almost dead, doe but open the doore, and let me sit heere vpon the stayres, that I may haue some shelter from the cold. Alas, quoth she, sweet loue, thou shalt and thou wilt, but when the doore is opened, it makes such a noyse, that it wakens the whole house. Rather quoth hee, let me suffer death then you be discredited, for if I were to abide the stone of Sisiphus , the wheele of Ixion , the gripe of Prometheus , and the hunger of Tantalus , yet had I rather pocket vp all these tortures with patience, than bring thy credit within the compasse of the least preiudice: at this period she left him, and vp they went, smiling at the constancie of Rowland . The Gentlemen they were sleepie, and went to Bed, and Marian , (as farre as I can conjecture) though it were somewhat before the marriage, that night made tryall of her new betrothed husband, where from three, she lay with him till sixe, and then it waxed daylight, and shee rose: and remembring her louer went downe, opened the doore, and found him almost sencelesse: there wiping her eyes as though she had wept, she perswaded him that she was the most sorrowfull woman in the world for his sharpe frosty night he had suffered, protesting shee was falne into an ague for feare and griefe she had taken to see him in such distresse, and could by no meanes redresse it: but good Rowland (qd. she) be content, hie thee to Cambridge , & take some hot brothes, least by this meanes thou fall into a sicknesse, and then for feare I dye: no qd. Rowland , and he could scarce speake or goe, feare not me, for the hope of thy after fauors will be a sufficient comfort for me: and with that taking his leaue, for his cold nights worke he had a kisse, and so departed. Well, as weak as he was home he scambled, and got to his Chamber, and discouered to a friend of his, how he was like to perish of an extreame cold he had taken, if he did not so much for him as to get him a Physitian, who straight went and brought him a Doctor, that with inward potions, and outward oyles and vnguents so wrought him, that he recouered him to his former health, although very hardly: for he was so frozen in his loynes, and so nipped in his muskels and sinewes, that if his Physitian had not beene good, he had perished. It was almost a quarter of a yeare before Rowland was frolicke againe: in which time Marian thinking she had lost her louer with a nut, sent him a present of apples to winne him againe, which he receiued so gratefully, that he valewed the worst of them worth a Fellowship, eating them with an extraordinary taste, that he imagined them as sweet as Ambrosia , and all, for that they came from his Marian . Thus continued Rowland in his amorous humour, vntill such time as Marian forsooth must be married, and for that it was Aduent, there was no asking in the Church, but they procured a Licence the day before. As she and the rest of her friends, which were inuited to the Nuptials, were merrily jesting, oh Lord (quoth she) I had almost forgot my selfe, to morrow must bee the Wedding, and the Bride is yet at Cambridge , why Gentlemen it were no bargaine if Rowland were not heere, therefore quoth she, I will send for him, and lay such a plot that he shall be with vs all Dinner, and yet taste none of our meat. I pray you quoth her Husband, let vs see your cunning in that. Alas quoth one of the Gentlemen, poore Rowland is credulous, and whatsoeuer Mistris Marian saith, he thinkes it is Gospell, but if he will be so simple, as to think that his last nights worke is not a suff-cient warning, he is worthy of whatsoeuer befals. Well, vpon this Marian sent for him, and come hee did in the Euening: where, to make my tale short, she made him to walke in his woonted station till one of the Clocke, then she let him in to a good fire, where he well warmed himselfe, and she louingly sate by him, discoursing of the last nights worke that hee abode so patiently: at last she commanded the maid to lay the cloth, that they might haue some quelque chose for a reare Supper, which they went busily about: for Rowland said, he was very hungry. As the cloth was layd, and they ready to sit downe, the wench came running in, and said that her Master was rising, and seeing the light of the fire, was comming into the Parlor. Alas, what shall I doe quoth Marian ? Hide me somewhere quoth Rowland , whiles he be gone to Bed. Come quoth she, here stands a new truncke and a large, come, skip into it, and I will for a while rake vp the fire, and goe to Bed, while the old man be falne asleepe: with that Rowland whipt into the Trunke, and she lockt him in, and straight in a pleasant humour, went to her new Husband, where she lay all night, and left Rowland safe shut vp for starting. Still lay hee expecting when she should come: but hearing nothing, and extreamly weary, for very griefe he fell asleepe till the next morning. When the poore Scholler awakt, and entred into consideration where he was, he began to be halfe in suspition that he was mockt and abused: still he lay patiently, till he heard them of the house say, Good morrow Mistris Marian , God send you a good day to day: the Sunne shines faire, you shall haue a cleere day to your Wedding. This word went as cold to his heart as a knife, that Marian should be married, and he made a foole to suffer such disparagement of his credit: yet as before hee was patient in extreames, and so resolued with content to see the successe of his abuse. Well, to Church goe the Bridegroome, and the Bride, with all their friends attendants, and married they were with great solemnity: this done, home they come to Dinner, and after they were set and placed in the Parlour where this Trunke stood, they fell to their Uiands, which were very sumptuous. The Gentlemen bidding reach downe the Pig, the Capon, Goose, Swan, Turkey, Phesant, Bitour Uenison, and such dainty cates: all this heard Rowland , and being passing hungry, wished he had a leg of the worst of them in his hand: still he lay almost famished and smoothered, till the tables were taken vp, and boords shifted, and they fell to dancing. All this heard Rowland , and hearing the Musicke, fell asleepe vntill supper time, and then he awakt, and heard how they layd the Tables, and went to Supper, where they were passing pleasant, and the more, for that they meant to make sport with Rowland after Supper was done, which continued not long, for they made the more haste, for that they meant to bee merry. When the cloth was taken vp, the Bride fetcht a great sigh: what wife quoth the Bridegroome, why sigh you? In a dumpe: repent you of the match? No (quoth she) but I haue a blot in my Conscience, and now before you all I meane to reueale it. I was once beloued of a Cambridge Scholler, who loued mee entirely and suffered much for my sake: then from poynt to poynt she recompted vnto them the whole discourse of the loues and fortunes passed betweene Rowland and her, whereat the company had good sport. A man he was (quoth she) wise, proper and well proportioned: and for proofe, take this key, open that trunke (quoth she) and you shall see his picture. Rowland hearing this, arm'd himselfe to suffer all, and so the Trunke was opened, and he rose out like Lazarus from his graue. Good Lord (quoth the company) what is this a Spirit? In nomine Iesus vnde venis? Epurgatorio (quoth Rowland .) And with that all the people laught while they could sit: At last when they were weary with laughing Rowland had silence, he boldly sayd: Thus I am glad Gentlemen, that my mishap hath made you so merry, and that Mistresse Bride hath so large a plaine song to run descant on, Caueat Emptor ; this is but a Comedie, but looke for a Tragedie whensoeuer it fals. And so he went out of the doore sore ashamed that he had such a kindly scoffe. The company laught well, and he patiently went thinking how fortunate a man he should be, if he might liue to reuenge. Rowland at this misfortune had an insight into the world, and began to waxe wiser, that in short time hee began to haue as much knowledge in worldly affaires, as in his booke, and was (for his good behauiour, and pleasant wit) highly had in estimation, not onely amongst Schollers, but amongst Townesmen, that in all the Uniuersitie he was called the Gentlemanlike Scholler. Liuing thus in good credit, and yet discontented, because fortune fauoured him with no opportunity to reuenge: it so fell out at length, that Marian comming euery weeke to Cambridge , espyed amongst the Schollers, one whom she cast her eye on, and thought him the properest man in the whole Uniuersitie: Well, she counted it but a glance, and thought as lightly to passe it ouer, as it sleightly entred: but she found Loue, though he entred in by grant of curtesie, yet he would not be thrust out by force of extremitie; insomuch that she could not content her selfe without, but with the sight of her new friend, which was done so manifestly that the Scholler perceiued it, and aiming at the fairest, one Saturday seeing her in the Market, offered her a quart of Wine, which she tooke gratefully, and began to be very familiar with him, insomuch that before they past, force of Loue made her so shamelesse, that she was content to yeeld to his request, so that time and place would serue without the disparagement of her credit. Upon this they concluded, that Master Awdrey (for so we will call him, should grow familiar with her Husband, and by that meanes, should haue a better meanes to the quieting of his mind. Upon this determination they departed, and hee so brought it to passe, that he not onely was acquainted with her Husband, but so familiar that he would carry Master Awdrey often from Cambridge with him to Cherry-hinton , and I hope you doe imagine hee was no little welcome Guest to his wife: Being thus fitted in this in their passions, onely watching for place, and lingring off the time, at last it was concluded, that she should come on a Saturday to Cambridge , and faine to stay with a Kinsewoman of hers that dwelt in the Towne, and so lye with her all night: this stood for a sentence, and so the next weeke was decreed. In the meane time it so fell out, that Master Awdrey and sir Rowland being of great acquaintance, and such priuate familiars, that nothing was holden too secret betweene them. Master Awdrey smothering this ioy in himselfe, thought to pertake it with his friend: and so as he and sir Rowland were walking, he reuealed vnto him the loue that had past betweene him and Marian , and on Saturday was the night when his posse should come into esse , desiring him to tell him where he might haue a House fit for such a purpose. Sir Rowland hearing this, smild, which made Master Awdrey to enquire the cause of his laughter: whereupon sitting downe vpon the grasse, hee began to recount vnto him the whole discourse of his Loues with Marian , and what sundry abuses he suffered at her hand, to the great and vtter infamie of Schollers. M. Awdrey hearing this, sate a great while in a Muse, at last he said, and will women be Crocodiles, to weepe rose-water and vinegar at one time, stil delay in extreames to loue without reason, and hate without cause? Oh the follie of men to be such, to such painted Sepulchers, whose painted sheaths hold leaden blades, whose skins are glorious like Panthers, but haue deuouring paunches. By that God that drew that infortunate female from that fortunate Adam . I hate her as extreamly as I loued her earnestly: and I will not onely yeeld thee opportunity to reuenge, but Ile ioyne issue with thee to performe it to the vttermost. At this Rowland was tickled with inward joy, and taking Awdrey in his armes, protested such humble seruice for that friendly promise, as euer should lye in his ability to execute. Thus in this determination of reuenge, they crost the fields to Trompington : and there they eat a messe of Creame, whither by chance came one of the Proctors, with whom both Rowland and Awdrey were very familiar: him they had in, and made as good cheere as such a simple Ale-house could affoord, and there in priuate reuealed to him all their practice, desiring his furtherance in the matter. The Proctor promised to doe what in him lay for the execution of this merry action, and there amongst them they laying and confirming the plot, they went altogether home to Cambridge , where they past away the time pleasantly till Saturday came: and then according to promise was Marian there, and met with Awdrey , who entertained her with all the curtesie that he could, spending the day at the Tauerne whiles night came, and then he carried her to the house appointed, such a Subaudy domus as was fit for such a purpose: and there they supt. In the meane time Rowland had sent a Letter to her Husband in Awdreys name, that his wife being not wel, was faine to stay at her kinswomans all night, and desired him to come to her the next morning, and that her father and the rest of the Gentlemen would come with him, for that they should see Rowland taken in bed with a pretty wench. This Letter in all haste was conueyed to Cherry-hinton to her husband, who reading the contents waxed somewhat iealous, because he had seene very familiar curtesie betweene Awdrey and his wife, and thought Schollers were slie fellowes, and could deuise many Sophistications to make a man a Cuckold, but he concealed his suspicion to himselfe, and shewed the Letter to his Father in Law, and the rest of the Gentlemen, who as they sorrowed his wife was not well, so they were all glad to see such a comicall fortune of Rowland : her husband taking euery word for his aduantage, said, he would be there by foure of the clocke to see Rowland taken vp. Thus they all agreed, and were gone by two of the clocke, where we leaue them comming to Cambridge : and againe to Marian , who after Supper sate vp late, but Awdrey fild her full of Wine till she was almost drunke, that she was very heauy, and desired to goe to Bed, which she did, and was no sooner layd but she fell asleepe, and Awdrey slipping out, put out the Candle and sent in Rowland , and bade him now goe to his Mistris: he went into the Chamber, and lockt the doore: and Master Awdrey stole out of the house, and went to his Chamber, leauing Rowland with his Paramour: where I thinke more for enuy of the man, then for Loue of the woman, perhaps he dubd him one of Paris Priesthood, howsoeuer it was she descryed not how it was, but both fell asleepe: on the morrow by foure of the Clocke, was Marians husband, her Father and the rest of the Gentlemen at Peters Hostell , where finding the Gate open, they went to Master Awdreys Chamber, and raysed him vp, who quickly slipping on his cloathes, welcommed them, and went with them to find out the Proctor, who watching for their comming already, was with a dozen Masters of Art well appointed walking in the Court-yard, and presently went his way with them, and came to the house where Rowland lay: the Proctor knockt, and bade open the doore: who is that quoth the good wife? The Proctor quoth he: open the doore and that quickly, or I will beat it downe: the Good man came stumbling downe in his shirt, and the good wife was so amazed that she could not remember to tell her guests. The Proctor came in, and by the direction of Awdrey , went straight vp to the Chamber: who be here (quoth the Proctor?) None sir (quoth he) but a stranger and his wife: beat it open with a Holbert quoth the Proctor: and with that for haste Marians husband ran against it, and the doore fell downe and he into the Chamber: with that Rowland couered her close, and stepping out of the bed in his shirt, asked what they meane. Ah sir Rowland (quoth the Proctor) I am sorry I haue diseased you this morne, I thought full little to haue found you here, what is the cause you lye out of the Hostell to night? Truly sir (quoth he) I was late abroad this night, making merry with my friends, and so I was faine to take vp my Lodging here. How doe you sir Rowland , quoth Marians husband and her father, I maruell wee see you not at Cherry-hinton . Oh masters quoth hee, when there is another Comedy to play, looke for me, but if you remember I promist you a Tragedie first, when that is studied, I warrant you I will visit you: poore Marian lying in Bed, and hearing all this how she was betrayd, and had layne with Rowland all night, and how her Father and her Husband were there present, thought surely now Rowland to the vttermost would be reuenged vpon her, so that she fell into a great sweat for feare. The Proctor that had his Lesson taught him, said, well sir Rowland , had it beene any other but you, that had beene taken abroad, and in such a suspected house, he should haue gone to the Towle booth: but since you haue no other company, farewell. Awdrey jogg'd vpon Marians husband, and as they were ready to goe out of doore, tush Master Proctor (quoth he) but I maruaile you examine not who it is that lyes with him, it may be a pretty wench. What? is there one lyes with him? Yea, marry is there sir (quoth he) and with that stepping to the Bed, threw off all the cloathes, and there lay his Wife in her smocke. Sante amen , quoth Rowland , who is heere? Haue you seene such a chance this yeere? What a Woodcocke come so soone, From Cherry-hinton to Cambridge before noone, And found a Cuckowes nest Is this Masters (in earnest or in Iest?) That Rowland so earely in a morne, Should make a knaue weare the horne: What man! Be not agast, For you cannot call backe that is past. At this all the Schollers fell a laughing, and sir Rowland sate him downe in his shirt (and to make the matter vp, that it might be a right blacke Santus ) while they laught, cryed Cuckow . The Gentleman seeing his wife, and the Father his daughter, they were in such a maze, that they stood as men senselesse: they fell out a weeping, the Schollers a laughing, the Gentlemen a sighing, and still Rowland kept his wench, and cryed Cuckow : at last Rowland began thus. Why you my masters and friends of Cherry-hinton , did I not promise you a Tragedie, and haue I not now brought it to passe? I hope this Dame, and you all, remember my frostie night, and how I was brought out of the Trunke: now am not I reuenged well, haue I not had my penny worths? Yes villaine (quoth the Gentleman) and first the whore shall dye: and with that drawing out his Rapier, hee would haue kild her: but the Proctor stayd him, and she protested she knew not how she came there, but thought shee had beene at home in her bed. Upon this all the Schollers perswaded the Gentleman, that Rowland did it by Negromancie, and that if she were the honestest woman in the world, Magicke were able to doe as much: Rowland for very pitty affirm'd it: and so they perswaded him not to wade further in the matter for his owne credit, but to clap it vp with silence. She wept, and wrung her hands, and her father sate and shed teares: but at last, by perswasion of the Proctor, and the other Schollers, Rowland and he for all this were made friends: his wife and hee agreed, as a man perswaded she was faultlesse, and that it was done by Negromancie: and so all merrily went to the Tauerne and drunke, they going to the Colledge, and he to Cherry-hinton , wishfull resolution neuer more to let his wife come to Cambridge , for feare of the Schollers Art Magicke. This Tale made them all heartily laugh, euery one commending the policie of the Schollers that had inuented so good a reuenge. The Cobler he marked all very diligently, and swore there was not a more sound Historie in all the Legenda aurea : well, it made all the Barge merry, yet seeing they began to bee all in a dumpe, one cryed who is next? Marry that am I (qd. the Scholler, and he began to settle himselfe, whom I can best describe thus. Giuen much vnto his Booke: For his visage was all pale, As Clarkes tellen this tale, That mickle study makes men leane. As well as doth a curst queane, Apollo radiant and sheene, His patterne long had beene: For well skild was he In verses and in Poetry. In Palmestrie he had some lore, In other Artes mickle more, Mickle could he say at each steuen, Of the liberall Artes seuen, Of the Welken and the Axle-tree, Whereon the Heauens turned bee: Of Mercury and Charles waine, And of the Beares twaine: Calisto and her Sonne conueyed thither, Which to Sea-men shew the weather: When Neptunus with his Mace, Will make smile Amphitrites face. Many other matters of Sophistrie, Could this Clarke in secrecie. He could also speake of Loue, Of Paphos and of Uenus Doue, And perhaps though he were a Clarke, Yet he could skill in the darke, As well as a man of Lay degree, To dally with a Wench in priuitie. His Attyre was all blacke, But why doe I longer clacke? This Clarke gan report His Story in this sort. Containing the sundry misfortunes that two Sycilian Louers had, and how at the end, their passionate sorrowes came to a pleasing successe. When the King of Tunis was beaten out of his Kingdome, and sought to enter againe by force, Iacomine Pierro , and Alexander Bartolo , two Noble-men of Sycilia , and both of Palermo , for the good will they bare the King, prepared certaine tall Barkes, and with their ayd, maugre his enemies, placed the King againe safe in his kingdome: which done, they returned againe to Palermo . This Iacomine Pierro had a Sonne called also Iacomine , and this Alexander had a daughter called Katherine , these two being Neighbours-children fell in Loue together, insomuch, that Iacomine noting the beauty of Katherine , seeing with his eye her outward excellencie, and hearing with his eares her inward vertues and perfections, entred with such deepe insight into her qualities, that he resolued in himselfe, she and none but she, should be the Goddesse of his Affections: and on the other side, Katherine feeding her eye with the desired object of his person, and with delight pleasing her eare with the generall fame that ran through all Sycilia of his curtesie, affabilitie, and valour, determined that none but Iacomine should enioy the flowre of her beauty. These two Louers being such a sympathy of agreeing Passions, liued a long while with lookes, bashfull both to discouer the essence of their Loues: yet at last Iacomine taking heart at grasse, finding one day fit place and opportunity, discoursed vnto her, how euer since his yeeres could entertaine any amorous thought, the Idea of her beauty and vertues remained imprinted in his heart so deepely, that none but she could satisfie the end of his incessant desire: which was no other, then the honest and honourable content of marriage. Katherine who was as willing as he was desirous, told him, that vpon that condition, whensoeuer their Parents should agree, she was ready to be at his command. Thus they wooed and ended, and all in a short space, for that time parting with a kisse. This sweet consent of thoughts continued a long time betweene these two Louers, insomuch that Iacomine resolued shortly to breake the matter to her Father, to whom he knew the match would be most pleasing, for that old Iacomine and Alexander loued together as Brothers. Whiles thus these two Louers held their demand in suspence, there fell a deadly jarre betweene the house of the Iacomine , and the family of the Bartolos : insomuch, that not onely all Palermo , but almost all Sicilia was in an vproare: for each tooke armes against other, and being men of great Parentage, friends tooke parts, and they began to bandy, that they fell to a flat ciuill dissention. This disagreement betweene the Parents, although it was a heart-breake to the two Louers, yet could it not at all disparage their affection, but the greater the mutinie, the deeper was the impression of their minds. But by this meanes their meeting was hindered? yet Loue beeing a priuy searcher of secrets, found them out a creuise betweene two Walles, which parted their Houses, and there oft times they met and parlyed, hoping still some end would grow to this dismall dissention; but as the fire encreaseth with the Wind, so this jarre grew greater by time, that the Louers lost all hope euer to haue consent of Parents: insomuch, that wholly in despaire of an vnitie, they concluded to forsake Sicilia , and to goe into Spaine , where they had both friends, and there to remaine till their Families were accorded. Upon this resolution, Iacomine prouided him a Barke, and layd it ready in the Hauen, and when the Wind and weather was faire, gaue a watch word to Katherine , and so got her aboord, hoysed Sayles, and away they made towards Spaine : they were not long gone, but they were missed, and by all possible conjectures knowne to be slipt away together, for diuers manifest instances were reported of their Loues. The Fathers fell both into deepe passions, Iacomine hauing but one Sonne, and Bartolo but one Daughter: yea the griefe of their vnkind departure did so worke in their Fathers minds, that each intended more mischiefe to other, as it were in reuenge, that the broyles grew hotter. But as they dissented, so these two louers accorded euery way, looking for no other Hauen, but ye Coast of Spaine : but Fortune that delights to sport her selfe in ye variable accidents of Loue, brought it thus to passe. They had not sayled three dayes from Sicilia , but that there fell a great calme, and certaine Gallyes that were Rouers vnder the King of Tunis , espyed this Sicilian ship, and thinking to haue some rich Prize, made out, and gaue onset, commanding them to yeeld; the Sicilians (being calme) could not make way from them, but yet although too weake, stoutly denyed to be boorded, and fought it out to the vttermost, chiefly Iacomine , who was sore wounded: but at last, they of the Gallies entred, and bestowed the Mariners vnder hatches, and then went to rifle the Ship, where they found Katherine all blubbered with teares, and almost dead for feare, her they tooke for all her pittifull shrikes and cryes, conueyed her into the Gallies: which Iacomine seeing, tooke so heauily, that he was ready to die for griefe, but so sore he was hurt, that stir he could not, but was faine to suffer her to be carried away, whither the mercy of the slaues pleased to transport her: when they had rifled the ship and found nothing but passingers, away they went with faire Katherine , determining with themselues to giue her for a present to the King of Tunis , whom they knew did loue a faire woman more than halfe his Kingdome, and so faire a creature as Katherine , they were sure he neuer saw before. Upon this they made sayle toward Tunis , and when they were arriued, the Captaine of the Gallies causing her to dresse her in her richest attire, went with her to the Kings place, where when he was admitted to his Highnes presence, humbly on his knees he craued pardon, as one that contrary to his Maiesties lawes had beene a Rouer and a Pyrate on the Seas: but now loathing that course of life, was come to submit himselfe, and hauing taken that Gentlewoman as a prize at Sea, desired his Maiesty to accept her as a present. The King whiles the Pyrate was telling his tale, kept his eye still on the Gentlewoman, whose beauty he found such, that he thought her some heauenly creature shrowded in some mortall carkas. The King not onely thanked the Pyrate for his Present, but gaue him free pardon, and a Letter of Mart, with many other rich guifts, so that he returned richly rewarded, and then turning him to Katherine , he tooke her in his armes, kist her, and gaue her such entertainment as in all Royaltie hee could. But nothing could make her cease off from teares, hauing still her Iacomine in remembrance, which she held for dead, which the King perceiuing, commanded that she should be carried to a Pallace of his, standing fast by the Citie wall, and there placed and attended vpon with all diligence, vntill she might bee comforted, and thither when it pleased him, he would haue recourse. Seated in that house, there she led a solitary life, washing her cheekes euery day with teares for her poore Iacomine , who likewise wounded as he was, was brought to Tunis , and there left in the Chyrurgious hand, where he was healed: As soone as he might well goe, he went as a man forlorne vp and downe the Citty, looking euery where if he might see his Katherine : whereupon he resolued to passe from place to place,  & so to end his dayes in trauell, if he did not by narrow inquisition find her out: getting therefore his bag and baggage in a readinesse, he was going out of Tunis : and as he passed out of the Gates, he cast his eye vp to the House where Katherine was, who at that time was looking out of a Casement, he espying her, and thinking it should be she, stood in a maze. Katherine seeing him, and thinking him to be her Iacomine , was almost ready to fall downe in a swoune: thus stood the two Louers at gaze; at last Iacomine called Katherine: Iacomine (quoth she) and with that she clapt her fingers on her mouth and made a signe, that for that time he should depart. Backe againe went Iacomine to his Hostesse, as merry a man as might be, and there staid till it was something late in the euening, and then going to the Palace, sought round about the house, and there found a backe window into a Garden, where they might conueniently talke, he had not stayed there long, but Katherine came to the Window, and there, after a volly of sighes, quencht with teares, they began to discourse their fortunes since their departure. Katherine told vnto Iacomine , how she was giuen by the Pyrates to the King for a present, and how he had placed her there, reseruing her for one of his Concubines, and that she looked euery houre, when he would come to deflowre her. Therefore (quoth she) since we are man and wife, and as we haue liued together, euen so let vs dye together, and enioy thou the chastity of that body, whose Soule hath beene euer thine in all amitie: I respect not the King, nor what his Tortures can doe, therefore at Night come hither to this place, when it is darke, climbe vp on the Wall, and so on this Tree, and thou mayst easily come into the Casement, which for the same purpose thou shalt find open. At this motion Iacomine was glad, and so departed, and at the time appointed, came: and being made more nimble by Loue and desire, he leapt vp the wall lightly, and so into the Tree, and from thence into the Casement, where he found his Katherine ready to receiue him: banquet him shee could not, least any might heare, but feast he did with kisses, or whatsoeuer she might affoord to his amorous desires, so that in the end, to Bed they went, and there with pleasure recompenced their former misfortunes. Loue hauing thus aduanced her Champion: Fortune enuying their happinesse, meant to haue one fling more at them, and brought it to passe, that the King that night resolued to haue the company of Katherine , and therfore after all his Lords were at rest, tooke with him his Chamberlaine, and certaine of the Guard, and went to the place where she lay: comming in by a backe Gate, hauing Keyes for euery doore, at last opened the Chamber where she was, and there drawing the Curtaine to behold his Goddesse, he saw where she lay with a young man in her armes fast asleepe: the King for anger was ready to haue kild him, but yet he did qualifie his fury with a royall patience: and called his Chamberlaine, and the rest of the Guard, and shewed them this sight, demanding of them if any knew the young man; they all answered, no: but supposed he was some stranger. The King straight commanded, that certaine of his Guard should watch them, and assoone as they awak't, carry them to Prison, and let there in the midst of the Market place be erected a great stake, and in the afternoone there let them both be consumed with fire: the Guard obeyed the Kings Commandement, and he went away in great choller, and highly discontented. The King departed, these Louers slept sweetly till the morning, and then they awoke, where presently they heard a rustling of men, that straight told them how the King was there, what had happened, and what hee had commanded: therefore they made them rise, and then bound them, and carried them away. The two Louers were no whit dismayed at this newes, but embracing and kissing each other, comforted themselues in this, that they should as they liued together so dye together, and that their Soules nor Bodies should neuer part. Straight were they carried to Prison, and the stake was a prouiding, whereupon the rumour of their burning came about the Citie, that against the houre appointed all the City were gathered together, and forth at last was Iacomine and Katherine brought, and bound to the stake backe to backe: They earnestly desired that they might be bound face to face, but it could not be granted, which grieued them: but they comforted themselues with cheerfull words, resoluing to suffer death with patience. All the City was gathered together, and stood gazing on them, and pittying them that so sweet a couple should fall in such fatall extremity: the poore soules ashamed and hanging downe their heads, expecting euery minute the beginning of their Martyrdome. As thus the fire was ready to be brought, came the Lord high Admirall of Tunis by, and seeing such a concourse, demanded the cause: the people told him as much as they knew. Hee on his foot-cloth came to the Stake, and looking vpon them, seeing them so louely, asked of them, of what Countrey they were? Of Sycilia sir, quoth Iacomine . With that the Admirall staring earnestly in his face, called to his remembrance the fauour of old Iacomine his father. Of what place in Sycilia , my friend, quoth hee? of Palermo : Thy name quoth the Admirall? Iacomine quoth he: Why thou art not (answered the Lord) the sonne of Iacomin Pierro ? Yes quoth he: and this the Daughter of Alexander Bartolo : And if quoth Iacomine , you knew these families, doe but so much for vs as to speake to the King that we may be bound face to face, and so dye, for life, that we hold in scorne. Although the tormentors were appointed to dispatch them by an houre, yet the Lord Admirall charged them not to put any fire to the wood till his returne; which they promist, and away gallopt the Admirall as a madman through the streets to the Kings palace, where when hee came, hee found the King in a great rage discoursing to his Lords the villany of Katherine , that admitted a Stranger into her. The Admirall, giuing a little way to the Kings rage, at last stept in, and on his knee begged the Liues of the two Louers, but the King, three times denyed him: Then said the Admirall, O Royall Sir, if you put these Two strangers to death, you are Cruell to your selfe, false to the Honour of all Kings and Princes in the world: I know you would not be called an Ingratefull man, to haue ten Kingdomes more giuen you; if you kill this sweet couple, if you part the deare hearts of these two Louers, the Sunne cannot looke vpon a man more vnthankfull; for when you were beaten out of Tunis , and got what Forces you could of adjacent Countries, to re-instate you, old Iacomine Pierro , this young mans Father, and noble Alexander Bartolo , the young womans Father, (both Sycilians and of Palermo ) with hazard of their liues and fortunes, fought for you, and set you vp againe, and will you now bee the murtherer of the two old men, by taking from them such deere Iewels as their Children. Looke into your selfe, and see what the fire of Loue has wrought in you: In them it has beene so powerfull, that to embrace one another, freely they forsooke Country, Father, Mother, Friends, and haue run into a thousand dangers, and must fire now bee the last, vtterly to consume them? The King hearing this, sent for them, their pardon in the Market-place was proclamed, people showted for Ioy, the Louers were with vnspeakable ioy brought before the King, and kneeling downe to his mercy, Hee imbraced them, kist her, and made much of him: And charging them, to commend him to both their Parents, him hee Knighted, and lading a Ship with treasure, sent them home, where they were with all gladnesse, welcommed; The two Fathers vpon this grew friends; the Louers were married, and liued in Palermo , in the aboundance of all happinesse. This Tale of the two Sycilian Louers beeing ended, made all the Company, as glad, to heare how well the Louers sped, as before they were sorrowfull to consider their Tragicall misfortunes; A Sea-man therefore sitting in the company, sayd thus: My masters, because this Gentleman the Scholler, (who can deliuer his minde better then I) hath told his Tale of two Louers taken by Pirates at Sea, I pray giue mee my turne too, being a Creature liuing by the Sea, and let my Tale be next: with all our hearts they all Cryed. My story shall be but short (sayd the Sea-man) because, heeres a merry Ging and many of vs, but first looke vpon the Marriner and behold his face. Sun-burnt in his face he grew, Well set, strong of Limbe and Bone, Yet tight and yare as any one: Skill he had, the Helme to steare, And o'th Ships Decke to domineere, Each Tacking, little rope, and line, He could finde, when was no shine, Of Sunne or Moone; in stormyest night. He could trim his Sayles aright. His Compasse cond he at his heart, And knew what Winds blew in each part; The Starres he had as true by name, As if at Font he heard the same, And with his fingers poynt, could tell, In what house euery Starre did dwell, As here the great Beare, that the small, Such Starres are fix'd, such shoot and fall, (At least they Sea-men, downe to slide,) There does the bright Orion glide, The Taylors yard, and the Starres seauen, Is he acquainted with in Heauen, As well, as those seauen Starres (the signe To tell within, is sold good Wine.) Shelues, Rocks, Gulphs, Quick-sands, could he shun, And i'th maine Ocean his course run, By his good Needle and his Chard, Blow grumbling Boreas nere so hard. In the Uniuersitie of Oxford , there sometimes liued an ancient Gentleman, a great Scholler, and of great Reuerence in respect of his age, and places of Office and Honour which he had borne amongst the Colledges, his Name (for he was in the Winter of his Life, Knighted) being Sir Lionell Aspernoone : Lands and liuings he had in some Shires in England . Three beautifull Daughters he had, married to Gentlemen of good rancke in Cambridge shire , and but one onely Son, whose name was Sebastian . The old Knight being strucke by sicknesse, and feeling that his weake and weatherbeaten ship of Life could not hold out long, prepared himselfe for a better Iourney, and to put in at Heauen: So that setling his estate, he by his last Will and Testament, appoynted his Sonne to be his sole Executor, and instated him in all his Lands, as his Heire. Yet lying on his death bed, after many other instructions how to beare sayle in the troubles of the world, he enjoyned him to print in his memory three Precepts especially: The first was, when hee did marry, he charged him, albeit he should neuer so much loue or dote vpon the beauty of his wife, yet neuer to trust her with his priuate intentions, nor by any meanes to reueale any secret of consequence to her. The second was, that if he neuer was blest with a Sonne of his owne, then not to Adopt another mans Child, as one of his begetting, nor at any hand to make him his Heyre. The third, that he should neuer put himselfe into subiection, to any man, of what greatnesse or power soeuer, that ruled the Helme of his Country as pleased himselfe, but rather to trim the Sailes of his owne Ship, and bee a faithfull Pilot in the Nauigation of his businesse by himselfe. These Precepts being giuen, and the Sonne vowing to performe them, the old Knight dyes. The Sonne hauing a Masse of Wealth, Reuenewes, Plate and Iewels, and beeing in the prime of his youth, lusty, braue, and full of Spirit, thought it much to lye alone, but to marry some faire Gentlewoman, youthfull as himselfe, and of good Parentage, for her Portion he cared not, so he might please his eyes. And because he would tempt any such Creature the sooner, to come vnder the Lee of Wedlock, he with his mony got him a Knighthood, so that who now but Sir Sebastian Aspernoone ? Fate, or Fortune, or I know not whether it were the little blind God of Loue, brought him to a delicate Creature, a young Gentlewoman (a Squires Daughter) her name Elinora ; The wooing voyage was not long, but married they were, and our young Knight, is not more fond of his Life, than of his deere Loue. Long they liued, and as long they loued; But that Cable at which all married Couples lye at Anchor, with most content, was wanting, for in three or foure yeeres together, they had no Children. Hereupon, others to their faces, much pittying that two such goodly Trees, should haue faire Leaues, and no Fruit, and they themselues lying in their Bed, as much grieuing that they ploughed vp a Sea, which returned them no Traffique. In the end they both resolued to take some other mans Sonne, of poore Parentage, and to make him his Heyre, contrary to the Commandement which his dying Father inioyned him to. A yong stripling therefore he tooke from a poore Widdow; handsome was the Boy in face, well-proportioned in body, and of a good ingenuous disposition; his name was Marmaduke ; who as with his supposed Father and Mother he grew vp in yeares, so he in behauiour pleased them the more. This jouiall Knight, liuing at ease, fulnesse of Fortune, and glutted with all the pleasures of his owne Countrey, as Hawking, Hunting, Horse-racing, Cock- fighting, and such like, besides seeing Playes at London , and bringing his wife acquainted with other Ladies and Gentlewomen, and the fine girles of the City; was weary of England , and determined with his Lady and adopted Sonne, to see some other Countries. In the life-time of his Father, he had beene in Italy , and could a little speake the Language. Italy he called the Garden of the World, and thither should his Lady goe with him, to behold the beauties of the braue bona Robaes there: Money, by Exchange is to be sent him, rich Apparell for him and his Wife, with a competent number of Followers, are prouided; a Ship gotten to carry them, and aboord, aboord hey, cry the Marriners, so that in a short time the (Wind being faire) with a merry gale they arriue in some part of Tuscany . The Great Duke of Tuscany was a yong Gentleman, and exceedingly giuen to the Pastime of Hawking; The report of this English Knight and his faire Lady, comming to the Dukes Eare, hee was desirous to see them; They are sent for to his Court, and come; the Duke in discoursing with Aspernoone (liking him the better because hee spake Italian ) conceyued so extraordinary an Affection towards him, his sweet proportion, behauiour, and graces of mind, that in a short time, the Duke made him his Companion, his play-fellow, his second selfe, and he so woone vpon the gallant Italian Courtiers, that he lay as deere in their bosomes, as in the Dukes. Hawking he loued as well as the Duke did, and in that Pastime he shewed himselfe both expert & noble. Upon a day when our English Caualiero, was retird alone into his priuate Chamber, he began to call to mind, the fauors of this Princely Duke; with what a loome gale of Wind, and in how smooth a Sea, hee sayld in his Court, doated on by the Duke, embraced by his Courtiers, admired by the Italians , and beloued of all men. Then he considered how blest he was in Marmaduke his adopted Sonne, he praised his feature, his Loue, obedience, and humble (yet generous) carriage towards him. And vpon these two thoughts, Lord (said he) what a strange man was my Father! How was he abus'd in his Iudgement! How did his Death bed make him doate! What melancholy, or rather what madnesse, got vp to the top of his braines, to read such a Bedlam Lecture to me, when he was to goe out of the world, and I to enioy all that he left behind him? Why did hee most foolishly inioyne me if I had no children of mine owne, neuer to make a stranger mine heyre? Is not Marmaduke a good boy, an obedient Sonne, a louing youth! And why forsooth must my wise Dad, forbid me to subiect my selfe to any Lord, or to fawne vpon his humors, who commanded his people and state as best pleased himselfe? Can any King vpon Earth so dote vpon his Fauorite, as this great Prince of Tuscany does vpon me? Does the Duke keepe his Subiects in awe, and am not I master of his Passions? He is the Duke, but his Diadem stands on my head: well, my dead Father, I am glad thou art gone because thou wert no wiser; Two of thy Lessons I find idle, vaine, false, and vnnecessarie to be listened to; and whats the third? Marry forsooth, neuer to trust my Wife with a secret. Alas (good old man) let wormes make much of thy head, for thy wits were worme-eaten before thou wentst to thy graue. Not trust my Wife? Is she not faire? Is she not yong? Is she not honest? Does she not lye with me? Does she not loue me? Does shee not kisse me? Does she not embrace me? Yet I keepe any secret from her! Has she not left her Country, Father, Mother, Brothers, Sisters, Aunts, Uncles, Cozens and Friends to follow me, and shall any thing lye in my heart, which I will not vtter to her? No, no, I must trust her, and I will trust her. Upon this resolution, he left his Chamber, and went to the Dukes Pallace, and comming to the Pearch, where stood a great number of braue Fawlcons, he tooke the fairest secretly away, (such a one as the Duke esteemed aboue all the rest,) brought her to a deere friends House, and there left the Bird, closely to be kept from the eyes of any man, till he himselfe eyther came, or sent for it by some good token. This done, he goes to his owne Lodging, and hauing Fawlcons there, wrings off the necke of one, and bringing it to his Lady, said; sweet heart, thou knowest the Duke loues me, yet of that fondnesse of his am I so weary, it kils my heart, that I cannot when I would, be master of my selfe, and my owne man. To get therefore some more libertie, I haue done a tricke to make him fall out with me, and so for a while I shall be at quiet. What tricke (quoth shee?) I haue (said he) kild his best Fawlcon, looke you, here tis: I pray thee dresse it, and we both will eate it, for the Dukes sake, and drinke to his health in rich Palermo Wine. O cryed out the Lady (Sir Sebastian ) what haue you done? you are lost for euer; this is a villany not to be pardoned: call you this a tricke? A tricke to breake your owne necke: to haue a steeletto in your guts, or poyson in an Italian Sallet: if the Duke heares of this, thou (silly Creature) art but a dead man. Peace foole (quoth he) none in the world knowes it but you and I: nay (sayes she) for my part, cut out my tongue when I prate of it. Well, the Fawlcon is drest, they both sit downe, but she swore, not a bit of it should goe into her belly; he intreated, and intreated her but to taste it; No, if he would hang himselfe she would not: Hereupon, he vp with his hand & struck her o're the face: The blow made her mad, the Fawlcon flew out of the Platter, the Trenchers one way, Table-cloth another, Plate at his head, Glasses to the ground, and crying for anger, swore to be euen with him: The next morning, (nothing being able for all he could doe, to please her all night) she went to the Duke, and told him how basely her Husband had recompenst his fauors in killing his best Fawlcon. The Duke inraged, without hearing him speake condemnes him to be hangd, and his goods to bee confiscated and diuided into three parts: the first to his Wife, the second to his Sonne, and the third to any one that would be his Hangman. He was to dye the next day. The sweet-fac'd youth (his Sonne) pondering in his minde, the Sentence of the Duke, made account if his Father were hang'd, it would be better for him; he would to England , and liue like a Gentleman, he was no Father of his; All his Lands should be his, and hang let him. Nothing stucke in his stomacke so much, as that any stranger, that had a heart to bestride his fathers Gallowes and turne him off, should haue a third share in the Goods, as well as hee, or his Mother. To his mother he therefore comes (and sayes) Mother is it not better that I play the Hangman, and with ease dispatch my father, and so gaine that third part, which some base Italian Roague, will else carry from you and mee too. Yes (sweet Boy) quoth shee, I like thy care, thou art a louing Sonne, and when thy father is vnder thy fingers, dispatch him as soone as thou canst to put him out of his paine. The gracious stripling went to the Duke, beggd the hangmans office, which the Duke betweene a frowne and a smile granted him. The Knight being in Prison, Iron'd, and expecting Death, sent priuately to his friend that had the Fawlcon, intreating him, when he saw him passe by to Executio, to step to the Duke, and intreat him but to heare the Prisoner speake, before he dyed. This his friend did. Then Sir Sebastian seeing the villany of a wife, and what misery he was falne into by beeing subiect to such a Prince, remembred his fathers Councell: and sayd; now deere father, I see mine owne folly and thy wisedome: A Wife thou bidst me not trust, nor to warme my selfe too much in the Sunne-shine of a Great mans fauour; I haue done both, and now must loose, my Honour, my Fortunes, and my Life. Let thy Ghost pardon my disobedience in not following thy Councell: when I am dead, I will come to thee, and on my knees beg thy pardon. Being in the midst of this meditation, his officious and most dutifull Crackrope Sonne Marmaduke , came to the Prison, with a company of browne Bils to guard him, and like an ingratefull hard-hearted Rascall, sayd thus: Father, sithence it is the Dukes will you should dye, into whose hands can you safelyer fall than into mine, your dutifull Sonnes: my intents are honest, louing, and good, not to suffer some Rakehelly stranger, to share with my mother (your deere Lady) in your Goods, if any such Rascall will vndertake to hang you. Now my deere father, to keep off any such to lay a fowle hand vpon you, what thinke you, if I (because your Goods shall still continue in your Name) take that charitable Office vpon me? O my carefull Sonne (quoth he,) what father had euer such a forward Child? Hadst thou not come thus to comfort mee, I had dyed vnwillingly where now I shall take my leaue of the World with a ioyfull heart, because at my parting I shall last of all receiue a kind farewell from thee: Doe then thine office, and so kissing him, the Boy tooke a Cord, and put it about his fathers necke, councelling him to dye like a Gentleman, and an English man. Away is the Prisoner led, with his hands bound, and the Rope about his Necke, and being brought to the Gibbet, the Ladder he mounts, the yong Hangman sate stradling on his woodden Curtall, and bid his father pray: who turning his face to the people told them why he was to dye, and that his wiues tongue had brought him to his end, his onely comfort beeing, that his sweet Sonne, would rid him out of the miseries of the World: some wept to heare him, some were ready to fling stones at the Hangman: but were preuented by the Prisoners
