 pleasing for the mirth, as profitable for the matter. Now how every one will take it, I know not. The best minds I know will take nothing ill that is meant well; and for the worst, they know not how to take any thing well, how good so ere it be: and therefore intreating every man to take it as he list, lest I should bee beholding to I know not whom, for I know not what, I leave to the Stationer to take his price, and you to take your pleasure; and so rest Your friend, if I be not mistaken, Nicholas Breton . . good morrowes to mine honest Dorindo : but how goes the world man? no newes stirring worth the hearing. leeve hold my peace, as have no thanks for my tatling: but I thee tell me, where hast thou beene this many a day? I heard that thou hast beene over the water, I know not how farre. travell will treade a a prettie piece of ground: but to tell you where I have beene, I cannot; for my way was long, and my memory is short: But had I time to tell thee that which I cou'd, (at least if my memory would serue me (I should make thee like the better of home, and the worse of travell while thou livest. danger, and more feare, little safetie, and lesse gaine, made me wish either to have knowne lesse, or somewhat more worth the knowing. order? But I am sure I was so ouertaken in mistaking of every match that I met withall, that I had as leeve almost be an Ignorant, as deceive my selfe with imagination. or whereupon grew this griefe of yours? Dor. I tell you by mistaking. was the most mistaken of any thing in the world. For, with onely a little obseruation, I was perswaded, that there was no matter of worth, but I had it by heart; and for trifles, I would not be troubled with them; but, when that reason came to ripping up of secrets of wisedomes intelligence, I saw my wit so wilfull, that I was mistaken in all matters that I met with. care of my conceipt of them. But now to tell thee, in my travells how I was mistaken: to run over all my courses, it were too tedious, let suffice as much as may make thee merry to heare, and wise to remember. First, when I left my Countrey, and came aboord the Buon-a-venture , wee had no sooner weighed Anker, hoissed sailes, and put to sea, but with a fresh gale of winde, and faire weather, wee were so merry above hatches, that me thougt there was none so merry alive, as the Saylers. But wee had, not thus passed five leagues, till the skie was over-cast, the winde came about, and grew high, the ayre thick and foggie, and the drizling raine came so beating in our faces, that wee were glad to get under hatches: where wee were scarcely set in our Cabbins, but the tempest grew so great, the windes so rough, and the waves so high, that we were glad with throwing out almost all the goods into the Sea, to saue our lives in the bare vessell. Now when I came on shore, well moiled and poore, having lost all that I had abord, more then a little money in my purse, which was so little, as that I will say little of it: I began to thinke with my selfe, how I was mistaken, to thinke, that one faire day, and a little faire weather, could make me thinke, that the saylers life (which every minute is subject to danger of one harme or other, and betwixt a bord and the water, hath a walke, but in a short and unsteadie roome) should be compared to the land life, where there is pleasure in the faire weather, and shelter against the foule, and no feare of wind or water, nor many other dangers which I omit to speake of. And in stead of a whirle- poole in the water, a walk large enough to walke man and horse too, till they were both weary. Now heere was my first mistaking. good prize, you would not have thought your selfe mistaken in the merry life of the marriner. in the hig-hway, and so take the gallowes for his Inne, that joyfull taking in the beginning, brings a sorrowfull mistaking in the end. leave it to them that love it. Now to tell thee of my second mistaking. When I had been a little on shore, had weathered my selfe, dried my clothes, filled my belly, and emptied my purse, I now beganne to thinke how my witts should worke for my welfare: and first intending to seeke entertainement of some Noble Person, that would honourably looke into the vertues, valour, and good qualities of a good mind, I began to put on a resolution to aduenture any fortune, and indure any discomfort, that might be a hinderance to my happinesse. And with this resolution, travelling till I was weary, almost penilesse, and exceedingly hungry; I came to the view of a goodly, faire, and gorgiously built house, which stood as it were a mile from a Citie neere adjoyning. Now in hope there to find some such person: as I before spake of, I began to rowze up my selfe, as one that had an assured hope, at least of some good victuall, I meane of a good dinner scot-free, howsoever otherwise fortune would be my friend. When ere I would aproch too neere the house, lest I should be seene in in any unfit manner, I combed my beard, gartered up my stockings, trussed every point, buttoned every button, and made my selfe ready in the best manner I could, to appeare before the presence of such as I should meete withall in this gallant mansion. But when I came neere unto the house, and finding the doore shut, I did imagine (being about the mid time of the day) that the seruants were all at dinner, and the lord of the house either laid downe to sleepe, or gone into his closet, to talke upon some accounts with his ladie: but hearing no sound of any noyse, nor voice within of either man or dogge, I feared some ill fortune, that there was some great sicknesse, or danger of death that might dampe the spirits, and so cause the sorrow of the whole house: but staying a while, and neither hearing any voice within, nor any poore creature without at the gate, that might hope of almes from the hall, I feared the charitie within was so little, that my comfort without would be according: but after that I had stood a while, loth to loose time, I knocked at the doore; where I knocked long, before I had any answere, and in the end was saluted at a window farre within by an old fellow, who, it should seem, to save a groate, had slept out his dinner; whose speech (with a wide mouth gaped out) was this: What lacke you? My friend (quoth I) I pray you let me speake with you. No (quoth he) I cannot come down, I am busie, my master is not at home, and here is no body in the house but I and my wife, and shee is not well: but say your errand, and I will heare you. My errand thought I; was there ever such a kennell for such a curre? doth he take me for some sorrie fellow, or hath hee no better kind of greeting for strangers? And thus while I stood musing, and fretting at my fortune, and this bad fellow, hee shut the window: and I with a sigh, to see how I was mistaken in this faire house, turning me from it, I met with a foole in a pyed coate, who looking upon mee, after he had out-laughed himselfe, told me: Sir, you are mistaken, this is a Banqueting-house, where the gazers are onely fed with conceipts, for there is not a chimney that smokes, nor a doore open, it is called Mock-beggar, ha, ha, ha. Now when the foole went thus laughing away, and left me more foole to tarry there. Before I stirred my foote; out of my pocket I tooke my table-booke, in which I writ downe my second mistaking. be you might have given you cause to have spoken better of it: but indeede faire houses are for rich men, and cottages for the poore: and therefore being in that predicament, it is no maruell you had no better entertainement. But I pray you proceede with your travell. I began to frame my selfe to the humour of a cunning begger: when meeting with a grave old man (who by his veluet coate, his golden chaine, and his rich firred gowne, should seeme to be at the least, some rich Burgar, if not some Burgamaster of some Citie) this well apparralled picture with a kind of life that gave the body leave to carry the head upon a square paire of shoulders; I in hope to find more comfortable then the faire house, master Mocke-begger; I saluted with a great reverence, and requited with a proud nod, I yet aduentured to bord with a few words. When hoping to have found him a man of no lesse understanding spirit, to judge of the estate and conditions of men, then bounty, in the reliefe of the unfortunately distressed, I fell aboord with him with these words. Sir, I thinke you have heard of the hard fortune of the Buon-a-venture , who put into your harbour this other night, hardly saving her life, with losse of all her goods, and some of her people. My selfe, with much adoe, well weather- beaten as you may see, with some few that lie sicke in the haven, got to shore, and am now travelling towards your Citie heere before mee. Loth I am to enter into any base course for my comfort: but, if I might be beholding to your good favour, in this time of my distresse, giving me your name withall, I doubt not if I live, but either by my selfe, or my better friends, to find a time, either to requite, or deserue it. He, as one whose heart was so shut up in his purse, that he understood nothing but ware and mony, after a harsh hum, or two, gave me this answere; Was there nothing saved of her goods I pray you? What was her fraught? Sir, quoth I, it was most silkes, and spices, but some pearle, and money, more then would have beene willingly lost. Good commodities, quoth he; by my fay, a shrewd mischance: I am sorry for ye, I would I could doe ye good, but I am now in hast going about a little businesse, and therefore I cannot stand to talke with you, God be with you; the towne is hard before you, you will be there anon: but, if you have any jewells or pearle that you have saved, I will give you money for it, if I like it. Truely Sir, quoth I, iewells I have not many, onely two rings on my fingers, and this bracelet of Pearle I have saved; my bracelet cost me a hundred crownes, if it please you to have it of the price it cost, though against my will, I will part with it. With that, upon his bottle-red nose, he claps on a paire of spectacles, and looking on my pearle, found fault with the roundnesse, and the clearenesse, and I know not what else, till at the last, thinking to make a gaine of my misery, he offered me ten crownes: saying, that he had no need of it; but rather then be disfurnished of money (being a stranger) he would aduenture so much on it: whereat, I swallowed a sigh, and concealing my discontent, desired him to pardon me, I hoped to find some of my countreymen in the City, that I would be as bold as I might withall. Thus with an idle word or two, did I leave this good old gentleman, in whom how much I was, and many moe, no doubt, have beene mistaken, I referre to the judgement of those that can spell him without booke, and may desire never to come neere him within booke. This was my third mistaking: to take the shadow of a man, and the substance of a money-bag, without charity or humanity, by the hypocryticall figure of gravity, to be a creature of vnderstanding, a man of honour, and a blessed reliever of the miserable. holinesse, the Martyrs faithfulnesse, the Virgines purenesse, and the prayers of the elect, I have heard and read of; but I never heard of any rich apparell, or chaines spoken of among them; for God blesse vs from it, some say the Devill hath a chaine wherein he leades a number into hell; but I hope it is not gold. I know not that, but I thinke not, for muderers hang in iron chaines, and therefore he will not be at cost with them, all alike: but how he doth with the Covetous, the Lecherous, and the ambitious, that knoweth God, and not I. City, but that it was my hap to meete with a countreyman of mine owne, and somewhat of alliance unto me. This man at first seeming to be glad to have met me in that city, promising me to bring me acquainted with some other of my countreymen, and that he would be ready to doe me all the pleasure he could, this did not a little content me, hoping that for countrey and kindreds sake, I should find no little friendship. But after that he had made me know three or foure of my countrymen, and brought me to an Inne, where for my money I might lodge, neither inuiting me to dinner or supper, onely was content to take a cup of Wine of me, and to tell me that he hoped to drinke with me before my going out of towne: thus was I mistaken both in kin and countrey, to hope of any comfort. But the next morning comming to a Taylors house (which was likewise a countreyman of mine) I had no sooner talked with the good man, about the pawning of my bracelet, and taking up of some stuffe for my apparell, but his wife in an inner roome, almost as quicke of eare as of tongue, with a wide gaping mouth came to us with this greeting: Go too, goodman-goose, meddle with no pawning nor taking up, you have payd enough for playing the Foole, and yet will be an Asse still? I pray you wife quoth he, be quiet: and then to me, truely gentleman, I would be glad to doe you any pleasure, but I have such a wife, that I dare doe nothing without her consent: if you bring your stuffe, I will doe it you as well, and as good cheape as any man. Now, I that tooke him to bee the master of the house, was much mistaken, for the women weare the breches, and hee was to worke for the house: when pittying the poore mans case, and much commending his patience, sorry to thinke how I was mistaken, I tooke another course for my contentment. I was not long in towne before I had learned how to turne pearle into gold, and gold into silver, and so to furnish my selfe of such necessaries as I found most fitting for my use; when there passed not many dayes before I fell upon another fortune, where I was, as I was still in every thing, mistaken. Church and holy places, passing through the streets, beholding aswell the faire houses, as sweete creatures at their doores and windowes; to cast mine eye upon a very artificiall faire, sharpe-witted, wanton-eyed, and faire- handed, small-footed, straight-bodied, and, as after I found, smooth-tongued Gentlewoman, I say gentle, for she was so gentle, that she was as tame as a little Filly, that had been brought up all by hand. This fine mistresse, I had some hope to doe some good upon, when setting a good face on this matter, after a courteous salutation I fell to kissing of her hand: which she endured with such a pleasing smile, as gave me cause to proceed further in my purpose. I had not so soone began to goe about her, but she had me at every turne, and in the midst of my talke would be fidling with a ring, in which was a painted Diamond, that I ware on my finger, which she would commend with wishing her hand worthy such a favour. Now I that hoped to have found so gallant a wench, as franck-handed, as free-hearted, and as liberall for love, as ready for entertainement, found that artificiall beauty was but a shadow, or rather cover of covetousnesse, or an instrument of wit, to draw on folly into the ruine of prodigality: so that here I found my selfe so mistaken, that it made me afraid along while after, to be busie with the female kind. and would have mistaken you for her husband, by whom you might craftily have beene taken, and so beene carried to Bridewell , or payed for your pardon; what a taking would you then have beene in? it. I onely spent a few faire words, but not a peny of money, for I would not pay for my repentance: but so leaving her, as I found her, with a Bazo los manus , went about my businesse: which I had not long followed, but fell upon another mistaking. was to doe a piece of seruice upon a City of the Turkes, under whom who could get entertainment, might quickly purchase both honor and wealth. Now, my youth having beene trained up in armes, and my fortune falling upon such a point, it was not long before I made and got meanes of entertainement at the hands of this gallant souldier, of whom I hoped to receive the due of my desert: but after that he had in many desperate pieces of seruice employed me, and saw in me that true valour, that made him in the enuy of my good deserts, feare some neere pressing towards his pride, in stead of advancing my fortune, or rewarding my seruice, he still put me upon such continuall exploits, as threatned every houre narrow escape of my life. But in the end seeing his misery to make a gaine of those that did him honour, hand-fasted to the well deseruing, and rather plotting the death, then aduancing the fortunes of the valiant, got meanes for my discharge from him; and sorry to thinke how I was mistaken in him, as I tell you, I left him: when I had not gone farre, but light upon another mistaking. pray thee let me heare it. It was my hap in a little field neare unto a Church in a countrey Towne, to overtake a little old man in a gowne, a wide cassock, a nightcap and a corner- cap, by his habit seeming to be a Divine; of whom I was in hope to find that sacred fruit of Charity, that might be some comfort in my returne: whom beginning to salute with a few Latine words: My friend quoth he, doe not deceive your selfe, I understand not your Greeke: We here, that dwell farre from the City, and are not troubled with fine eares to our reading, care for no more but to discharge our duties in our places, I meane of a Vicar, for I am no better; the Parson is a man of greater place, and of faire possessions, who dwelleth a great way hence, and therefore seldome comes into this countrey. I vse twise a yeere to bring him his rent, and perhaps a couple of Capons against Christmasse for my Land-lady, and that is as much as they looke for. And for my Parishioners, they are a kind of people that love a pot of Ale better then a Pulpit, and a Corne-ricke better then a Church-doore; who comming to divine service, more for fashion then devotion, are contented after a little capping and kneeling, coughing and spitting, to helpe me to sing out a Psalme, and sleepe at the second Lesson, or awake to stand up at the Gospel, and say Amen at The Peace of God; and stay till the Banes of Matrimony be asked, or till the Clerke hath cryed a pyed stray bullock, a blacke sheepe, or a gray mare: and then, for that some dwell farre off, be glad to be gotten home to dinner. Now we that have no more living then will hardly serue to keepe a poore house, are not in case, God helpe us, to doe any thing for our poore brethren; and therefore my good friend, trouble us not with other speech then we understand, lest if you come afore the Constable, he take you for some Conjurer, and so bring your selfe to some trouble, which I would be sorry to see: for truely you seeme a handsome man; God hath done his part in you; God be with you. Oh Lord (thought I) is this man possible to be a Church-man, and knoweth so little what belongeth to the Church? Well, this was no little mistaking: but going a little further, leaving this poore Sir Jenkin to his mother tongue, I overtooke a plaine fellow to my seeming clad in a home-spun ierkin of russet wooll, a paire of close breeches of the same, a falling band somewhat courser then fine Cambricke, a payre of wollen stockings, and a halfe boote, like a good high shooe. Now, this plaine out-side, I guessed to be lined with no excellent stuffe in the inside: and therefore somewhat more bouldly then rudely, saluted him in this manner: Good fellow well overtaken. You are welcome, quoth hee: but to clap a man on the shoulder before you know him, is a point quite out of the rule of all good manners, at least that ever I learned. Alas, quoth I, goodman clowne, can your nose abide no jeast; Yes sir, quoth he, with my friends; but mine eares have no pleasure in a foole. This touching me too neere the quicke, replied againe: Oh sir, quoth I, then if your friends be fooles, you will shake hands with them; but a stranger will put you out of patience. Hee little mooved herewith, (as it seemed) made mee this answere: My friend, I pray you keepe your way, I would be loth to hinder your walke: but if your passion be no greater then my impatience, wee shall not fall out for a trifle. But Sir (quoth I) how might I fall in either with your selfe, or such another, for a matter of good earnest? It seemes you are a man of sence, and had I not given you cause of displeasure, which I am sorry for, I would have acquainted you with some-what, that by your good meanes, I might perhapps be the better for. Truely sir, quoth he, my estate is not such as can make me bountifull to the best deserving; but so farre as discretion will give me leave, I would be glad to pleasure a stranger. My house is not farre hence, but on the further side of this field; whither (if it may be no great hinderance to your travell) I will intreate your patience to a poore pittance, and if in either my aduise, or better meanes I may stead your desire, you shall find that you doe not looke for; nothing that you shall pay for; and somwhat that perhaps you shall thank me for:  & therfore, I pray you beare me company for this night; to morrow you shall take your journey at your pleasure. This kind offer (having no reason to refuse) I tooke most thankfully: and by the way after a few discourses of my fortunes, I acquainted him with the resolution of my intent, which was either to serue in the warres, or in Court, or to professe some trade, or to follow my studie. To which, I asked his aduice for my good, in all and every one of them: to which, as I propounded the question, he made me this answere. And first, quoth he, my friend, I am sorrie, by these your discourses, to have occasion to call to mind the folly of my youth, which taught me nothing in mine age, but the repentance of lost time: but for that I have tried fortune to the uttermost of her mallice, and in the end am come to that you see, I would be glad to tell you a merry tale, how I was mistaken in many courses, before I hit on the right compasse: in which, if you can gather any thing for your good, I shall thinke it the best gaine that I have made of it. Now finding this vnlooked for, and vndeserued kindnesse at his hands, and nothing more fitting the humour of my fortune at that time, I intreated him most hartily, to make me in this first to be beholding to him. Whereupon, with a very little preamble, he fell into this plaine trot: I will tell you, when I was yong as you are, and had as little to care for as, you have, being brought up at home with ease and plentie, and weary of welfare, would faine have I know not what, when having the world more at will, then witt to governe my affections, and a desire to see more then I could well carry away, thinking my mothers best creame but bare milke; and others thinnest milke, as good creame as might make butter; taking leave of no friend, and flattering my thoughts with fortune, I would to sea forsooth, with a sight of such spirits, as (but that they looked like men (would have made poore people afraid of them: yet these were the men with whom (in the more hast then good speed) I must goe lose abroad what I had gotten at home. When, hoping to have light on some good prize, I was taken prisoner with the enemie: of whom being stript of that I had, with a few old raggs on my backe, among a few of my fellow sailors, that were set on shore in a poore taking, I found how I began to be mistaken; to leave the land for the Sea, and a safe home for a strange harbour. But now on shore with my good fellowes in fortune, every man shifting for himselfe, and I trying so many wayes to the wood, that I have lost my selfe in the plaine, wearie of doing nothing, began to looke about me for my better profit: but such were my crosses in all my courses, that I could never thrive till I got home againe. For to make an abridgement of a long tale, I will tell you: In courting I found more cost then comfort; in warre, more danger then ease; in learning, more studie then profit; in trafficke, more gaine then conscience; in seruice, more paine then honour; in marriage, more care then quiet; and in love, more pleasure then vertue: so that in all my courses being mistaken, that I found a crosse to my comfort in every of them, I fairely left the Courtier to his curtesies, the souldier to his marches, the schollar to his studies, the merchant to his trafficke, the married man to his purgatory, and the lover to his vanitie: and home returned to my poore cottage that my parents left me; and, as my wife tells me, my sonnes shall possesse after me. Heere I live in a meane course, content, and glad of Gods blessings, never in danger to be mistaken, because I trust onely to experience: while doing honor to God, and following my businesse, with the sweate of my browes, I gaine the foode of my sences, with my necessary appurtenances. O my friend, beleeve me, hee that is contented is rich, while he that is rich is not contented: a little sufficeth nature, and excesse is but hurtfull; beauty but the inchanter of wit; ambition, but the overthrow of vertue; covetousnesse, the corrupter of conscience; authoritie, the charge of care; pride, the hate of nature; enuie, the nurse of malice, and wrath, the inuenter of murther; sloth, the losse of time; drunkennesse, the shame of nature; gluttony, the ground of sicknesse; and lechery the fire of sinne. These notes when I had taken by the light of Gods grace, and obseruation of times, leaving all extremities, I tooke this meane course: where though home be homely, yet living quietly and contentedly, I find it true, That he who serueth God hartily, liveth happily, and dieth joyfully. Now my good friend, if I might aduise you for your good, I would wish you to take a stayed course, and lay away all running humours: looke home, love home, live at home, a small assurance is better then a great hope; and a little possession then a great possibilitie, and when a man hath of his owne, hee neede not borrow of his neighbours. Travell may be pleasing, and seruice hopefull, trafficke gainefull, and wealth powerfull: but a conuenient house, an honest patrimony, a kind wife, obedient children, faithfull seruants, and loving neighbours, make such a common wealth of contentment in the true conceit of a carefull understanding; that a king of a mole-hill, were better then a lord of a great hutch, Oh, to see in a faire morning, or a Sunnie evening, the Lambes and Rabbets run at bace, the birds billing, the fishes playing, and the flowers budding, who would not leave the drinking in an Ale-house, the wrangling in a dicing-house, the lying in a market, and the cheating in a fayre; and thinke that the brightnesse of a faire day, doth put downe all the beauties of the world. But I doubt I grow tedious, and therefore being so neere home, I will intreat your patience till we have supped, and only assure you of a good welcome, to supply the want of better cheere. With this breaking off his talke, he tooke me by the hand and led me into his house, the doore open, as unfearefull of theeves, as unprovided for strangers: where we were at the entry saluted with a modest smile of a kind wife, humble courtesies of most sweet children, due reverence of comely servants, and a table furnished for both the host and a good guest. Here (though no Inne) yet I tooke up my lodging, where with the entertainement of much kindnesse, having fed both body and mind with sufficient comforts, with due thanks for all curtesies, I tooke leave of the whole family, of whom in generall I received kindnesse. In the morning, not too early, receiving an extraordinary golden favour, for a friendly farewell, calling to mind his discourses of mistaking, and noting mine owne crosses in my courses: I tooke his counsell for my comfort, and with as much speed as I could, leaving my travell turned even faire home againe. And thus much for this time of my travell. Now what say you of yours? for I am sure you have not lived alwayes at home. for, where you hoped well of other, you found the contrary; but of him you thought but little, and found much good. But it is no rare thing: for a man may looke like an Owle, that hath more wit then ten Asses; and a woman may bride it like a maid, that hath beene the mother of many children. A King in a Play may be a begger from the stage, and a clowted shooe may have a pate beyond all the Parish. Oh, take heed of a Wolfe in a Lambes skinne, and talke not of hawking, till you have beene a Faulconer: for if a man have not his five witts, he may be a foole in foure of them. But, lest you take my words for a Lecture, which may bee more tedious then pleasing, I will a little tell you of my travell, and how I was taken in every corner. like my mistaking, then perhaps we should shake hands for our fortunes. But howsoever it was, I pray you make me acquainted with it. crosse the seas, I was taken short of my course, and by strange people carried to a strange place: where being taken for no worse then I was, I was used no better then I should be. But after that I had got out of this taking, I forthwith fell to devise with my selfe, what course I should take for my comfort. and first I would take upon me to be a Courtier, when I would be so gay; as if honour attended upon colours: but wisemen taking me as I then was, but a foole, brought me into such a taking, that what with love, and what with sorrow, I tooke such passions, as brought me to a weake taking: And yet I was taken among the best for an honest man, and a well meaning. But in taking my courtly course, my word was so taken in every corner, and my name so taken in every booke, that I grew so afraid of takers, that I durst not almost goe into any place for feare of taking. And to thinke of the sundry kinds of taking, it is strange to thinke, that any one should be taken up, and taken downe so many wayes as I was. If I but courted a wench, I was taken for a wencher; if I talked merrily, I was taken for a jeaster, if I looked sadly, I was taken for a spie; if I were liberall, for a prodigall; if thrifty, for a snudge; if valiant, for a quarreller; if patient, a coward; if rich, wise; if poore, a foole: so that they, who knew not how to take any thing as it should be, tooke me to be any thing that they would have me to be. But this was not enough: for if I gave my word, I was taken for a surety; if I brake it, I was taken for a banck-rupt; if I kept it, I was taken for a silly fellow; if I talked of a disease, I was taken for a Physitian; if of a case a Lawyer; if of armes a Captaine; if of religion, at least a Doctor: so that (as I said before) I was taken so many wayes, that I knew not well which way to take my selfe. But beyond all these, not onely my selfe was thus taken to be this and that: but my horse was taken post, my purse was taken prisoner, my word was taken hold of; and what was I, or had I, but was either taken up or downe: my horse was taken up, my purse was taken downe; my word was taken up, my mind was taken downe: in briefe, you could not be more mistaken in any thing, then I was taken for every thing. But lest you should thinke I should chop Logicke with you, or thinke much of my breath in telling a long tale, I will tell you how I had like to have been taken napping. Going to an Ordinary to dinner, with a friend of mine, who had beene with me at the taking up of a little money, no sooner we were entred into the house, and scarse set downe to a table, short above an houre for covering towards supper, but wee were taken up for a rest at Primero: when being taken for a gamster, I had the trick put upon me, which no sooner I espied, but having got a small rest or two, faining an urgent businesse, I took occasion to leave off; for which cause I was taken for a cheater. Which fitting some of that place, who taking mee for a fine fingreed companion, fell abord with me for assistance and aduice, so farre, that at last, in an assurance of my fidelitie to them, and villany to all the world besides, they put a sum of money into my hands to goe to play with. Which money, I no sooner was master of, but the wind seruing well, and I in readinesse to bee gone, in the still time of the night, got meanes to ship my selfe for Roane : where being a stranger, I was to take what course I well could for my comfort. Where, no sooner I was arived, but I smiled to thinke how I had overtooke my takers. Now comming to Roane , and finding diseases so rife, that an honest Phisitian might set his Apothecary well on worke, I made a shew with a little Allume and Copresse, to perswade such wonders of my Art or studie; that who would not give me a good fee for a sore finger? Oh, healing but a Whitloe on a Lords thumbe, and the crampe in a Ladies finger, I went for the cunning man, that had a cure for all diseases. So that there was not a yong wench that would have a child; a yonng man that was weake stomaked; an old sir that was deafe; nor an old Grandam blind; but would seeke to mee for remedie. By reason whereof, I came to the knowledge of some secrets, that made me sought to farre and neere. To be short, I was taken for such a Physitian, that I tooke no little profit of my patients. But least my skil would be descryed, and so my profession discredit, I turned all my greetings into gold, which I shipt with my selfe for Antwerpe . But ill gotten, ill spent; ere I came halfe way over sea, I was taken prisoner by a Pyrate, who after hee had taken my goods, keept me in hold for my ransome: which having payed, and gotten away, take me ever after that what they would, I would take no profession upon mee; but taking the world as I could, I would thinke to use it as I had reason. And thus much for my two first takings. Now recovering my losses aswell as my wits and fortune would give me leave, I began to take an humour of love, and by a little eloquence, and fine dissimulation, to goe about (as I tooke her) a creature of more beautie then wit; and talke then honesty. To bee short, shee was of the doubtfull-gender, the common of two or three scores, or hundreds, I know not whether. Now, this idle-times mistresse I would have a kind bout withall, to see if my wit could helpe my purse in going beyond the wiles of a woman: but while I stood gazing on her leering-eyes, she so stole away my heart with a vaine affection, that to tell you troth, I was taken in love, and that so fast, as that to take hold of her kindnesse, she tooke hold of my cost. For if she but spake of that she liked, if my purse could purchase it, she was sure to haue it: so that in a little time, she tooke my kindnesse so kindly, that I was counted the kindest man (I will not say, foole) in the world. Oh, I was not onely so taken, but so overtaken with this taking-mistresse, that she brought me into such a taking, as is scarce worth the talking of. Oh, mine eyes were so taken with beauty, my heart with vanity, my wits with folly, and my purse with prodigality; that had I not the sooner left this Taker, I had left nothing for taking. Now sir, being thus weary of my love-taking, or my taking lover, I began to bethinke me what course I were best to take for my comfort: when finding many malicious people, that could not live quietly with their neighbours, spend much money to little purpose, and so fed the Lawyers with fees, that they left their purses without money: I began to thinke, that a little study in the Law, would gaine much good in a common-wealth. Whereupon, without much circumstance I got me into the formall outside of a iolly fellow; and for the better countenance to my credit furnished my study with more bookes, then I had either time to read, or wit to understand. When hauing gotten acquaintance with some setters for Clients, rubbing over my poore French, having Littleton before me, and a booke of notes, I know not of whose writing, I would set on such a counselling countenance, as if I had beene at the barre, before I knew the hall: when, what with the multitude of Clients and golden fees, I made such a gaine of my dissembling, that neere a Lawyer of my standing, but I carried it cleane from him, man and matter and all. In which pritty thriving course, I had not continued long, but that being found by my learning unfit to pleade for a blacke-pudding, I was taken for a petty- fogger, and not so good as a poore Clarke; so that my condition being found to be but a practiser with cunning, to trouble the quiet of honest people, for feare of being turned over the barre, I was faine to turne my compasse to another course. But to tell you, during the time of my profession, how honest a man I was taken among knaves, and how contrary among honest men, I would be loth to have notice taken: for indeede I was rather a bench-whistler, then a bencher; and more meete (for my good conscience) to be arraigned at the barre, then to pleade at a barre. But as I said before, lest I should be taken for that I truely was, I left that course, and tooke another inuention by the backe. I got me into a Countrey where I was unknowne, and there hoping that men that sought to win heaven by their good deedes, would surely enrich me with their charitie: I began to counterfeit a diseased creature, and seeming with the ruefull countenance that I framed for the purpose, I would so move the hearts, and picke the purses of kind people, that I doubted not in time to grow a wealthy begger. And with this inuention I went forward, till, after that I had so long followed my profession, that my benefactors grew weary of their liberalitie: it fell out by-good, or ill hap rather, that I chanced to beg of a very neate and handsome man, who seemed by his mild eye to have a heart pitifull to the distressed. But hee more cunning to pry into the knavery of my dissembling, then to cure me of my disease, if I had had any, asked me of my paine, and how I had beene diseased. Which, when I had untruly told him, hee willed me to come home to him, and he would undertake to heale me. Oh how glad I seemed of his kindnesse, and promised to waite upon him, with many humble thankes. But fearing this my undertaker should so overtake me in taking mee napping in my knavery, I fairely tooke my was out of the towne, and never came within the gates after. Thus was I almost overtaken with a water, before I had made my fire burne halfe kindly. To be short, if I should tell you all the courses that I have taken, and how I have beene taken in every of them, I should make you thinke all your mistaking but a trifle, in comparison of many a miserable taking, that I have beene in. compasse, but you could guesse whereabouts you were; nor ever went so farre any way, but you could find the way home againe: let us take hands together like good friends and take all well that hath hit well, and warning by that hath falne amisse, to follow such a folly any further. kindly I was entertained in a place, that by chance I tooke up for my lodging; where being taken as indeede I was, a man of more honestie then wit, and kindnesse then wealth: after good cheere and welcome, the good-man of the house taking me aside, began to reade me this honest lesson: My friend quoth he, for that I take you for a man of that good disposition, that will take any thing well, that is well meant; let me tell you, there be many men in the world, that with mistaking the right course of discretion, run such wild courses as bring many of them into many pitifull takings. Som no sooner come into their land, but they take up their rents afore the day, so long, that they are ready to make a new taking for an old matter: other take money for leases, ere they know the value of their lands: other take money for their lands, ere they well know the Summary of their rents. All these are commonly taken prisoners, either with the heart-ach for want of money; or the head-ach, for want of wit. And, for many of them, they are taken either with the beggar, the theefe, the cheater, or the foole. Some when they have nothing to take to, will take a wife to helpe forward a mischiefe, or mend an ill matter, but such a one may hap to take a wrong sow by the eare, that may bite him by the fingers for his labour: another perhaps takes upon him to be a Phisitian, or a Surgeon, and with a pill and a plaster, makes profession of great wonders. Now he with taking upon him much skill, takes much money, and though for want of knowledge, or through crafty villany, hee is determined to make a gaine of his patient, hee will one day give him ease, and another day torment, as he finds the nature of his purse, in stead of his pulses. Now, is it not pittie, but that such a horse-leech were taken and hanged, and to make a gaine of griefe, will bring any Christian into such a taking? that by so divelish a nature will shew himselfe such a dog? Divines, which onely make the name of God a cloke for their knavery: But these may rather be called lurch-men then Church-men, who as they are not troubled with much learning, so they have no more honesty, then they may well away withall. But these who take eleven for tenths, and yet can- scarse reade any other names, then are written in their Easter-bookes, is it not pitty, but their places were taken away from them, and given to them that could and would take more carefull paines in them? world, that, if God did not take the more mercy on them, surely the devill would take away a great many of them: but let them go. having scarce read a line of Littleton , onely acquainted with a common case, either in the masculine or the feminine gender, will set a solemne countenance upon the matter, and taking money enough for fees, will bring poore clients into such a taking, that, if they perceive not the sooner, how they are taken with the foole, they will feele themselues too late to be taken with the begger. Now these kind of injurious privy professors of the Law will take of all hands in all matters, and when they are taken napping with the matter, they take small hearts griefe at any punishment that doth befall them. Now, is it not pity that such petty-foggers, as will pry into mens titles, pleade on both sides, and take all they can come by, were not taken from the barre, and barred for ever comming more at a barre? offender of the Law, as so abaseth the Law, should not be more sharpely punished by the Law. other, that if they can write Item for a yeard of Satten, a halfe elle and quarter of Taffety, fold up a piece of Grogeram, aske what lacke you, and sell an elle of Siprous, why he takes himselfe to be a Merchant, and that of no meane account in his parish. But let him be, if he can make a gaine of a countenance, he is worthy to live by his wit: but if he can take up wares or money upon dayes, not caring for the payment, till he have inriched himselfe with other mens goods, and upon a suddaine take Lud-gate, and pay them with the Banck-rupt; is it not pitty but that he who so abuseth the credit of a Merchant, should be banished for ever comming more into the city? shillings, the Sergeants will take him prisoner, and all the towne will take him for a shifter: but God blesse me out of such takings. better orders taken with them, but let them goe. Now there are some that take all that comes, till being taken napping, the hangman taketh order with their clothes. Other take another mans wife for their owne, that being taken with the matter, either fall into a pittifull taking for their knavery, or make their purses take order for their delivery. all those, with many more, are wicked courses to be taken. But to leave all occasions of ill taking: take a good course, serue God, take a bit at home, rather then a banquet abroad, and water of thine owne, then wine of anothers: take account with thine estate for the defraying of thy charge, take no rent before the day, take no counsell with the wicked, take no pleasure in vanity, lest when thou want that is necessary, you receive comfort with sorrow, or despaire in misery: take not a wife without wealth, for it will helpe to hold love; nor without wit, for there is no plague to a foole; nor without grace, for it is a hell to be jealous; nor without beauty, for there is no pleasure in deformity; nor without education, for a slut will be noysome, and a novice idle; take her not too old for conscience sake, nor too yong for thrifts sake; take knowledge of her, ere you love her, lest if you be mistaken, you were better to be without her. And last of all, take heed of a Whore, a paire of Dice, a Parasite, a Pandor, a Cheater, a Flatterer, and a Promooter. Take a Courtier for a fine man, a Lawyer for a wise man, a Souldier for a valiant man, a Divine for a learned man, a Merchant for a rich man, a Clowne for a painefull man, and a begger for a poore man: but for an honest man, take him as you find him, in what estate so ever he be: If he be in a great one, give him honour; if in a meane one give him praise. Now if you find Wealth, Valour, Wisedome, Learning, Labour, and Honesty, all in one man; note him for a rare man, and take him for the best man. But, because in many it falleth out, that Wealth causeth pride; Wit, cunning; Learning, pollicy; Valour, discord; Paines, griefe; and Poverty, misery: take good notice of every man that you have to deale withall, and have to doe with as few as you can. And for an end, if a good occasion may be taken, slip it not; if a good gift may be taken, refuse it not: and if you have taken a good course, leave it not. Take God for thy chiefe good, thy wit for thy seruant thy wife for thy companion, and thy children for thy comfort: and what thou hast, take patiently and thankfully. So shalt thou be sure, at the count-taking of all the world, thou shalt be taken into the joyes everlasting. This rule was I taught to take by them, whom I justly tooke, and truly found my good friends. So my good frind, for that I take a gesse of a gratious disposition in you, that you will not take scorne of a small gift of a poore friend: let me intreate you to take your supper and lodging upon my charge, and this piece of gold towards the defraying of your further charges. Thus when I had thankefully taken his kind offer, and further had well taken to memory his good admoniuons, I tooke my leave of him, and according to his counsell tooke my way home againe: where, how happy I should hold my selfe to enjoy your company, I shall make you know by that you find. have made to you: but since it is your fortune to bee afore mee, I am at your will to bee disposed. therefore I will say but this: Chuse your owne time, and make your owne welcome. you: shortly I hope to see you, I will alwayes love you, and wish I could ever be with you. silence you may heare mee? I pray you beare mee company home, and I will bring you halfe way backe againe. tongues, and therefore not to detract time, I am at your direction.
