 accuse not my unworthinesse, but your owne worth; which like a Load-star is pleas'd to attract the coursest mettle, to make knowne her power. Were it not a prophanation to sunder that symmetrie of Vertue and Beautie, (pieces, of which you are the whole, and which worthily beget wonder and love) I might aspire to levell prayses to some few particulars: but since such a disunion cannot bee made by a weake pen without cracking or disordering th' goodliest frame of Nature; Madam, you must give mee leave onely to admire you in great, as the great Subject of all admiration. If in writing You, I fall short of sense; it is Love: if I overreach it; it is Wonder: so is sense and language oppress'd, or heightned by the subject that admits no meane. Madam, if this Pamphlet of You rise in the opinion of the World, it is You; if it fall, it is I; I, that have batter'd my braines against as great a miracle as the Philosophers stone. If you please to receive it with a favour answerable to the ambition it is offered, I shall account it the greatest honour that can bee done to him, in whose esteem (Madam) You are the first and last of these Stories; the unparallel'd Lady Fencer, the Fidler, the Jugler, and the Player, liv'd Cecinna P aetus , sometimes Consull, a man every way worthy that high title, of a Spirit moulded for great designes, that would breake through all interruptions to advance his Honour: Hee, a faithfull friend to Scribonianus , in whose faction he had engaged his life and fortunes; after his overthrow was taken prisoner by the Souldiers of Claudius Nero . When hee was taking Ship, ( a Triumph for Rome ) he desired the Officers that Arria his Wife might accompanie him; holding it a grand discourtesie, since shee had shared his prosperous fortunes, to deny her his miseries: but the Souldiers, of men the best studied in crueltie, were more ambitious to tyrannize over his mind (the greater Triumph) than his body; and well advised how sorrowes are subtracted by being divided, denyed his most passionate prayers, and hoised saile. Many of them were flies engendred from his heat, who now fled him as an inhospitable clyme, too cold to nourish flattery. They beheld him as one whose misfortunes were infectious, not to bee sympathiz'd; or as a Rock that stands the shock of the impetuous Wind, to ruine those that touch it. Adversity is the true touchstone of Vertue and Friendship; Friendship followes the good fortune, but Vertue the bad. That calmenesse of mind which attends some high fortunes, is grounded rather upon Policie than Vertue: hee that swels when he is full, intends to break himselfe; who then will be proud when he is prosperous? As it is an argument of basenesse to bee elated; so it is true magnanimity, not to bee dejected. Friendly offices, like Rivulets to the Ocean, are tributes reflecting to the fortunes, not the men: let these once decline, the other like Frie will swimme against the sinking streame: or like Mice, shelter themselves from the approaching storme. So P aetus outliv'd his happinesse, and his friends: onely his deare Arria , having hired a Fishboat, followed along by the Shore of Sclavonia ; so noble was her piety; as if shee did congratulate those extremities, as the tryall of that unshaken faith, that well-knit affection, not to bee ravel'd from her P aetus by the strongest battery of fortune. With so meane advantage as one small Bark, so small attendance as one mean Fisherman, no Saile but Resolution, no Pilot but that high Spirit that threatned destinie, and dar'd the utmost power of Fate, shee imbarqu'd her selfe into the dangers of the Seas. When shee was arriv'd at Rome, and in the Emperours presence, Iunia the Widow of Scribonianus , chiefe partner in her captivity, did familiarly accost her: to whom with words made for disdaine, shee made reply; doest thou live, (said shee) shame of our sexe, and monument of our shame! Thou, in whose armes Scribonianus thy Husband was slaine! What stands between thee and death, now hee is removed that hindred thy prospect? Unworthy woman, that prizest loathed life above thine honour, and lovest thy selfe above thy Lord! Arria , thy courage (said Iunia ) is ill plac'd: the Gods that sent us hither, gave us life as their greatest blessing, not to be appropriated to our selves, but communicated to our friends and Countrey; if wee should live onely to our selves, wee should live onely to undoe all; since this great All subsists by each particular: is then the whole of us our owne, when the least part of us is not only ours? Grant our lives were intirely ours; yet are they not of that small consequence, that like our clothes wee may devest us of them when our misguided fancies tell us they are out of fashion. Then if Scribonianus (to whose departed soule thou slanderest my affection) had held an end like this, an end of misery, or a way to happinesse and honour; hee had counsel'd mee to die, and had not liv'd himselfe to have been slaine. Fond Woman (replyed Arria ) how thine owne arguments condemn thee! If the Gods give us life as their greatest blessing, then surely blessednesse is the quality and vertue of life: when they withdraw this, they call us (if our faint soules could heare them) nay, even nature her selfe whispers to us to bee gone to some better place. If our Friends and Countrey have part, or all of us, to whom do we belong, if they discard us? must wee live wretched till the decay of nature doth remove us? So patiently the poor silly Cottager awaites the good houre his house shall fall upon his head. If Scribonianus thy Husband had not dyed honourably in the Camp, (so great an opinion have I of his Vertue) hee had dyed as honourably in his Tent: but when thou leav'st the World, the World shall not leave to say of thee, that Iunia outliv'd her Vertue, and her Love died sooner then her selfe. The Emperour by these passages perceiv'd whereto shee tended, that shee would live no longer then till shee had a power to die; commanded her to be streightly guarded: but this restraint was rather a spur then a bridle to her actions travelling to fame: for shee enraged that her death was denyed her, flung out of the Chaire where shee sate, and violently ranne her head against the Wall, with which blow, shee much wounded, fell into a deadly swoone: but as soon as her keepers had recall'd the unwelcom'd life to her, the life that griev'd her, not that it was gone, but returned; she thus bespake them: You see how vainly you imploy your care to keep a prisoner that will be free; you may make mee die with more paine, and lesse honour; but not to die at all, this is beyond your power: whilst I wear a hand commanded by a heart that knowes no feare, I shall not despaire of death, nor shall I long protract a loathed breath in such wretched times that make life but the nursery of sorrowes, and seminary of misfortunes. Some few dayes she wasted in comforting, and condoling with her friends the generall calamities wherein the most vertuous were involv'd, under that monster of men, Nero , then tyrannizing. Then she retired into P aetus lodging, and there thus spake her last: The soule imprison'd in a necessity of being miserable, must break through all fence of nature into an honourable end. This very precept nature her selfe imprinteth in us; shee denyeth not the iron-bound Slave a death to free him from the toylsome Oare; doth she deny the Sun-scorch'd Pilgrim his nights sleep? no, nor the world-beaten man his eternall rest. Surely then, shee allowes us to shake off her interest, when we are sunke below her succour. P aetus , thy life is not link'd to nature, but to fame; fall then by thine owne sword, and thy spirit wound up in thine honour, mounts to the Palaces of the immortall Gods: If thou faintest under so brave a resolution, or enviest thy selfe the glory of thy end; know, that ere two dayes expire, thou thy selfe expirest: but how? by whose hands? beheaded by a base hangman, offered up a tame sacrifice to insated tyranny. Awake the Roman in thee; shall high P aetus (whom when the World unworthy of his Vertue, ingratefully flung off) claspe broken hopes and fortunes, to save himselfe with the shipwrack of his fame? shall hee, to whom thousand servile necks did bow, stoop to the basenesse to beg life, while his death is in his hands? Cato and Scipio (whom this age is more prone to adore then admire) held it not honourable to begg life, though they might expect more from C aesars Vertue. But what canst thou hope for from a Tyrant abjur'd by all the Vertues, one that approves nothing in Soveraigntie but Power, and that guided by Passion to insatiate revenge? Then (as if shee had distrusted her Husbands spirit) shee drew out the poyniard from his side: P aetus , (said shee) how I have not entertain'd life, nor death but for thy sake, this last act of honour be my witnesse. Doe this P aetus : then she plung'd the dagger into her heart, and having drawne it out, shee delivered it to him againe; trust my departing breath, P aetus , (said shee) not the wound it gives mee, but thee, afflicts mee. There died the noble Arria , there did that soule flie to eternity; that soule that was too great to owe her liberty to any power but to her owne. P aetus blushing to be indebted to a president for his death, especially his Wife; took to him the dagger that was so lately guilded in his Arria's bloud, and with these words hastned to his end. Had fortune answered my resolution, and crown'd my enterprize with happinesse; I had entered Rome, envied by the most noble, not pitied by the basest. I now see how the successe of humane affaires depends not upon valour, but uncertain fates; and our actions elevated by the height of spirit, do but intrench us deeper into misery. But though I am bereft of all the advantages of fortune, and of honour: yet am I Master of a mind unconquered; over which nor Tyrannie nor Fate shall triumph. Then embracing her dead, hee sigh'd, and said; Pardon, blest spirit, my too long absence from thee; I have borrowed this little leave of life but to admire thy Vertue, which being above my wonder, I must soare unto that height where it is ascended, to search out her true perfection: Pardon my soule that she ascends not to thee in an extasie; faine would shee: but this dagger claimes her liberty that gave thee thine. Then he thrust it into his heart, and there the dagger acted his last and most faithfull service; slew his Master. sexes into one body, and one soule; the bodies by alternate use so proprietated, not to one, but both: the soules so sympathizing in affections and in passions, as both became one to both. They that keep this mystery inviolable, know no outward respects of power to divide them into two: If P aetus be unhappy, Arria is unfortunate: Paetus is doom'd to die; and shall Arria live to see him slaine? Hath hee outliv'd his hopes, and can shee hope to outlive him? But why would she die? was the feare of the Emperours cruelty mingled in her cause? What feares she that feares not death? what Emperour is cruell to her that dares die? what cruelty is to be parallel'd to that which bereft her of her life? It was Paetus slew her; Paetus ? had Arria liv'd, Paetus had not slaine himselfe; therefore Arria died: died because Paetus should die: Oh unheard of cruelty! oh unparallel'd affection! Arria died because Paetus could not live. Paetus by death redeem'd himself from what was worse than death; from torture: Arria redeem'd her honour, and her Paetus from torture, and dishonour. Fortune made her miserable, that Vertue might make her happie: her faith so firmly tyed her love, that death could not undo it with her life. Her fortunes were so ingrafted in her Paetus , that with his they did bud, flourish and wither. Her life was fastned to his strings of life: with him she liv'd, with him she died. reason is unseated! Arria would die rather then bee led in triumph: did death redeem her? No; death was but fortunes headsman to execute her she had condemn'd. The Emperors power extended no farther then to afflict her withred body: not able to endure this weak revenge, shee yeelded up her mind a triumph to her fortune, and her selfe unto her sorrow. If fear did not surprize her, then engag'd in P aetus treason, she was her own wrack and torture, scorning all Executioners but her self. Who then condemns her death, when it was due to justice? But what law exacts of her this justice? The Gods forbid her to kill another, much more her self, being nearer to her selfe than any other. Nature by her law claims life, as her due debt, payable when shee demands it. If she died because Paetus should die; shee did but invite him to her rage, not to her vertue. But I think fear, the common defect of Nature in women, depriv'd her of her life: for death appeard so accoutred in the terrours of wrack and hangman; that she died for fear of death. Emperour, was Lord of great Revenues, to which his vertue, not his fortune was his title; his mind was richly embroydered with all the studied ornaments of learning; a good part of his life hee exercised in the Court, where while the Princes ears were open to Philosophy, his heart and hand were both unbent to him; his favour and his noblenesse, like rivalls, striv'd which should with most devotion serve their Soveraigne: but when debauchery usurp'd upon the Emperour, the Tutor was devanced and disgraced. In all these extremities Seneca in himself was so well poiz'd, that neither the greatnesse of fortune could bribe him into riot, the height of knowledge into pride, nor the Courtier into flattery: nor did he know any man great enough to make him lesse; nor could his mind, which Philosophie had plac'd above the World, decline with fortune. In his old age hee married Pompea Paulina a young, faire, and nobly descended Roman Lady, a Lady of that worth, that no Roman but hee that did enjoy her, did deserve her. Nero having let loose the reines of reason, and himselfe to all licenciousnesse, so tyranniz'd, as if he did perswade himselfe that an Emperour was above the Law, and must also bee without it: what his will prescrib'd, his tyranny did execute, and so, as if his actions were accountable to no power but his owne. Among his chiefe and most remarked cruelties, it is not the least hee exprest against his Tutor Seneca ; to him hee sends his Satellites to denounce his death: the fashion of those times was, when a person of qualitie was condemn'd to die; hee was allowed the liberty to chuse his death, and a time proportion'd according to the Emperours rage, to dispose of his affaires: but if his revenge flowed so high, that it would brook no delay: then hee enjoyd no time to doe anything but die: if the condemned resisted his decrees; then he commonly appointed, that by some slave hee should bee barbarously murdered: but the nobler Romans held it nearer way to honour with their owne hands to anticipate their fates, and in unhappinesse staid not the enforcement of tyranny or nature. Seneca , with an undaunted looke receiving the sentence of his death, called for inke and paper to write his last Will and Testament; which the Captaine denying him, he turn'd about, and then bespake his friends: You see, my loving friends, (said hee) I cannot gratifie your affections with my fortunes: I must therefore leave you my life, and my Philosophy, to enrich your minds with the invaluable and nere-to-be- depriv'd-of treasure of precept and example. I shall desire you by all the tyes of friendship, and by the glory you shall purchase by it, to endeare my life and death (which shall not staine the honour of my life) unto your memory: then gently reproving them who seem'd too sorrowfull, hee said; to what other purpose have I furnished you with precepts of Philosophie, then to arme your minds against the assaults of Fortune? Is Nero's tyrannie unknowne to you? What man is Master of his owne life under him that massacred his Brother, that us'd upon his Mother that cruelty which never yet knew name? Then hee turn'd him to Paulina , in whom sorrow had sweld it selfe so high, that rather then break out, it threatned to break her heart: My Deare, (said hee) I am now going to act what I have long taught; my houre is come, and nothing so welcome to me as my death; now I am unloaded of this flesh that clogs my soule, I shall with more ease ascend unto eternity, to enjoy a condition without a change, an happinesse without a period: wherefore, my dearest Paulina , forbeare thy too immoderate passion, lest thy grief disgrace my end, and thou seem to value my death above mine honour: enjoy thy youth, but still retaine those seeds of vertue, wherewith thy mind is richly stored: I confesse, for thy sake I could bee content to live, when I consider that in my breast lives a young Lady, to whom my life may bee advantage. Paulina's love now raising up her courage, and her courage her dejected spirit; Think not Seneca , (said she) that like your Physitian, I will leave you when the hope of life forsakes you; but I will follow like your Wife, your fortune. This resolve shall tell you how much your life and doctrine hath availed your Paulina . When can I die well, but then when I cannot live well? When I am bereft of thee, in whom all my joyes are so wealthily summ'd up, that thy losse will make my life my greatest curse; then will I die in honour, and think it fitter for my fame, then linger out my life in sorrow. Trust mee, my Paulina (said Seneca ) I cannot but admire thy love, knowing from what height of vertue it proceeds: as I will not envie thee thy death; so I wish a glory may await thy end, great as the constancie that advanc'd thee to it. Then he commanded his Surgeon to cut the veins of both their armes, that they might bleed to death: but Seneca's veines, shrunk up through age and abstinence, denyed his bloud a speedy course; therefore his thighs were also launced: but lest his pains might insinuate too farre into Paulina's torments, and a new addition of sorrow meeting with her losse of bloud, might make her faint, hee sought to mitigate her feares by the discourse of death. Why should (said he) this monster nothing so affright us? while we are living, wee are dying, for life is but a dying being; when we are dead, wee are after death: where then, or what is death? It is that inconsiderable atome of time that divides the body from the soule: what is it then in this afflicts us? Not the rarity, for all the world that is not gone before, will follow us: is it the separation, and tyed to that the jealousie how we shall bee dealt with? upon this hinge, I confesse, turnes the wickeds fear: but the Stoick, whom Philosophy hath taught the art of living well, death frees from misery, and wafts him to the haven of his happinesse. For this necessity of death, wee are bound to thank the Gods; for it redeems from a worse of being eternally miserable. The separation, as it is naturall, so it is the only meanes conducing to our better being. The body being the corruptible and ponderous part, falls naturally to the earth whence it was first elemented: the soul etheriall gaines by this losse; for being purg'd from the drosse of weight, and of corruption, is made heavens richest ore; so refin'd, that the great Gods image may bee stamp'd upon it, and ascends unto the skies from whence it first descended. Nor doe I hold this dis-junction to be eternal; for when the world by the revolution of times and ages, whirls about into her first Chaos , then shall they meet again never to bee sundred. The soul shal be so purified by the immortall Gods: that it shall neither hope, nor feare, nor grieve; that it shall bee freed from all those discording passions, and affections, that here transport it from it selfe. The body so spirited that it shall know no necessity of nourishment, and therefore no weight, alteration, or mortality. Of great consequence then is death to our wel-being; since before it wee can account none happy; we see it end all miseries; we see it make none miserable; why then should we feare it, or condemne it? What have the wisest thought it, but the Port wee all must touch? He that scarce arrives at half a man hath as little to quarrell at his fate, as hee that in a weeke reacheth his haven, whereas by the troubled winds he might bee bound up in the more troubled seas a year. Nor is hee that is his owne death, being condemn'd to die, shipwrack'd even at the very shoare: for honour and the Emperour allow the liberty, and to die by the most abject of men, an hangman, is to die dishonourable. For this boone I gratulate the Gods: but more that they are pleas'd to call the perfect Seneca unto their joyes, the Seneca that hath not yet outliv'd himselfe, nor return'd into his infancy. There Paulina , not through feare (knowing none but what proceeded from her love) but through decaying nature fainted; therefore Seneca taking his leave caus'd her to be remov'd into the next chamber. In Seneca all these incisions were not of force to force out life; he therefore commanded his Physitian to poyson him; but wanting naturall heat to convey it to his heart, the poyson was rather a nourishment then a destruction to his nature: then he was laid in warme bathes, by this forc'd heat the poyson in his full source, and violence raged in his witherd body. While he had life he discours'd freely of life and death; his end approaching, all bloudy in his bath hee bath'd his head, and said, I vow this to Iupiter the Deliverer ; Nature at the last conquerd by those strong assaults, yeelded up her Fort (which weaknesse had so song fortified) to death her common enemy. So liv'd the famous Seneca , and so hee died that with the Gods his soul's immortaliz'd, with the world his fame. Nero informed of Paulina for whom hee seem'd much troubled: for though pitie had no entrance at his yron breast: yet feare the Tyrants tyrant told him that her death (being one of the most nobly allyed in Rome) would make his tyranny and hate the greater: hee therefore sent with all possible speed to recall her life now posting to her stage, and entring the dark confines of death. Her servants receiving the command unbound her, and clos'd up her incisions, she more than halfe dead, devoyd of sense, thus against her will return'd unto her life, and very honourably: for that of life shee lost, did witnesse to the world, that nothing but want of power restrain'd her from her death. constancie rais'd higher in a womans breast? She did not die, there shee exprest the true valour that derives it selfe from vertue, and that spirit that issues from the truest honour. That shee would, but could not die, are both Nero's act; that shee could live, or die, her owne. That she was Mistris of her fortune, witnesse that shee did live; how she valued her Husbands death, that shee would die. Fame and vertue did both attend her in the progresse of her actions: had she died, it had been thought the wretched times had interest in her end: but in her life shee conquer'd the extremities of life and death. The rule of vertue ties us to live so long as we ought, not as we list: then is the fittest time to die, when we can live no longer. To die, is at the height but like a Roman: but to dare to live when life is tedious, this is as much above the Roman, as the true substance of vertue, that false shade of honour. Had shee then died, she had acted but the Roman: but she liv'd to exceed the noblest of all Romans, but her selfe. hee teach her so to live that shee durst not die? or did shee distrust his happinesse that shee would not follow him? Shee had too much of death to have more, and those pangs so much endeared her to her life, that she would live at any rate, rather then break through fleeting torments into honour. While Seneca was yet alive, she was dying; he dead, she return'd to life: Was her life vowed to him, when his death reviv'd her? Nero call'd her back; the greater was her shame to take Sanctuary in her Husbands murtherer. Sure death was far more terrible then Seneca did speak it: she fled to a most inhumane Tyrant for protection. Seneca did not force her to die, nor Nero to live; one day gave her her liberty: she had as much strength, as life; and that little power she could use, was able to force out that little life she did detain. She would dy, in the extremity of sorrow for her husbands fate: but she did live to repent her both of her sorrow, and her death. more ambitious of honour then life; for the common exployt, the siege of Ardea: Sextus Tarquinius entertain'd the night with the Roman Nobility in the pride of luxury and riot: The ruines of Kingdomes were sacrificed to Bacchus , the sea and land plow'd up to appease ingenuous gluttony. They, as frolick as youth, and wine that made them so; unlock the treasures of their hearts, their Wives, and their beauties, to the admiration of unsound eares: But Collatine the most justly prodigall of his Wives fame, tels them; nor Italy , nor the World holds her, that stands in parallell of wonder with the faire and vertuous Lucrecia.' Tarquin divided between astonishment and rage, that Collatine his servant, should be his Soveraigne in happinesse: mounted upon the wings of lust and fury, flies to Rome , where his eyes having encountred the Idoll of his heart, and he the noone of night to enjoy it; with his sword and taper breaks into her chamber, into her presence: shee affrighted at the sword, and blasted by the light that lust gave life to, trembling like a prey with more horrour then attention, hears him thus bespeak her. Madam, wonder not at my unlookt for arrivall at Collatium , or at this visit so unseasonable: but applaud the wonder of your beauty; the silent night will speak my purpose, when in my restlesse bed a flame kindled from your fair eyes burn'd through my soule, consum'd my Countries service, my hopes of honour, then which nothing but your faire selfe is so near unto my thoughts. Let not the slave Fear intrude upon your princely breast, nor this steele divorce those Roses from the Lilies, drawne to hew out a way through all obstacles, to encounter Paradise. The same love that arm'd those eyes with Lightning, armes these hands with Thunder; bids them grapple with great Iove , were hee rivall in my affection. This night I must enjoy thee Lucrecia , or on thy name engrave an infamy, that Time, nor Times heire, Eternity, shal ne're devoure: If thou move or hand, or voice for ayd; thy groome I'le slay with thee; then fling his loathed trunk on thine, and sweare I found him fast manacled in thy embraces: cease then to bee faire, or to bee cruell, and returne me the Prince ravish'd from mee, by the all commanding beauties that attend thee. The sin unknown is unacted, nor shall the sowrest vertue mis-read those blushes the liveliest pieces of innocence. Accuse not Nature of tyranny, she made not so delicate an object to tempt, but satisfie the appetite: yeeld then; or this sword must enter that adamant, from whence all pitie is barakado'd. She conjur'd with this tyranny of complement, with as undistracted words as could bee pump'd from the deepest confusion of thoughts, makes her reply. Renowned Sir, let true pitie as really enter your eares, as false is banished mine. In Tarquines shape I entertain'd you; wrong not the Prince so farre, as to prostrate his fame to so inglorious an action; hee that hath the eyes of all Rome fix'd on his vertues, and must hereafter look like a Prince in Story, shall hee have all his glories sullied by the conquest of a woman? Shall he bee read King of all the Romans but himselfe? wanting this Soveraignty, all his honours shall be buried in his infamy: Then punish Great Sir, the Traitor to your vertue, this face; teare it to a loathing; so shall you appease the lewd rebellion of your bloud, and make your victories, still ending in your selfe, discourse for all posterity. But if you are conquer'd by your lust, you shall revenge your worth in her dishonour, who shall not be unpitied of men, or unrevenged of the Gods. This said, shee wept the rest. But he not daunted at that majesty of sorrow that sate inthron'd in crystall, nor at her words that would charme the most inhumane: but rather whet, then refin'd in passion, unloads his lust, and with the night posts undiscover'd to Ardea . No sooner had the Morne unchain'd the prisoners of the Night, and spread his light (welcome both to miserable and happie) through the vast regions of the Skies; that light that was so lovely to her, because it came to light her to her end: but shee sends to Ardea for Collatine and Brutus , her Husband and Uncle. Long before the day was fled into the other world, they at Collatium did arrive. First they saw her face stand in that amazed silence, that they could read, not heare the full contents of sorrow; they in that expected some great cruelty had been us'd upon her, which had depriv'd her of the tongue to tell it. But this silence was but a pause in her great soule, whether shee might stoop to that wretched body, as to borrow those organs which commonly conveigh our friends calamities into our eares: but lest shee should detaine them too long lock'd up in wonder, hasting to her ease, shee unbent her soule, and gave vent unto her sorrow. Fortune, (said shee) hast thou now hit the marke thou hast long aym'd at, my poor heart; take to thee now thy triumph, and leave mee to my injur'd vertue. Brutus and Collatine , you are come from Ardea to hear the storie that will break my heart ere I am delivered of it; should I truly tell you how low I am rammd in miserie, I should bee farre too low for you to pitie mee, unlesse your love should lead you to dishonour. In what Court shall I appeale to justice? The grand Gods act, and licence what I suffer: the houshold Powers are not of power to keep their Lawes inviolate. Shall I addresse, mee to the King? his owne Sonne hath dishonourd mee: to him I would appeale, would hee revenge his guilt, as I mine innocence; then would I speak him a true Prince; when to advance his justice higher then his sinne; he made her way through parricide and treason to her power. But hee loves his lust too well to loath his life; of him I cannot expect justice who hath injur'd mee, nor of you mercie whom I have injur'd: I have tainted your bloud with mine owne. Tarquin hath conquer'd this body, Lucrecia this mind. You true Romans Brutus and Collatine , in whom my life was truely happy, I conjure you by all the tyes of bloud, love, and religion, bee as cruell to Tarquin , as hee to Lucrece , shee to her selfe, who with bold steele carves on her breast the Tragedie that shall stagger the piety, or awake the pitie of all posteritie. Her life and language had both this period; for having tyed their vowes to her revenge, her soule too pure for her bodie, disclogg'd it selfe of clay, and broke the vault of mortalitie. So riseth day disrob'd of night: so did her soule ascend to immortality. It is beyond the art of words to expresse what valiant sorrow, what noble rage, this cruelty of hers had stamp'd upon these two princely brests. Silence at the instant had tongue-tied all language, wonder had pent up all teares, immensitie of furie had transcended all bounds of passion: so much had they to speak, they could not speak; so great was their sorrow they could not sorrow; so were all the powers of the soule knit and contracted into the project of revenge, that till they were scattered into their offices, passion was not discernable; then the object lessened, wonder descended to passion, passion to expression; then discolouring the crimson floud, and with their teares washing her body white as her innocence, they took it on their shoulders, set it in the Forum , where Collatine , when the Auditory was ripe for his Oratorie, bespake the Roman cofluxe. Romans, and Countrimen, this day presents to your wonder a fact of that height of impietie, so degenerating from all humanitie; that in it hell hath plotted the dishonour of this whole nation, this whole age. Were not your affection stronger tied to the Oratour, then the Oratory: I should not hope to perswade you that the breast of man could travell in such a prodigie of exact villany. You see a monument of that miserie that vindicates the pitie of Tygers, or Tyrants: much more of minds ennobled with vertuous actions. The Tragedie (not long to wrack your expectation) I will briefely declare. Sextus Tarquinius (I know not with what colourable excuses hee painted his designes) left Ardea for Rome ; honour could not bridle his false furie of affection, nor the publick interest in the State overpoize his private passion; I say, hee posted to Rome. Rome ! where the Gods have their Temples, the Vertues their Sanctuaries, that thou shouldst breed a Monster to prophane thee! No sooner had hee entred Rome , but hee entred my house; where like a Prince, a kinsman, like the happie messenger of Collatines happinesse, (oh, that vice should bee so bravely disguis'd!) hee was receiv'd by Lucrecia , receiv'd in a bravery of affection too high for the apostate from vertue; his face did not discover the false heart that lay in ambush to surprize her honour, nor his vertue shew it selfe, as it was, the staulking horse to his covert. The ceremonies of hospitality finished, hee retires to his lodging, though not to himselfe; now when the brother of death had summon'd to still musick all but foule ravishers, theeves, and cares; with his drawne sword hee leaps from his owne, enters Lucrecia's bed, her hee ravisheth. Shee having possess'd us with a full relation of her mis-fortunes: shee Empresse of a mind unconquer'd of sinne or sorrow, with this poniard let out the life Tarquin had made loathed; And now O Countrimen awake your Roman vertue, flesh your swords and valours upon the revenge of the proud usurper of publick liberty, the cruell murderer of private innocence: you cannot offer to the Gods a more gratefull sacrifice; nor will they ever in requitall, forsake that State that forsakes not the defence of vertue. Such impression strikes Thunder upon Oakes, Earthquakes on Mountaines, as Collatine on the Roman hearts. Their thoughts were torne, and divided from themselves, anger boyled into malice the policie of passion, both flowed into resolution: then like an unpent torrent from some high precipice, the multitude violently ran to precipitate him made high for a precipice; which in the perpetuall exile of the Tarquins was accomplish'd. glory: shee forcibly abus'd by Tarquin , declares her innocence to the world, and confirmes it by her death. There were two in the act, one in the sinne; one adulterer, and one chast; her body conquer'd, her mind truely heroicall, not stooping to the lure of false pleasure; that remained as untainted, as unforced. Why dyed shee being innocent? to bee innocent. Why received shee her death from her owne hands? haply to prevent it from anothers; then had shee subscribed to guilt, and not left life without staine. For a Roman to outlive honour was dishonourable, for her to survive her infamie, was to act it. Curtius spur'd on by honour, did ride into the Gulfe. Regulus , rather then his faith, would prostitute himselfe to the witty cruelty of the Carthaginians. To honour did the three hundred Fabii sacrifice their lives. Honour chased the Tarquins out of Rome ; but Lucrece out of life. To wipe off all thought of guilt which maligne censure might imprint upon the act, she slew her selfe. Hee that condemnes her for the murder, accuseth her of the adultery; life had been her guilt, whereas death was her innocence; through her life shee made way to her fame, to which life and fortune are slaves, not to be entertained farther then they tend to her advancement. I confesse, torne haire and face, and eyes bankrupt of teares, and her owne vertue was of force to possesse the world shee had been ravished without the witnesse of her death: why then died shee? Her shame was too great to bee supported by her life; nor any thing but her death revenged her and all Rome, of the insulting Tarquins . Then Lucrece in the hight of glory sacrificed her selfe, as well to the State, as to her innocence. if an adulteresse? is death due to innocence, or to adulterie? was it that her crime was greater then Tarquins , that shee was slain and hee banished? The Roman Law puts not to death the adulteresse: but what law screwd to tyranny destroyes the innocent? The body might be purg'd by the adultery: not soule of the adultery by murder. This revenge may argue chastitie before and after: but not in the nick of the act, which yeelding to some secret enticement, might staine her thought; then loathing her selfe for the act, held death a more satisfactory revenge then repentance. But, it was Tarquins lust staind her: no, it was Lucrece ; if Tarquins lust staind her, it was not Tarquins , but her own. The will left free by divine providence, is not constraind by humane power. If her will was ravished, why doe wee extoll her for murder who died for adultery? had she slaine Tarquin , her act had been no way to be justified; but how is this aggravated? Lucrece is her chast and innocent self; Tarquin her foul ravisher, and greatest enemy. She then did sacrifice her life to her honour: could not her insatiate thirst of glory bee slak'd but by her bloud? Was it not unworthy Tarquin to bee her conquerour against her wil? and was it not more unworthy thy Lucrece , not to endure the conquerour against her honour? Her vertue was more debased by being enslav'd to common praise, then her selfe to carnall delight. Had shee kept her mind unconquered she had liv'd the mirrour of women: but her weaknesse press'd her downe to die in her despaire, rather then live after shee was dishonoured. but the Tyrians as impatient of of a Duarchie, as Pigmalion of a Rivall: yeelded allegeance solely to him not of years to write man. Dido was married to her Uncle Sich aeus, Hercules Priest: this Sich aeus the sponge of Fortune, filled only to be squeesed; was slaine by his Nephew and Brother Pigmalion . Hee a man of treasure vast enough to betray his life, jealous of the security of his greatnesse, trusted it to the earth: but Fame (the most injurious Hyperbole) drew it up (perhaps greater then it was) the many fathomes of earth, where it lay ramm'd from the eye, not the envie of the Prince. Unkind Fortune, that deal'st with us as the Persian with their slaves, crownest us for a Sacrifice! Dido a Dowager by her Brothers tyranny, begins to feele a tyranny of sorrow; that (had not nature resolved to keep perfect as much of her as was hers) had made her a Widdow also to her beauty; her faire face clouded with discontent: but her fairer soule with no more passion, then betraid mortality; shee betakes her to the malecontented of the Tyrian Lords. Since Brothers (said shee) are enemies, let us seeke to our enemies for Brothers; since pitie is fled humane brests, let us seeke it (for such a creature there is, nature tels mee) among salvages. Though we cannot expect it from his nature; yet his youth might enfeeble him to it: but his very infancy is a monster; what then will his riper yeares produce but the exile of all humanity? What distant respects will hee know that wades through his owne bloud to his ends? if an innocent Uncle and Brother be slaine; if a Sister be not, where is a Subject secure? Miserable Strato , thou wert a Prince by thy slave, to beget a Prince to make slaves of Princes! Miserable Tyre , now more oppress'd by one Tyrant, then before by a thousand slaves! Wretched wealth, to thee quiet poverty is a Prince; thou hast divorced mee from my Sich aeus , thou hast made mee the football of a Tyrant Brother, toss'd from his Kingdome, into what unhappy shore is not yet knowne unto my thoughts. My Lords, I speake to minds too noble to be stifled in the narrow confines of fear: follow your Princesse, whose vertue the spite of Fortune shall not wrack into despaire. Her words proceeding from the height and sweetnes of her mind, were as great a spur as the hope of liberty to advance them into action: then as in a thoughtfull mind refresh'd with wine, Care it selfe keeps her revels: so were their thoughts (before dejected) now lifted to that pitch, that valiantly affronts the hard affronts of Fortune; then with all speed they rig'd a fleet, and Dido with her treasure, and the Tyrian Lords in the advantage of night hoised saile. The Cyprian was the first shore they touched; where (as the fashion of the Countrey was) their Virgins were assembled, to sacrifice for their chastities to Venus , before their marriage. Fourscore of these untouch'd Dido ravisheth from the barbarous sacrifice, and sailes with them into Affrica ; where when she was arriv'd, shee purchased as much land of the Inhabitants as might bee covered by an Oxes hide, which cut in thin pieces, made a great extent of ground: but scarce to containe a City two and twenty miles in compasse. There was the famous Carthage built by Dido , which after times dilated into a great Empire. By the consent of all there was a yearly rent paid for the land on which the City was founded. The concourse of Affricans (which hope of gaine brought thither) was great as their gaine they received by traffick, which invited them to settle themselves there. The many conspiring hands in no great space of time wrought it to a perfect Citie: but in the interim, their wealth that flowed thither in high tide, made Carthage the envie of Hiarbus King of the Mauritanians. Hee summons ten of the Carthaginian Princes, and with them treats of marriage with their Queen; which if fairely may not bee obtain'd, hee resolves to try the force of armes. Dido hearing this unwelcome message, desires respite of resolution till the City was finished: which accomplished, shee in no wise would yeeld unto Hiarbus , whom lust linkt to rage and avarice, had arm'd against her and his honour. Dido now the creature which melancholly divorceth from society; desires three months absence from her friends, whom shee tels she must goe whither her owne and the Cities fate did drive her: in which time a little remote from the Citie, shee erected a stately Pyre, which having kindled, and invok'd Sich aeus ghost; shee a little eased her selfe against her fortune. What a monster of misery (said shee) received life with Dido ? The World hath dealt with mee, as Love with those it hath distracted; allowed mee happinesse but by some short intervals. First I was borne Princesse of Tyre , then by my Brothers tyranny I was exil'd; after long conflicts with the Winds and Seas, I arrived here in Africa ; here I built this great Carthage , of which I am intitled Queene; then I thought me plac'd above my envie, or my fate: but as those wretched creatures that are drawne higher, the more to bee strapado'd: so was I made great, great for Hiarbus envie; so was I wound up to the height of happinesse and honour, only to fall never to rise againe. Prosperity and adversity might bee termed the fever of life, did not our best dayes afflict us more then our worst. In our happinesse, the feares that doe attend it make us miserable; the hopes that await our unhappinesse, make us happy in our lowest unhappinesse; which estate would a wise man chuse, that which will be better, or that which will bee worse? then to be happy, is to bee miserable. As the pain of the soule transcends the paine of sense: so is misery to be valued above happinesse. For as what shall be is the greatest wrack of thought; so what is , is the clearest reliefe, the clearest satisfaction. In our height of happinesse we know wee shall bee, in our lowest misery wee know wee cannot bee worse; then to bee miserable is to bee happy. If I desire felicitie, I desire misery; for I rise onely to fall. If misery, then happinesse; this makes me Fortune's, that makes Fortune my triumph. Where is then content, since banished the height of State? If in the low estate, then must I seek it in the Wildernesse, and in some unsun-seen Cave waste out the remnant of my dayes; there Pigmalion and Hiarbus follow mee; there reignes as great a confusion of thoughts as at the Court: then welcome Death, thou didst divorce mee, thou shalt unite mee to my Love. Purged from earth, to the Skies I flie, and intwine my soule for ever to my lov'd Sich aeus . Then she leap'd into the Pyre, and there consum'd. The meeting of Dido and Æ neas (in which Virgils Muse hath sweat to the dishonour of them both; her for love, him for ingratitude) is so meerly fabulous, that it is scarce worth the expence of paper to disprove it, onely I am bound to vindicate her honour. Rome (as Eutropius writes) was built three hundred ninetie foure yeares after the destruction of Troy , none computes the time lesse. Carthage was built seventie two years before Rome , so Iustine writes. So there must bee of necessity two hundred yeares betweene the Trojan Prince and the Carthaginian Queen. Seven hundred yeares this Citie stood unconquered; so long they sacrificed to Dido as their tutelar Goddesse; at last by Scipio , thence called Affricanus , it was burnt, there their devotion ended with their fortune, and themselves. coveted? If Carthage was his end, money was his matrimony; if beauty, hee sought a woman, not a wife; if a wise, to make his lust warrantable. Dido in Sichaus buried all husband, in Hiarbus all man. Love is the good which by being diffused, is corrupted; shee that loves one, another, and a third, takes men in at the coile, and loves only for her pleasure. The object of true love is but one; from the infancy of time to her decrepitude the love between two hath been held most honourable. Hee that tooke from the first man his wife, did not make every rib a wife; not onely to shew us how out of the least of numbers he could draw infinites upon infinites: but especially, that our desires might move within the narrow compasse of love, not expatiate themselves to lust; that as the first man was all the men in the world to his wife: so now the husband should bee the wives Horizon, that where ere shee is plac'd, hee may bee all shee sees. The objects of lust are as various as numerous: as there are lovely beauties, and to attend them, fond desires. The wanton woman darts forth her unruly heats more freely then the lesse-offending Sun his beams; he with the day, in courtesie to nature, withdrawes his fires: shee day and night carries the rage of dog-dayes in her breast, and never sets but then when shee can rise no more. Dido would not wed Hiarbus , because she thought all nuptiall rites had not their period in Sich aeus . Death is the divorce of man and woman, not of husband and wife; that contract flesh ties and unties: but this is that of soules, which eternity cannot undoe; it is as immortall as themselves, not deaded in being singled from earth, but reviv'd to a greater perfection: if then her soule did intirely love, the soule of her soule must be her only love. But Hiarbus sought lawfull marriage. Why did he force is? Dido refused marriage, shee could not love. Marriage to her had been a rape, another had enjoy'd her against her will: if a rape must bee avoyded with the losse of life; through how many death must she flie a loathed bed, where every night she shall be ravished? Did her vertue attract Hiarbus ? why did he not covet her vertue in her prosperity, as in her misery? He that hath lost the effect and quality of vertue in himselfe, will not value it in another, and with reason; for her vertue was his greatest enemy; forc'd her chastity so to whom she had been married, that like the Phoenix shee would marry to nothing but her ashes. was it a crime because it was no sin? Religion and honour allow her to marry Hiarbus ; neither Sich aeus : hee was a King, a stranger; this a Subject, an Vncle. Marriage is the tie of strange blouds, not of the same. Nature bids us affect, not love our kindred; in this, affection screwd to love, is unnaturall: could she then marry Sichaeus , and not Hiarbus ? did she think the Priest in Sichaeus a warrant for her incest, and not the King in Hiarbus for a lawfull contract? Hath the King the liberty to make the Law, and the Priest to transgresse it? Hiarbus desires the establishment of the law of Nations; but Sichaeus violates the law which Nature wrote within him. The Gods suffer her to outlive her incest: she will murther her selfe rather then entertain a vertuous Love. Hiarbus us'd force. Why should shee refuse it? The safety of Carthage depended on the marriage: she liv'd to build it, and would die to ruine it. Had shee burnt a Martyr to her Countrey, her act had been too great for Chronicle: but she would die to satisfie her passion, rather then live to preserve the Citie. Her love to Sichaeus was that she valued above Hiarbus . Shee would vexe a living King to appease a livelesse Trunke, and rather obey a Block then a Storke. But Sichaeus stands in competition with Carthage . Oh unequall ballance! a womanish fancy poiz'd against a publick good. What other reason then had she to burn, but because shee would not marry? inspir'd with all those excellencies which first made the virtues of her sexe. History writes her birth ignoble: but as it is the greatest Sol aecisme in honour for high blouds not to flow into high attempts: so it is a reall ennobling of meannesse of birth to be guilty of more then noble actions. Nobility and beautie are a fair varnish of vertue, the lively shadowes of that unseen substance, which were it visible, nothing so lovely: but being the true Id aea of the mind, cannot bee discern'd with the eyes of the body. Without this (so much of nothing hath the unworthy honourable) they are but the complements of man, serve onely to fill up this vast vacuum of honour. She basely noble, not nobly base, born under a smoak-dried roof; which though of it selfe it receiv'd no more of heavens influence then through the loope-holes made by the rage thereof; yet her presence made perpetuall day. But let her birth bee strangled in the wombe of History. Shee was Natures fairest paper, not compounded of the rags of common mortality: but so searsed and refined, that it could receive no impression but that of spotlesse innocence. How unfortunate had her beauty been, had shee had no other championesse then her selfe, the sequell of Theutilla will declare. Amalius, Dynasta of France , rich in treasure, magnificent in retinue, Lord of all the world admires, but himselfe, which hee most admires; there was no deity to whom hee should owe his fortune, but his unworthinesse: for he was more hospitable to himselfe then to others, and freelyer feasted his senses then strangers. In summe, hee was what a vertuous man is not, what a voluptuous man should be. It hapned one time, the time pointed at in Chronicle; when his soul (the slave of his sense) dancing and floating like a toast in his wine, was seiz'd on by sleepe; the wine it selfe had paid the drawer of his wine his appetite. Then was he quiet, when hee was dead drunk. How fruitlesly were spent those thousand lamps of oyl? those thousand pen-plowed reams of paper about the immortality of the soule? Who hath a soule that will not here question it? what is become of it? is it onely for this interim metamorphized into a beast? or doth it die? if into a beast, since the prince of man, let it bee transmigrated into the prince of beasts, the Prince's beast. Who so sottish, so grosse of conceit, to think the Lyon, a creature of that invincible valour, and now commanded by reason; having rescued so faire a Lady from so foul tyranny, will transgresse the lawes of honour, let her loose to her losse of liberty, her loath some dungeon? Or doth she die? or will you mince it into an intervallum of life, a three hours death? it then followes, the soule thus dying will dye eternally. But to returne to Theutilla. Amalius servants have made the neighbouring Villages their rendevouz; where having discovered Theutilla , and in her as much as the world could boast of; they ravish'd her from the weak resistance of her parents, and laden with the rich triumph of nature, returne unto their Lord, and lock her up in his lodging, whose sense and fancy was so strongly lock'd up in yron-sleep, hee had not power to dreame of what he would have acted. She thus forfeited to dishonour, and night the friend of dishonour, enjoying no more of light then the courteous candle, which betraid to her eye and hand a sword, which shee taking to her, revolves her present condition. If the soule straightned (said shee) in a necessitie of ill-doing, must trie all her power to gain her libertie: surely shee must not refuse any opportunity conduceable to the preservation of her purity. Death is then and honourable freedome, when it takes us from the danger of living ill. As we came into the world with nature; so wee must goe out with honour; wee must not rest on nature for our ends, since before her summons, thousands of extremities doe beset our lives. There shee paus'd. Welcome (said shee) my deare, deare Preserver; to thee I owe this last, this most glorious act of my well-spent life; to thee posterity shall be as much beholding as Theutilla ; thou shalt redeem the errours of after times in women. Then shee, borne for what shee did, drew the sword, anvil'd and filed for her sexes glory: no sooner (said she) have I unsheath'd thee, but I must sheath thee againe, Where? In this guiltlesse breast of mine. Call up thy too degenerous spirit. Of what bravery can it accuse the act? Thou murdrest a poor innocent maid. Shall posteritie brand mee with that weaknesse? Shall it say, that not able to stand under the miseries of life, I was press'd down by the hard extremity of fortune to despaire to death? No, my tide of furie flowes into another channell; here is a revenge fit for thy spirit, fit for thine arme; thine honour shall bee proud to riot in his bloud, whose bloud would riot in thine honour. Thus then I shake off woman, and her frailtie; thus doe I strangle the monster lust that revels in thy veines; and to complete my vengeance, send thy sin-surfetted soule into the land of endlesse night, where it hath already tane sure footing, With that, her spirit restlesse in the revenge of words, eager of action, directed her arme, which gave Amalius so fatall a wound, that it seem'd her hot-metled fury was bridled with exactest discretion, and nothing wanted the attempt but passion. Bravest Theutilla , sooner shall the Fathers bowels bee silent at the sight of his long unseen Sonne, then posterity forget thy name. Amalius now miserably groaning, now miserably opening his eyes to shut them againe more miserably, had little more of life then what could give her life, in appeasing the fury of his servants that rushed in to her destruction. What means (said he) is Chaos of confounding noise; this unwelcome Traine, to the more unwelcome Pomp of death? Whither rush yee, yee betrayers of innocence, yee servants of nothing but my lust? Oh may mine infamie find a grave as soone as life; and you sooner; that the world may want a witnesse of it. I conjure you by the relation that ties you to my commands, and this last; spare her life, whose chastitie the Gods are pleas'd to spare. Then, to make a minute of his life famous, hee contemplated on mortality. Nature (said hee) that first digested this All into an exact method of parts, preserves it likewise by a constant concordance of the same, without the which it would soone resolve into the first nothing: onely man, ungovern'd man, Natures Master-peece, revolting from her allegeance, deposes her Lieutenant Reason, lets in the Usurper, Passion, to untune the harmony that preserves the soul. Hence is it that death, the privation of being, in this disorder seizes the Fort, hurries the Governesse captive to an eternall, a never redeem'd imprisonment. The Sunne, the Sea, have both their bounds, and man his stage from life to death, of equall length to all, though one runs faster then another. The world whirles about continually till it be dissolv'd; and mans brain not satisfied in the bare necessaries of life, moves in an unbounded motion, till stil'd by the period of action, the undoer of Nature, Death. There is but one doore at which wee enter this Labyrinth of life: but infinite are the waies wee turne and wind out of it. The infant no sooner with much difficulty rak'd out of the wombe, (punishing the Mothers guilt of his short-liv'd misery) enters the Tombe, flashing through the world, being but a lightning of life. Pleasure or businesse wears out the riper mans vitals, and forceth out life, let Nature block it up never so strongly. The aged man, because a burden to himselfe, sinks under his own weight. These are ordinary waies out of this world into the next: but to bee hurld out by violence of Fate, this is the doom of strictest Justice that makes eternity our curse. This is the hard fate my just merit hath encountred, to be punish'd by the sex I have so much abus'd. This was his last: for Nature, though shee could not tell him he had liv'd long enough; told him hee had been long enough dying. There she withdrew her selfe from him, and seal'd up his eyes to the eternall sleep of eternall night. creature, and they whose actions are not moderated and well poyzed by her power, deviate from themselves into the slavery of Sense. Theutilla , if shee could obtaine of her selfe to yeeld to sense, why should not Amalius obtaine it? If to reason; why should shee not kill Amalius ? or why should she be ravished? Her selfe then was Victor of her sense, and to conquer reason she conquer'd Amalius . Never had her vertue a fairer tryall, then when her honour was a martyr slack'd to unlawfull flames; never could her honour bee more honourably releived, then by her vertue; nor both, then by this act. Though Vertue being within her, Honour being above her, was not to be really violated without the Theutilla that was below her: yet must Amalius be sacrificed, as well to deprive her of the interest he might have in her dishonour, as to make opinion cleare as her actions. It was that mind that stoop'd not to her body, that made her of consequence; not her beauty: the other sullied, who but Amalius would value this? or one whose sense is so scattered in the admiration of the outward forme, that hee discernes not even those deformities of soule which are detected? It was necessary for her fame not onely to resolve not to yeeld: but to prevent occasions that might prejudice her vertue, or her honour. But why was Amalius slaine, not master of the opportunity hee knew not? why was she forc'd thither? Because shee would not yeeld; because she should bee ravished. But haply her handsome prayers had wrought him to an handsome repentance. Is beauty, the loadstar that attracts hearts of steel to it, the Orator that pleads against it selfe? Amalius , had his eyes been open, had not read contradictions in her face, nor made so obscure a Comment upon so cleare a Text. Hee had seene her but as hee had seene her; her eyes inviting all eyes, her lippes all lippes, her face Loves banquet, where shee ryors in the most luxuriant feast of sense: not as shee was the modell of Divine Perfection, so innocent shee knew not the meaning of a Mistris. Theutilla , had she had no other Sword but her innocence, might satisfie her selfe in that defence: but Conscience is but one witnesse to one, and her actions must endure the triall of another touch-stone beside her owne. Amalius would easily confront her meanenesse. Then allow her this great revenge of little innocence. knowing nothing without it to transport it from it selfe. Why should she then strain her vertue to a vice; in the too nice satisfaction of others, unsatisfie her selfe? Why should shee, to prevent unlawfull love, act a more unlawfull revenge? Why should shee revenge an unacted injury; commit a certain murder, to avoid an uncertain rape? Had she been absolutely tyed either to die, kill, or be ravished; she had shewed a greater height of spirit in enduring, then revenging her dishonour. For the passive valour is more laudable then the active: this being often the fruit of a desperate, dejected; that ever of a well-settled mind. Her valour was her crime, her cowardize: for as shee had the false spirit of a man, unjustly to kill a man: so had shee the true false spirit of a woman, to act a greater, lest she should sinke under a lesser evill. Perhaps glorie transported her to an attempt (as shee flattered her self) above a man: did shee not also descend into the cruell weaknesse of her sexe, slay a man that had already paid earnest to a sleep never to awake, that had already pawn'd himselfe to Death? Did she not goe lower, sacrifice his soule to the furie of furies, her selfe? Whither did her blind rage lead her, to punish innocence, to salve her honour that was not wounded? This act carries little Valour in it, lesse Vertue. the chiefest blessings of the earth, flowing in wealth, the wantonizer of the mind, and by it once dedicated to the Queen of Love, courted and feared of the neighbouring Nations: while secure in her owne height; the Othomannick Army, infinite in number, invincible in valour, unappeas'd by cruelty, breaks in like a sea, that threatens to eat her into another Iland, if not devoure her. Christianity was their crime, a wrong proud enough to unsheath a Turkish blade; life was their greatest guilt, which must bee wip'd off by cruell death. That which to nature was preposterous, the souldier made methodicall; the infant torn from the mothers brest, was mangled into as many atomes as it had lived minutes, and hewed out into more Sacrifices then it had sins: if sorrow was too weak to conquer the surviving distressed mother; the sword (therein courteous) supplyed it, and intomb'd both in the wombe from whence they did unfortunately spring. Wives and Maids were first ravish'd, then slaine for adultery. Father and Daughter, Mother and Sonne, Brother and Sister were all incestuously piled up; there was nothing wanting but new lives to satisfie the guilt of death. The Iland was an heape of carkasses in despaire of being repeopled but by Cannibals or Crows. Was ever cruelty so barbarously express'd? Was ever steel refin'd for such cruelty? Mustapha having almost dislimb'd the Iland, bends his fury to the head; besiegeth Salamina , renowned for rich Citizens, brave Buildings, and stately Temples; erected by the Telamonian Teucer , during the Trojan sieige. Dandalus the Governour, forc'd to submit himselfe to the Turkish yoke, after exquisite tortures, is beheaded; and to strike a greater terrour in the survivors, his head is carryed upon the point of a sword through the razed Citie. Nero had here seene his cruell wish accomplish'd, the head of thousands of heads strooke off at one blow. The highest rate the Citizen could amount to, was too cheap for the securitie of life, where innocence was punish'd in stead of treason. Mustapha , his sword now surfetted in humane bloud, spurs on his sacrilegious furie to revenge him of the Gods: he razeth the Temples, whither the wretched Salaminians were fled for refuge; the Altars are profan'd; Hymens holy Tapers are lighted to rapes and adulteries at the very Altars. Murders are their Sacrifices; innocent lives drop like beades from their bloudy hands, their more bloudy devotions. Good Heaven! where is your thunder? awake your sleeping armory: is not your whole Hoast blasphem'd? Good Earth! where is thy Earthquake? cannot these monsters move thee? The consecrated vessels are prophan'd to servile uses. The shrines of Saints that call'd the adoration of farthest Pilgrims, are demolish'd; all, holy, and prophane, are miscellaniously sacrific'd to fire and sword. Mustapha , his rage and avarice appeas'd, bethinks him of a present to appease Selimus his Masters lusts; he sends captive the choicest beauties of both sexes (doom'd to another destinie) to the distain'd Carpathian Sea, where his fleet lay at anchor. The captives ship'd, and ready to be wafted in their owne bloud to Byzantium ; when the divinely inspired Cypriana wrought the miracle, worthy the memory of all time. Shee, servilly imployed in the powder-office, with a countenance that gave a majesty to her miserie, and scorn'd the subjection of sorrow; resolves a powder- treason: a candle shee had flaming in her hand; but a purer flame shot from heaven into her breast: from no other place could so generous a mind be fired. This fire (said shee) purer then the element of fire, shall both burne and cure, shall extinguish the lurking inflammations of lust. Nothing of Cyprus shall bee transported to Byzantium but my fame, powerfull to perfume the contagion of their sin. O Heaven! to thee, the Sanctuary of innocence, flies my untainted foule: if my spirit enlightned by thine, act thy vengeance, thy mercy reward mee; if I transgresse thy Commission, if I let out my life before thou requirest it: pardon the weaknesse of my vertue, pardon her that sacrificeth herself a spotlesse creature to thy most sacred throne. If thy justice exclude mee thy pitie, oh pitie these innocents; rain all thy revenge on mee, burie my name from the discovery of posterity; let not them, because they feel my fate, feel thy vengeance. Then gave shee fire to the Powder, that knew as little mercie as the Turke . The Masts and Sailes were hoysed nearer the Skies, then when the boysterous element conspires a shipwrack; the ribs torn from the body, flew like murdering shot through the next ship; where the unquench'd pitch seized the powder, so that both were swallowed by the same fate. Into these two ships were congested the Prime of the Turkish Souldiery, the Cyprian captivitie dispatch'd by Mustapha to Selimus at Byzantium . The miserable Salaminians now upon the shore, paying the last office of affection, to see the last of their wives and children, were more delighted then terrified at the spectacle; they look'd on death not as a punishment; but as the most honourable divorce, and last refuge of honour. Death had in it more courtesie then horrour: for as it was the last, so it was the least of their evils. Did they weepe at their misfortunes? so did the Sea: with a generall acclamation they thank'd the Gods that had heard their prayers, desiring their friends should bee rather a prey to the mercilesse waves, then Selimus lusts, for which, by the misfortune of beauty, they were reserv'd untouch'd. Mustapha now again whets his sword, which before revenge had dull'd; there was not a life that was not his prey, till hee had left the Iland breathlesse; then, like a Tyger besmeard in the bloud of tamer beasts, hee returnes to his Fleet; and laden with the spoiles of the Countrey, but most with infamie, hoyseth Sailes to Bzyantium . Now is he in the Carpathian sea; where may hee see nothing but monsters ugly as himself; may wind and water roar to him the name of bloud. If sleepe---charming-care steal on his restlesse mind, may the Cyprian Ghosts awake him: may every minute bee feare of endlesse death, and may his sinne fright away his repentance: then in view of the Byzantium Towers, the great Seraglio , and his own Pallace; may he bee betrayd by his nearest friend to a rock that splits him; from thence let him sink into the lowest dungeon of Avernus . up a prisoner to Byzantium . Is there no refuge; no redemption? sword and fire can preserve this, as well as sword and fire consume the other. Policie allowes not captivitie a sword: but crueltie allowes her a candle, the clearer to see her slavery. Ignorance is the happinesse of misery which is not felt before it bee understood. Had Cypriana a slavish mind in a slavish body, shee had owed her attempt to fortune, not to vertue; and merited more scorn then praise: but Nature that gave her a soule above her sexe, studied a discretion proportionable to manage it. Had shee well weighed, alwaies to redeem her honour with honour; she could not better informe, or in a more ingenuous way relieve her selfe, then to make the embleme of her slavery the instrument of her freedome; her justice was wittie, to punish the Turke by the same means he had punish'd them. Was it their misery, or their cruelty to which she owed her life? Shee was halde from a glorious death, to an ignominious life, to an inglorious death. Shee was captivated by her owne beauty, and felt the greatest tyranny of it her selfe, why then also should her greatest offender bee unpunish'd? shee did not kill her selfe for feare of the Turke : for her brest was arm'd to meet death in any shape of horrour, shee had before beheld him unaffrighted in all his ghastly formes. Life was below her honour; her honour not above her friends, which nor life, nor death shall divorce from her affection. As they had accompanied her to her slavery: so it was equall to her libertie. Vnworthy is she of life, that lives by unworthinesse; unworthy is she of an handsome death, that seeks it by an ignominious life: but shee soared to the height of glory: for shee would not goe a voluntary slave to her dishonour, when death might releeve her: but shee died, and in her selfe bequeath'd three wonders to the World; a free Slave, a vertuous Prostitute, and an innocent Murderesse. strangers: shee, her friends, kindred, and her self. Had she life to revenge it with self-murder? or were she wrongd by another, must she therefore be reveng'd on her selfe? Was a life freely given bought at too dear a rate? or because shee might feel their power, must she use her owne? What was it that look'd on her more terrible then death, or that she look'd on through a multiplying glasse? was it slavery? that is the common fate of vertue, that stands unmov'd by misery, unshaken by despair. Had the Turk slaine her, he had not depriv'd the world of the opinion of her vertue: but the very substance is shipwrack'd by her selfe. The Turks cruelty was her courtesie: for though hee triumph'd over her; yet hee gave her the opportunity to triumph over misery, and shew that height of spirit that scornes any thing without her should afflict her: but shee disdain'd to bee beholding to their courtesie, or her owne vertue. Was dishonour the thing beyond death or captivity? had she asmuch of woman as not to feare a death from her selfe, and not asmuch, as not to feare a dishonour from another? Could shee hate her vertue, and her sin? could she better revenge her of her vertue, then by her dishonour? Why should she feare what might befall her in life, who was regardlesse what might befall her after death. Then was slavery the terrible, joyn'd with dishonour her twin sister. Had she been transported to a Nunnery, where vertue is necessitated, had not that been a slavery? would not her will break into a thousand sins, who broke through life into a false liberty? But lesse then death, slavery, or dishonour, onely sense of her dishonour depriv'd her of her sense; why should she be affrighted by a shadow, when her sense could bee wrong'd by none but her selfe? first in my thoughts, which by the order of birth may claim the priviledge to do wonders. As some things are lesse curiously perform'd which are ordain'd for common use, not for the ornament or wonder of the world: so have I, like a French Volunteir on a Lute, all this while scatter'd slight aires, which may perchance surprize an indifferent eye: but now like the glasse that twists the Sun-beames to steale fire from heaven, I must in writing her, so lessen and contract so much of her as may sinke into our narrow faith, or narrower reason. If our Poets prophanely rake heaven for comparisons, for each part of a rotten Mistris that shall nere bee part of it; one whom sinne, to prevent age, hath carcass'd in her cradle: to what heights must I ascend to reach a Subject fit for all fancy to work, not play upon; one that is above all heights? Sometimes she is pleas'd to stoop to bee admir'd, ador'd; not that shee falls lower to rebound higher: but that wee are admir'd for admiring her, and we her prisoners feast our selves with the fragmentarie offalls of her Fame. Thus doe I admire her, till I admire my selfe out of breath; then shee beckens to my soule (the reason I cannot reach; but I obey) to come, whither I will not tell you: but now I am return'd a re- transmigrated-mountebank-Pedler, I will open to your Opticks that which shall purblind the whole art; at your two nostrils you shal snuffe in both the Indies; for your pallats, (because the cleanest feeders are the cleanest meat) you shall have the whole sect of Epicures; if their opinions stick in your stomacks, you shall take all the fumes of Arabia in a Tobacco-pipe to concoct them: Here is that will chaine your eare to the perpetuall sound of Aretaphila : For your touch, are you a Midas ? here is a Diamond set in gold, within two dayes it will bee a Rhodian Colosse; then will it magnifie to an Escuriall; then to a World; then to tenne Worlds; then to Aretaphila : thus Fortune blows dust up to a Lady, then to a Countesse, then to a Queen: thus Gold and Diamonds at length come to be Aretaphila , in whose name they have been valued. Please you to look into this inward Drawer, you shall see all the secrets of nature, that have befool'd the grand Clarks of all the World. Here shall you see reason for the ebb and flow of Seas, and of an Ague that resembles it; here shall you see the wrack of your bodies wracks, how he is the onely Physician of himselfe. The wounded Roman State, like a broken Tobacco-pipe, was cured by bloud. Warre cures the Turkish Lethargie. The  Ægyptian Dropsie is cured by drinking; one month in a year the whole Countrey is drunk. The Plague cures Grand-Cairo of her diseases of repletion: but the Ague onely an Ague. It is an opinion of some, that every particular person hath two Angels, one waits at his right hand, the other at his left; this left-handed Devill is the thing we speake of; if wee bee fairely dispossest of him, we may say, the better Angell hath got the victory: but if by the holiogopheron hotontiperistaton , one Devill drives out another. Here you see this little little Pepper-corn; Princes are captives, Emperours are subjects to this Pymee-tyrant, this is Love. Let him be pitied, he swells higher then Atlas ; heaven and earth is not a load for his little finger. Let him be scorn'd, then (like a Prince's casheir'd Favourite) hee is frown'd from a Duke to a malecontented Gentleman; then hee crosseth his crossed armes, and looks upon his fate with that regreet a younger Brother in the Low- countries doth his followers, who make his misery their food, and are the onely flatterers of low fortunes; the little winke rereares the other; four stivers in hot water defends this from the world, and which is worse, himselfe. Love hath been a tenant to this heart for many years, and hath now left it like a Farme in the eighteenth yeare, plowed up and harrowed out of heart; under three years sleep it wil not again be tenantable. Here you may see the braine working like a Powder-mill, let the brasse be over-wrought, he is blown up; and the rest of man is as confused as a beleagured Towne: screw him not up like a treble Lute-string, in a storme, to a French tune, and he will shew you the wonders of heaven so distinctly, that you shall confute a whole kennell of Almanacks . But oh! whilst I am quacking, my Aretaphila is fled; fled like the last age; or faster, like yesterday; and my soul, like a skie- climbing Falcon, sprited as the ayre shee flies in, hath gotten height, and wind, and thinkes to seize her: but oh! shee is heightned into the incomprehensible; shee is lessened into the invisible; shee is greatned to the un-by-any ---fancie---fathomable. Shall we aske Sense what she is? Sense will tell us; her face is the unclouded Welkin in the infancy of day: her eyes the Sunne and Moon that sleepe by turnes, lest they should leave the World in darknesse: her tongue the harmony of Sphears and Nature: her brests Heavens milkie way, spangled with azure Starres: her armes Castor and Pollux : her other parts, because of lower function, are but the Symmetry of all the beauties of her sexe: shee is too much first to have any second; from the third, fourth, and fifth forme of women, from a million, or all of them you may take some piece of her, not all, for she herself is the All. Aske Reason what shee is; Reason will tell you, shee is her Directresse, that shee keeps the elements at peace within us: our fire she confines to religious zeale, and suffers it not to inflame either to lust or superstition: our watry element shee hath design'd to quench unlawfull flames: our sighs to drie our blubbred eyes, when teares have tyred them: our earth like the earth to tread upon, or make no other account of it then of a skin-purse that holds ten thousand pound: the money outed, the purse is laid aside till it bee refill'd by the same treasure. Aske Faith what shee is: Faith that ties us morally to riddles, religiouslly to mysteries; and Faith will tell you, shee hath yours, and mine, & an hundred other souls in one soule: nor doth her soule receive extension: for a soule fils no roome, though shee bee all over the body, and she all over ours; yet none knowes where, nor how. If, with some Philosophers wee will give them but such dimensions, that twenty of them cannot stand upon the point of a needle; then may it follow that two or three thousand of them may bee circumscrib'd (in which compasse I think so many misers soules may) in a locall inch: if they have any dimensions, they may bee circumscrib'd; if circumscrib'd, then followes the unheard-of absurdity, that they are bodies. We are circumscriptive; other Angels definitive: but her, immortall fame hath made ubiquitive, and repletive. There are orders of Angels, the first of higher knowledge, because of nobler function; the knowledge of the second but derived from the first: yet those and these Angels know no more of each other then they are pleas'd to reveale to one another: but shee, first of the first ranke, knowes all of them and us, and wee weakely enlightned, have so much of her, as the watry elements of the Sun, but bare reflection. Some Angels protect Cities, others Countries; but the noblest are Guardians to us frail and mortall men; all these offices were by her undergone on earth; to what high slights of exercise is shee now soared? But I must stoop, and draw neer her into her low estate. Faith tels us she stands one contrary without another: were there, or were there no night: yet were shee an everlasting day. Were there none bad: yet were shee unparalleldly good. Were there any or none to be compar'd to her: yet were she superlative. All of her is an even proportion of extremes. Faith tels us, now she is beyond our apprehension, that shee is nothing, yet all of every thing. But now since she is, let us see what made her this all; she was Wife to Phedimus , a Cyren aean Citizen. As when we see the Eastern Morn shoot his fiery-pointed darts, we say they are the Tipstaves to usher into the World the approaching Snnne; presently we see himselfe attended by his Page, the Day; anon he goes to bed, then it is night: So shall you see the Aretaphila in her glimmering, Wife to Phedimus ; then in the bright of day, Queen and protectresse of the Cyren aeans ; after that her returne to the solitary distaffe: then like a man that hath lost the other eye, I'le bid good night to all the World. Nicocrates the Tyrant having made the sword his Oratour to plead his Title, usurp'd dominion over the Cyren aeans ; among other his bloudy butcheries, hee put to death the innocent Phedimus ; and then forc'd the incomparable Aretaphila to be his Queen. She resenting the publick calamities more then her private injuries, meditates a remedy for both, and by advise of her nearest friends, attempts the poysoning of the King. The Tyrant had an old woman to his mother, named Calbia ; this carcasse, a better name I can hardly afford her outside, was the inside of a Sepulchre; her head was unthatch'd as an old Parsonage; her eyes (like lights at the last snuffe, when the extinguisher is readie to make their Epitaphs) sunk low into their candlesticks; her eares now deaf, now happy (such was her tongue) they have lost their sense; her nose worm'd like a peice of Homer of the first bind, offended with her breath, bowed to her chinne to damme it up; her cheeks hol'd as the earth in dogdayes drouth; her lips fit to bee kissd by none but by themselves; her teeth rotten as her soul, hollow as her heart, loose as the shingles of an old silenc'd steeple, scragged as a disparked pale, stood at that distance one could not bite another; her tongue so weakly guarded, scolds like the alarm of a clock; her chin was down'd with a China beard of twenty haires; her brest lanke as a quicksand, wasted as an hour-glasse at the eleventh use; one arme, one legge, one foot shee doff'd with day, and as a resurrection, dond with the morrow; her bones (pithlesse as a Stallion for seven Posterities) the slightest feares might now make rattle in her skinne; her body (wasted to no waste, blasted with lust as an Oak with lightning) was as familiar with diseases, as a Physician: to conclude; she is odious beyond all comparison: one sight of her would make the heat of youth recoile into an infant continence. Yet she maintaines two Painters  & three Apothecaries to maintain this old-old uglinesse, as the rare thing shee hath been these fourscore yeares in getting. But I have too long, like a Sexton, convers'd with rottennesse. She was Calbia , and in that, her soule was a wel acquainted with sin as a Confessor: shee was Nicocrates Mother, and in that name she carried to the faire and vertuous Aretaphila , the envy of age, the wormwood of a mother-in-law; a word that is the originall that signifies all that is ill in the sexe: yet for the reliefe of some few particulars, read it like Hebrew, and it yeelds something that is good. This Calbia discovers the poison-plot. Then, as eagerly as my young Master in the Countrey fastens on the red-Deere-pie (tougher then Drakes biskets that went round the world, hoary as Methusalem ) entaild by his Grandsire to the house for ever; shee seizes the faire Aretaphila into her tallons, more griping then poverty it selfe; nails that scratch like the law, and are as good a cure for the itch as the Goale for theeves; her she brings to the rack, there intending, after confession, with most subtle tortures to let out her life. Oh, that Love in his Olympiads should bee drown'd in those faire eyes! those eyes, more eloquent then all Rhetorick, that would raise an Anchoret from his grave, and turne the Fiend Fury into the Cherubin Pity , that those eyes should be of no other use then to vent sorrow to inexorable ears! that those white and red roses (which no rain but what fell from those heavenly eies) could colour or sweeten, should wither in their prime! those lips that staine the rubies, and make the roses blush! those lips that command the scarlet- coloured morn into a cloud to hide his shame, should kisse a mercilesse and sinew-sundring rack! that breath which makes us all Cham aelions should bee wasted into unregarded sighs! that those brests eternally chast, and white as the Alps; those legs, columnes of the fairest Parian marble, columnes that support this monument of all pens, should bee stretch'd into anatomies! that her body that would call a soule from heaven into it, should bee mangled like one that hath hang'd in chaines these three years! that her skin, smooth as the face of youth, soft as a bed of violets, white as the queen of innocence, sweet as the bean-blossomes after raine; that that skin, the casket of that body, the karkanet of that soul, should be jag'd and torne with that remorselesse pitie we commonly bestow upon a scare-crow! After long racking, when Calbia saw shee could rack no confession; then when more torment would have been a reliefe; she was taken down from the rack, and her body was pinn'd, as an unwelcome courtesie, upon her soule. Thus noble and pious guilt is twin- brother, and carries the same face with innocence: so was she spirited, that those tortures could scarce trie her patience, lesse her truth; and though Calbia was not fully possess'd of any course to put her to death; yet had shee cruelty enough to doe worse then kill her to make a cause. But, Aretaphila , though her Countries liberty, and her owne honour lifted higher then the flatteries of life, or feare of death; resolv'd in spite of cruelty or fate, to live whilst shee had offred Nicocrates and Calbia to her oppress'd Countries rage: therefore the second time she was brought to the rack, when fearing she should be sacrific'd to Calbia , not Calbia to Cyren aea , to calm Nicocrates , shee thus bespake him: Great Sir, when you were pleas'd to list my humble fortunes up to those glories that willingly engage a womans pride; when by kind fate, and kinder Nicocrates , I was snatch'd from base private arms, to the embraces of a Prince: were these cheeks dy'd into ingratitude and crueltie to make them lovely? can your brest harbour such a thought; that this brest which you were pleas'd to think worthy to harbour yours, can swell with those two monsters abandon'd by the most infamous of our sexe? But since (such is my hard fortune) I am reduc'd to that misery as to defend mine innocence; hear me Nicocrates ; not that I beg life; for I scorne to stoop (now I am suspected) so low as to take it honourably. This potion (which the comments of envie interpreted a poyson) is a confection, not of Cantharides for thy lust: but of all those ingredients that may strengthen vertuous love. This true innocence had no designe upon thy life, which (oh thou all- seeing Skie witnesse) I value as much above mine owne, as mine honour above mine enemy: but fearing lest like a needle betweene two loadstarres, the stronger might attract thee; and my unworthinesse (how happy am I in it since it pleads mine innocence!) might betray me to a worthyer Love; I devis'd this potion to make thy love lasting as mine, which else would soon consume, fed with such withred fewell as this poore declining face; this face that can boast nothing but her sorrow, which (since deriv'd from you) is most welcome to these eyes, and is receiv'd as your Embassadour, into this heartlesse heart. Oh let these tears for ever drown these eyes! oh let this sorrow sacrifice this innocent heart in all her glory to the great Nicocrates ! oh let Aretaphila , the Aretaphila that is (since she)--- There (though no tongue could praise her but her owne) the Tyrant impatient (such oratory have teares in a faire face) to heare more, tearing his haire, his rage too hastie to be silent; hee express'd as much spleen to Calbia , as shee to Aretaphila . What furies (said hee) fled from their black region have possest thy blacker soule (fit to lend rage to all the horrid haggs of Tartarie ) to act a deed, which, oh you Heavens! can you behold without raine and thunder, your combin'd sorrow  & rage? can you rend the clouds which are but the suck'd up vapours of the earth; and not her that takes in all the poysonous sin of hell to fortifie her wickednesse? Accurs'd fury! curs'd from the cradle to the tombe, curs'd above all that ever Heaven and Earth yet curs'd! May all the sins of me, my Name, and House returne into thy venom'd soule, till they have press'd it into the low despaire of nere- below-repenting sinners. Then in his fury, too great for more words; he had rack'd his Mother Calbia ; had not the vertuous Aretaphila stepp'd in betweene him and his revenge. Nicocrates now gladly possest of her innocence, endeavours by studied favours to raze out all the injuries imprinted on her body and her soule: but shee like an Anvile, too much heated by the last blowes to coole suddenly; meditates upon another, and more safe way for the Tyrants death. She had a Daughter, every way exactly perfect, for she was Daughter to Aretaphila . The Tyrant had a brother called Leander ; you have already all that commends him; hee was an haire-braind, wild-headed, unrein'd young man; one whom lust or ambition might flatter into the most desperate attempts. Aretaphila wrought so far with the King, that a match between her Hero -Daughter and the young Leander was by his consent concluded; her shee counsels to insinuate into her Husbands rashnesse, and perswade him (and oh what will not this pestiferous night-geare doe!) to besiege his brothers Crown. Leander not contented with the Kingdome hee enjoyd in her; thought now nothing lesse then to raise himselfe as high as his ambition, brib'd his Swiz---servant Diapheries , who in the first nick of opportunitie murthred Nicocrates . Whither do these crowns and scepters, the worlds magnalia , but indeed the balls of Fortune, hurrie thee, fond Leander ? thou hast not kill'd the Tyrant for the Countrey: but slaine thy brother for the Crowne. Through how many restlesse nights, and lesse restlesse thoughts do we encounter these sweet-bitter joyes: and as the more we graspe the water into our hands, the lesse wee hold: so is content the farther from us, the more we seeke it in these fading glories of the World; which like an ignis fatuus , first lights us through wild untrodden pathes unto themselves; then through vaste ayrie thoughts they lead us up to that precipice, from whence we fall, and there they leave us. Aretaphila could not appease her revenge till she had pluck'd up the Tyrant by the roots. First shee incenc'd the Citizens against Leander , the Traitour to his Prince, the parricide of his Countrey, the fratricide, and lastly the muderer of her Husband. They with one consent adjudged him to bee sowed up into a sack, and cast into the sea. Then judgement proceeded to Calbia , whom they condemned to the fire, and shee was burnt alive. Diapheries not worth naming, and therefore I think not worth hanging, the Storie mentions not his punishment. The Cyren aeans now prostrate their lives and fortunes to the devotion of Aretaphila , that was owner of them both; they offer her divine honours, and beseech her to take further protection of the Countrey. But she who to doe her Countrey service, could subdue her thoughts to be a Queen; can fall from that height, to rise above all Crowns, into her owne content; she shaking off those glorious loades of State, retired from all the crowding tumults of the Court, into a solitary and truely happy countrey-condition; there to spinne out her thread of life at her homely distaffe: where we will leave her a veryer wonder then the Phoenix in the Desart, the alone Paragon of all peerlesse perfections. Her actions (so above the criticisme of my purblind judgement) I am not able to comprehend, much lesse contradict, or controvert. I am silent, lest you should passe that censure upon me for her; which Famianus Strada did upon Horace for Plautus ; that my judgement is judicium sine judicio . FINIS. her body, and that dispos'd to serve, not rule her better part. It is as Nature left it, neglectfull, not negligent; neat, not stretch'd upon the tenterhookes of quaintnesse of dresse or garbe; with Nature it decaies, with Mechanick art the ruines are not repaired. Her soule is her heaven in which she enjoyes  aeternall harmony: her conscience is her Sanctuary, whither, when shee is wounded, she flies for refuge. Her affections and passions, in constant calme, neither flow nor ebb with Fortune; her hope is not screwd up to ambition, nor her fear dejected to despaire. Her joy is confin'd to smiles, her sorrow to teares. Prosperity is the type of what shee shall bee; Adversity, her rowling yron that smoothes her way to Paradise. Outward happinesse she owes not to her Starres, but her Vertue that rules her Stars. If shee bee lash'd by Fortune, it is but like a Toppe, not to bee set up, but kept upright. Religion, not Pride or weaknesse makes her chast. She understands not the common conceit of love, nor entertaines that familiarity with man that hee may hope it. Flattery, the inseparable companion of Love, she scorns, though she cannot flatter her selfe. If Love enter her breast, it is in the most noble way directed to the beauty, neerest the most perfect beauty. If shee marry, it is onely to propagate; the very act tending thereto shee singles from the thought of sinne. Vertue is the reward of her Vertue; her soule is not so servile, as to be tyed by the hope of happinese, or fear of miserie to bee what she is: but is cleerly satisfied for doing well, that she doth well. Shee is temperate, that her soule may still be Soveraigne of her sense. Shee entertains pitie as an attribute of the Divinitie, not of her sex. Shee is wise, because vertuous. She is valiant: for her conscience is ungall'd, and can endure the sharpest touch of tongue. If shee bee inwrapped in the straight that shee may sinne, shee relies upon the highest Providence, which forbids her to use a remedie worse then the evill.
