 of his Verses was, That they were all good, especially his Epitaph on Prince Henry , save that they smelled too much of the Schools, and were not after the Fancy of the Times : For a Child (says he) may write after the Fashion of the Greek and Latin Verses in running; yet, that he wished for pleasing the King, that Piece of Forth Feasting had been his own. As Ben Johnson has been very liberal of his Censures on all his Co- temporaries, so our Author does not spare him: For (he says) Ben Johnson was a great Lover and Praiser of himself, a Contemner and Scorner of others, given rather to lose a Friend than a Jest; jealous ef every Word and Action of those about him, especially after Drink, which is one of the Elements in which he lived; a Dissembler of the Parts which reign in him; a Bragger of some Good that he wanted, thinketh nothing well done, but what either he himself or some of his Friends have said or done; He is passionately kind and angry, careless either to gain or keep; vindicive, but if he be well answered, at himself; interprets best Sayings and Deeds often to the worst. He was for any Religion, as being versed in both; oppressed with Fancy, which bath over-mastered his Reason, a general Disease in many Poets. His Inventions are smooth and easy, but above all he excelleth in a Translation. When his Play of the Silent Woman was first acted, there were found Verses after on the Stage against him, concluding, That that Play was well named the Silent Woman, because there was never one Man to say Plaudite to it . Mr. Drummond gave the following Character of several Authors. The Authors I have seen (faith he) on the Subject of Love, are the Earl of Surrey , Sir Thomas Wyat , (whom, because of their Antiquity, I will not match with our better Times) Sidney, Daniel, Drayton and Spencer . He who writeth the Art of English Poesy praiseth much Rawleigh and Dyer ; but their Works are so few that are come to my Hands, I cannot well say any thing of them. The last we have are Sir William Alexander and Shakespear , who have lately published their Works. Constable faith, some have written excellently, and Murray with others, I know, hath done well, if they could be brought to publish their Works: But of Secrets who can soundly judge? The best and most exquisite Poet of this Subject, by Consent of the whole Senate of Poets, is Petrarch. S. W. R. in an Epitaph on Sidney , calleth him our English Petrarch ; and Daniel regrates he was not a Petrarch , though his Delia be a Laura : So Sidney , in his Ast. and Stell telleth of Petrarch, Tou that pure Pettarch long deceast Wooes with new- born Sighs . The French have also set him before them, as a Paragon; whereof we still find, that those of our English Poets who have approach'd nearest to him are the most exquisite on this Subject. When I say, approach him, I mean not in following his Invention, but in forging as good; and when one Matter cometh to them all at once, who quintessenceth it in the finest Substance. Among our English Poets, Petrarch is imitated, nay surpast in some Things, in Matter and Manner: In Matter, none approach him to Sidney , who hath Songs and Sonnats in Matter intermingled: In Manner, the nearest I find to him, is W. Alexander ; who, insisting in these same Steps, hath Sextains, Madrigals and Songs, Echoes and Equivoques, which he hath not; whereby, as the one hath surpast him in Matter, so the other in Manner of Writting, or Form. This one Thing which is followed by the Italians , as of Sanazarius and others, is, That none celebrateth their Mistress after her Death, which Ronsard hath imitated: After which Two, next (methinks) followeth Daniel , for Sweetness in Ryming Second to none. Drayton seemeth rather to have loved his Muse than his Mistress; by, I know not what artificial Similes , this sheweth well his Mind, but not the Passion. As to that which Spencer calleth his Amorelli , I am not of their Opinion, who think them his; for they are so childish, that it were not well to give them so honourable a Father. Donne among the Anacreontick Lyricks, is Second to none, and far from all Second; But as Anacreon doth not approach Callimachus , tho' he excels in his own kind, nor Horace to Vir-gil; no more can I be brought to think him to excel either Alexander's or Sidney's Verses: They can hardly be compared together, trading diverse Paths; the one flying swift, but low; the other, like the Eagle, surpassing the Clouds. I think, if he would, he might easily be the best Epigrammatist we have found in English ; of which I have not yet seen any come near the Ancients. Compare Song, Marry and Love ,  &c. with Tasso's Stanzas against Beauty ; one shall hardly know who hath the best. Drayton's Polyolbion , is one of the smoothest Poems I have seen in English , Poetical and well prosecuted; there are some Pieces in him, I dare compare with the best Transmarine Poems. The 7th Song pleaseth me much. The 12th is excellent. The 13th also: The Discourse of Hunting , passeth with any Poet. And
