 of friends either to an ambitious and mercenary, or ignorantly zealous Divinity; Some assur'd to the trade of Law, grounding their purposes not on the prudent, and heavenly contemplation of justice and equity which was never taught them; but on the promising and pleasing thoughts of litigious terms, fat contentions, and flowing sees; others betake them to State affairs, with souls so unprincipl'd in vertue, and true generous breeding, that flattery, and court shifts and tyrannous aphorismes appear to them the highest points of wisdom; instilling their barren hearts with a conscientious slavery, if, as I rather think, it be not fain'd. Others lastly of a more delicious and airie spirit, retire themselves knowing no better, to the enjoyments of ease and luxury, living out their dates in feast and jollity, which indeed is the wisest and the safest course of all these, unlesse they were with more integrity undertak'n. And these are the errours, and these are the fruits of mispending our prime youth at the Schools and Universities as we do, either in learning meere words or such things chiefly, as were better unlearnt. I shall detain you now no longer in the demonstration of what we should not doe, but strait conduct ye to a hillside, where I will point ye out the right path of a vertuous and noble Education; laborious indeed at the first ascent, but else so smooth, so green, so full of goodly prospect, and melodious sounds on every side, that the harp of Orpbeus was not more charming. I doubt not but ye shall have more adoe to drive our dullest and laziest youth, our stocks and stubbs from the infinite desire of such a happy nurture, then we have now to hale and drag our choisest and hopefullest wits to that asinine feast of sowthistles and brambles which is commonly set before them, as all the food and entertainment of their tenderest and most docible age. I call therefore a compleate and generous Education that which fits a man to perform justly, skilfully and magnanimously all the offices both private and publike of peace and war. And how all this may be done between twelve, and one and twenty, lesse time then is now bestow'd in pure trifling at Grammar and Sophistry , is to be thus order'd. First to finde out a spatious house and ground about it fit for an Academy , and big enough to lodge a hundred and fifty persons, whereof twenty or thereabout may be attendants, all under the government of one, who shall be thought of desert sufficient, and ability either to doe all, or wisely to direct, and oversee it done. This place should be at once both. School and University, not needing a remove to any other house of Schollership, except it be some peculiar Colledge of Law, or Physick, where they mean to be practitionets; but as for those generall studies which take up all our time from Lilly to the commencing, as they term it, Master of Art, it should be absolute. After this pattern, as many edifices may be converted to this use, as shall be needfull in every City throughout this land, which would tend much to the encrease of learning and civility every where. This number, lesse or more thus collected, to the convenience of a foot company, or interchangeably two troops of cavalry, should divide their daies work into three parts, as it lies orderly. Their studies, their exercise, and their diet. For their studies, First they should begin with the chief and necessary rules of some good Grammar, either that now us'd, or any better: and while this is doing, their speech is to be fashion'd to a distinct and cleer pronuntiation, as neer as may be to the Italian , especially in the vowels. For we Englishmen being farre northerly, doe not open our mouthes in the cold air, wide enough to grace a Southern tongue; but are observ'd by all other nations to speak exceeding close and inward: So that to smatter Latin with an english mouth, is as ill a hearing as law French. Next to make them expert in the usefullest points of grammar, and withall to season them, and win them early to the love of vertue and true labour, ere any flattering seducement, or vain principle seise them wandering, some easie and delightfull book of Education would be read to them; whereof the Greeks have store as Cebes, Plutarch , and other Socratic discourses. But in Latin we have none of classic authoritie extant, except the two or three first books of Quintilian, and some select peeces elsewhere. But here the main skill and ground work will be, to temper them such lectures and explanations upon every opportunity, as may lead and draw them in willing obedience, enflam'd with the study of learning, and the admiration of vertue, stirr'd up with high hopes of living to be brave men, and worthy patriots, dear to God, and famous to all ages. That they may despite and scorn all their childish, and ill taught qualities, to delight in manly, and liberall exercises which he who hath the Art, and proper eloquence to catch them with, what with mild and effectuall perswasions, and what with the intimation of some fear, if need be, but chiefly by his own example, might in a short space gain them to an incredible diligence and courage: infusing into their young brests such an ingenuous and noble ardor, as would not fail to make many of them renowned and matchlesse men. At the same time, some other hour of the day, might be taught them the rules of Arithmetick, and soon after the elements of Geometry even playing, as the old manner was. After evening repast, till bed time their thoughts will be best taken up in the easie grounds of Religion, and the story of Scripture. The next step would be to the Authors of Agriculture, Cato, Varro , and Columella , for the matter is most easie, and if the language be difficult, so much the better, it is not a difficultie above their yeers. And here will be an occasion of inciting and inabling them hereafter to improve the tillage of their country, to recover the bad soil, and to remedy the wast that is made of good: for this was one of Hercules praises. Ere halfe these Authors be read, which will soon be with plying hard, and dayly, they cannot choose but be masters of any ordinary prose. So that it will be then seasonable for them to learn in any modern Author, the use of the Globes, and all the maps first with the old names, and then with the new: or they might be then capable to read any compendious method of naturall Philosophy. And at the same time might be entring into the Greek tongue, after the same manner as was before prescrib'd in the Latin; whereby the difficulties of Grammar being soon overcome, all the Historicall Physiology of Aristotle and Theophrastus are open before them, and as I may say, under contribution. The like accesse will be to Vitruvius, to Senecas naturall questions, to Mela, Celsus, Pliny , or Solinus . And having thus past the principles of Arithmetic, Geometry, Astronomy , and Geography with a generall compact of Physicks, they may descend in Mathematicks to the instrumentall science of Trigonometry , and from thence to Fortification, Architecturt , Enginry, or navigation. And in naturall Philosophy they may proceed leisurly from the History of Meteors , minerals, plants and living creatures, as farre as Anatomy. Then also in course might be read to them out of some not tedious writer the institution of Physick, that they may know the tempers, the humors, the seasons, and how to manage a crudity: which he who can wisely and timely doe, is not onely a great Physician to himselfe, and to his friends, but also may at some time or other, save an Army by this frugall, and expencelesse meanes only; and not let the healthy and stout bodies of young men rot away under him for want of this discipline; which is a great pitty, and no lesse a shame to the commander. To set forward all these proceedings in nature  & mathematicks, what hinders, but that they may procure, as oft as shall be needfull, the helpfull experiences of Hunters, fowlers, Fishermen, Shepherds, Gardeners, Apothecaries ; and in the other sciences, Architects Engineers, Mariners, Anatomists ; who doubtlesse would be ready some for reward, and some to favour such a hopefull Seminary. And this will give them such areall tincture of naturall knowledge, as they shall never forget, but dayly augment with delight. Then also those Poets which are now counted most hard, will be both facil and pleasant, Orpbeus, Hesiod, Theocritus, Aratus, Nicander, Oppian, Dionysius and in Latin Lucretius, Manilius , and the rurall part of Virgil. By this time, yeers and good generall precepts will have furnisht them more distinctly with that act of reason which in Ethics is call'd Proatresis : that they may with some judgement contemplat upon morall good and evill. Then will be requir'd a speciall reinforcement of constant and sound endoctrinating to set them right and firm, instructing them more amply in the knowledge of vertue and the hatred of vice: while their young and pliant affections are led through all the morall works of Plato, Xenophon, Cicero, Plutarch, Laertius , and those Locrian remnants; but still to be reduc't in their nightward studies wherewith they close the dayes work, under the determinat sentence of David , or Salomon , or the Evangels and Apostolic scriptures. Being perfit in the knowledge of personall duty, they may then begin the study of Economics. And either now, or before this, they may have easily learnt at any odde hour the Italian tongue. And soon after, but with warinesse, and good antidote, it would be wholsome anough to let them tast some choise comedies Greek, Latin, or Italian : Those tragedies also that treate of houshold matters, as Trachinie, Alcestis and the like. The next remove must be to the study of Politics ; to know the beginning, end, and reasons of politicall societies; that they may not in a dangerous fit of the common-wealth be such poor, shaken, uncertain reeds, of such a tottering conscience, as many of our great counsellers have lately shewn themselves, but stedfast pillars of the State. After this they are to dive into the grounds of law, and legall justice; deliver'd first, and with best warrant by Moses ; and as farre as humane prudence can be trusted, in those extoll'd remains of Grecian Law- givers, Iycurgus, Solan, Zaleucus, charondas , and thence to all the Romane Edicts and tables with their Iustinian ; and so down to the Saxon and common, laws of England, and the Statutes. Sundayes also and every evening may be now understandingly spent in the highest matters of Theology , and Church History ancient and modern: and ere this time the: Hebrew tongue at a set hour might have been gain'd, that the Scriptures may be now read in their own originall, whereto it would be no impossibility to adde the Chaldey , and the Syrian dialect. When all these employments are well conquer'd, then will the choise Histories, heroic poems , and Attic tragedies of statliest, and most regal argument, with all the famous Politicall orations offer themselves; which if they were not only read; but some of them got by memory, and solemnly pronounc't with right accent, and grace, as might be taught, would endue them even with the spirit, and vigor of Demosthenes or Cicere, Euripides , or Sophocles . And now lastly will be the time to read with them those organic arts which in able men to discourse and write perspicuously, elegantly, and according to the fitted stile of lofty, mean, or lowly. Logic therefore so much as is usefull, is to be referr'd to this due place with all her well coucht heads and Topics, until it be time to open her contracted palm into a gracefull and ornate Rhetorick taught out of the rule of Plato, Aristotle, Phalereus, Cicero, Hermogenes, Longinus . To which Poetry would be made subsequent, or indeed rather precedent, as being lesse suttle and fine, but more simple, sensuous and passionate. I mean not here the prosody of a verse, which they could not but have hit on before among; the rudiments of grammar; but that sublime art which in Aristotles Poetics , in Horace , and the Italian commentaries of Castelvetro, Tasso, Mazzoni , and others, teaches what the laws are of a true Epic poem, what of a Dramatic , what of a Lyric , what decorum is, which is the grand master peece to observe. This would make them soon perceive what despicable creatures our common rimers and play writes be, and shew them, what Religious, what glorious and magnificent use might be made of Poetry both in divine and humane things. From hence and not till now will be the right season of forming them to be able writers and composers in every excellent matter, when they shall be thus fraught with an universall insight into things. Or whether they be to speake in Parlament or counsell, honour and attention would be waiting on their lips. There would then also appear in Pulpits other visages, other gestures, and stuffe otherwise wrought then what we now sit under, oft times to as great a triall of our patience as any other that they preach to us. These are the studies wherein our noble and our gentle youth ought to bestow their time in a disciplinary way from twelve to one and twenty; unlesse they rely more upon their ancestors dead, then upon themselves living. In which methodicall course it is so suppos'd they must proceed by the steddy pace of learning onward, as at convenient times for memories sake to retire back into the middle ward, and sometimes into the rear of what they have been taught, untill they have confirm'd, and solidly united the whole body of their perfited knowledge, like the last embattelling of a Romane legion. Now will be worth the seeing what exercises, and what recreations may best agree, and become these studies. The course of study hitherto briefly describ'd, is, what I can guesse by reading, likest to those ancient and famous schools of Pythagoras, Plato, Isocrates, Aristotle and such others, out of which were bred up such a number of renowned Philosophers, orators, Historians, Poets and Princes all over Greece, Italy , and Asia , besides the flourishing studies of Gyrene and Alexandria . But herein it shall exceed them, and supply a defect as great as that which Plato noted in the common wealth of Sparta ; whereas that City train'd up their youth most for warre, and these in their Academies and Lyceum , all for the gown, this institution of breeding which I here delineate, shall be equally good both for Peace and warre. Therefore about an hour and a halfe ere they eat at noon should be allow'd them for exercise and due rest afterwards: But the time for this may be enlarg'd at pleasure, according as their rising in the morning shall be early. The exercise which I commend first, is the exact use of their weapon; to guard and to strike safely with edge, or point; this will keep them healthy, nimble, strong, and well in breath, is also the likeliest meanes to make them grow large, and tall, and to inspire them with a gallant and fearlesse courage, which being temper'd with seasonable lectures and precepts to them of true fortitude, and patience, will turn into a native and heroick valour, and make them hate the cowardise of doing wrong. They must be also practiz'd in all the locks and gripes of wrastling, wherein English men were wont to excell, as need may often be in fight to tugge, to grapple, and to close. And this perhaps will be anough, wherein to prove and heat their single strength. The interim of unsweating themselves regularly, and convenient rest before meat may both with profit and delight be taken up in recreating and composing their travail'd spirits with the solemn and divine harmonies of musick heard, or learnt; otherwhile the skilfull Organist plies his grave and fancied descant, in lofty fugues, or the whole Symphony with artfull and unimaginable touches adorn and grace the well studied cords of some choise composer; some times the Lute, or soft organ stop Waiting on elegant voices either to Religious, martiall, or civill ditties; which if wise men  & prophets be not extreamly out, have a great power over dispositions and manners, to smooth and make them gentle from ruslick harshnesse and distemper'd passions. The like also would not be unexpedient after meat to assist and cherish nature in her first concoction, and send their mindes backe to study in good tune and satisfaction. Where having follow'd it close under vigilant eyes till about two hours before supper, they are by a sudden alarum or watch word, to be call'd out to their military motions, under skie or covert, according to the season, as was the Romane wont; first on foot, then as their age permits, on horse back, to all the art of cavalry; That having in sport, but with much exactnesse, and dayly muster, serv'd out the rudiments of their Souldiership in all the skill of embattailing, marching, encamping, fortifying, beseiging and battering, with all the helps of ancient and modern stratagems, Tactiks and warlike maxims, they may as it were out of a loag warre come forth renowned and perfect Commanders in the service of their country. They would not then, if they were trusted with fair and hopefull armies, suffer them for want of just and wise discipline to shed away from about them like sick feathers, though they be never so oft suppli'd: they would not suffer their empty  & unrecrutible Colonells of twenty men in a company, to quaffe out, or convay into secret hoards, the wages of a delusive list, and a miserable remnant: yet in the mean while to be overmaster'd with a score or two of drunkards, the only souldiery left about them, or else to comply with all rapines and violences no certainly, if they knew ought of that knowledge that belongs to good men or good governours, they would not suffer these things. But to return to our own institute, besides these constant exercises at home, there is another opportunity of gaining experience to be won from pleasure it selfe abroad; In those vernal seasons of the yeer, when the air is calm and pleasant, it were an injury and sullennesse against nature not to go out, and see her riches, and partake in her rejoycing with heaven and earth. I should not therefore be a perswader to them of studying much then, after two or three yeer that they have well laid their grounds, but to ride out in companies with prudent and staid guides, to all the quarters of the land: learning and observing all places of strength, all commodities of building and of soil, for towns and tillage, harbours and Ports for trade. Somtimes taking sea as farre as to our Navy, to learn there also what they can in the practicall knowledge of sailing and of sea fight. These waves would trie all their peculiar gifts of nature and if there were any secret excellence among them, would fetch it out, and give it fair opportunities to advance it selfe by, which could not but mightily redound
