 that moved in that incomparable Compasse. His making the end of one Verse to be the frequent beginning of the other (besides the Art of the Trope) was the labour and delight of Mr . Edmund Specer, whom Sir Walt. Raleigh and S. Kenelm Dig. by were used to call the English Virgill, and indeed Virgill himself did often use it, and in my opinion with a greater grace, making the last word only of his Verse to be the beginning of the Verse following, as \---Sequitur pulcherrimus Astur Astur equo sidens, & versicoloribus arms. Virgill hath nothing more usuall than this gracefull way of repetition, as those who are most conversant with him, can readily witnesse with me. Our Authors making use of one and the same Verse in several places is also taken from Virgill, as you shall often find in his Georgicks, which he would never have let passe (being full twelve years in the compleating of that work) if he had conceived it would have bin looked upon as an imperfection either of two much Haste or Sloth, and this also is often to be found in Homer. You behold now how many, and what great Examples our Author hath propounded to himself to imitate, if it be objected, that it is a disparagement to imitate any, be they never so excelent (according to that of Horace) O imitatorum slultum pecus; It is no absurdity to make answer, that Horace wrote that in a criticall hour, when he abounded with a hypercrytical sense, for if you please to look upon the Fragments of those Greek Poets, which in many books are inserted at the end of Pindar, you shall undoubtedly find that Horace hath translated as much of them as are now extant word for word, and put them into the first book of his Odes, which is very easie in this place to be represented, but that it is much beyond our room, and little besides our subiect. But more fully to satisfie the obiection, it may be answered, that in this Horace had no relation at all to the words or fancy of the Imitator, but to these new numbers, and measures, which he first taught the Roman Muse to tread, and this makes him so much to magnifie himself . Libera per vacuum posui vestigia princeps. The works of Virgill are nothing else but mere Imitations: in his Eclogues he followeth Theocritus, in hi Æneids, Homer, in his Georgicks he imitateth Hesiod, which he conceiveth to be so far from his prejudice, that he esteemeth it his glory . Ascr aeumq; cano Romana per oppida  1 carmen. And yet because the same subiect was not treated on before by any Latine Poet, you may observe how confident he is of himself : \---Iuvat ire viam qu a nulla priorum  2 Castaliam molli deducitur orbita clivo. These prolibations may serve not only to discharge our Author, but to raise him above those accusations which peradventure some distemper'd Criticks might have charged him with. The other part of his invention is intirely his own, smooth yet smart, and as clear as it is active! Now when all this shall be done at nineteen years of age, and out of a desire onely to please you, what entertainment should you give unto it? with what flowers should you crown his memory, who brought for many flowers to crown your delight? Take them and peruse them, his leaves invite every hand to turn them over; The young men may read them for their Information, and with some sympathy of affection, The old men for their Recreation, The Ladies may learn them by heart, and repeat them to one another, for this the Muses, upon their credit, have given me in charge to impart unto them, That whatsoever they shall lay forth on his praises (the Book read over) they will finde it paid back to them in the reckoning. R. C. 
