 This Success of Columbus sounded by the Trump of Fame awakened the sloathful and incredulous World, who before would believe nothing possible but what their eyes could behold, or their outward senses fathom: The World thus awakened, and having wiped their eyes with the Gold of COLUMBINA, saw more clearly their former Errors: Now the Golden-Age returns again Gold is exchanged for trifles, such as Knives, Hatchets,  &c. which were valued at six times their weight in Gold; and Pearls, and Diamonds bear but an equal value with glass: But this lasted not long; for immediately such multitudes of Ships lanched out with expectations of gain, that they soon exhausted the discovered Mines, and reduced it almost to an equal value with that of Europe. Ferme omnes sceleratus amor nunc urget Habendi. What crouding to the West! with what cunning do they catch and enclose the Wind, from what corner soever it comes, and make it serve their purpose! What prying is now into the private recesses of Thetis! Never was more rapes committed upon the Virgin-Rivers than in this age. Heu crescit Scelerata sitis, nullusve petendi, Cogendive pudor--- \---Quid non Mortalia pectora cogit Auri Sacra fames. Several Discoveries was made, so that none lost their labour; and since that time many places have been discovered, and yet there remains above a fourth part undiscovered; this gave me encouragement to take upon me this Adventure, though not without great trouble and care, such as the want of many Necessaries for my self and Seamen, which were much afflicted with a desperate Sickness, that did deprive me of most of them; but I accidentally met with a vessel that lent me some of her men, which gave me greater encouragement to proceed in my Discovery, which Divine Providence did bless with success; for in four days after I came out of Fretum le Mair, I discovered the Land, which in the following Treatise I give you a relation of. I do not doubt but this Discovery will be beneficial to Europe many ways; first as it may encourage several others to proceed in the like Adventures which may happily find out other Lands, and likewise these particular Islands may be beneficial, they being very fruitful, not over peopled; abounding with many rich Mines, besides Pearls and precious Stones, with many other rich Commodities. The Inhabitants are a people very humane, witty, and intelligent, ready to receive any Instructions, and may be easily brought to Traffick. If you accept of this my pains in the Discovery and Relation, I shall think my time well bestowed, and may possibly by your acceptance be encouraged to make a second Adventure, in the mean time Amsterdam October 30\. 1671. I rest your Friend Henry Schooten. A Voyage from Amsterdam into the Southern Sea. the Flying-Faulcon: The Design of our Voyage being wholly Discovery. We made way to the Southern Sea; the twentieth of August following we came to the Streights of Magalan; and on the twenty sixth we had a sight of Terra del Fuega, by which we Coasted three or four days, and then left; passing through Fretum le Mair into the Main-Ocean called Mare del Zur: on the sixth of September following we took an Observation, and found our selves in the Latitude of fifty degrees fourteen minutes. The Wind at East and by South; we sailed directly before the Wind; and on the tenth of September in the Evening we discovered Fire, an assured testimony of some Land: but early in the Morning we were better confirmed in our belief, being in sight of the very Land, and within a mile or thereabouts of it: we Coasted along several days, and could spy no Towns or Houses, but discovered many good Ports and Promontaries. On the thirtieth of September we discovered another piece of Land separate from this by a River or Fretum, a League and half in breadth. We still continued our Discovery by Coasting along this Land likewise. About the Eighteenth of November following we came to the other end of the Fretum before discovered, by which we knew it to be an Island that we had discovered, and by computation Judg both the Islands to be in Compass about three hundred Leagues: we ventured into this Fretum, and at our entrance, I gave it the name of Fretum del Schooten. As we passed along we could discover on the Banks, People of an extraordinary size, and hairy: Having sailed about seven Leagues we discovered a River running Eastward up into the first Island; into this River we ventured, and having sailed about a mile, we discovered a Town (as we supposed by the great quantity of Smoak that ascended from thence); at length drawing nearer to it we espied Houses, or rather Hills as they seemed to us by their Grass-Coverings; before this Town we cast Anchor, and made an Observation, and found our selves in the Latitude of fifty Degrees thirteen Minutes, South; and the Longitude Two hundred seventy five Degrees thirty Minutes. We had not rid at Anchor above three hours before we could espy a Canoo coming over to us from the Town; the reason of which we could not well apprehend; at length drawing near to us, we espied in it an European, as his Complexion and Habit did show; he had in his hand a shattered torn Jack-flag, in which we might discover something of the Portugal Arms: Being come to the Ship-side, he saluted us with these words, Dios vos guarda hermanos; which in the Portuguese language signifies, God save you my Brethren: I then returned his Salutation in his own language, saying, Sea bien veni do Hermano, Welcome Brother; and invited him into the Ship: which Invitation he willingly accepted, and came into the Ship; our Seamen would have taken the men in the Canoo into the Ship, but he would not suffer them, telling us they were Slaves, and ought not to be so much Countenanced: We took this Portuguese into the great Cabin, and gave him the best Entertainment our Ship could afford; after three or four hours stay in our Ship, he took his leave, and gave us an Invitation to his House, which he told us was in that Town we saw; and promised likewise to send Canoo's for the whole Ship's Company, which he accordingly performed in the Morning following. The Natives that Rowed in the Canoo's were all hairy, having no other Cloathing than what Nature had furnished them withall; and the least of them by computation above Eleven foot high; by these Gygantick men, we were safely conducted to the Town, which consisted of about a thousand Houses, built of Timber, and covered over the top with Boughs of Trees wreathed together; and over them were placed very curiously Greensads, which make their Houses look like so many Hills covered with Grass. At length we were Conducted to this Portuguese House, who it seems was Governour of this Town, and Cacique, or King of that part of the Country: His House was built after the same manner with the rest, but much bigger. At the Entrance to his House he received us with a great deal of Expressions of Joy, and conducted us into a very fair Room, where we were plentifully entertained with roasted Venison, and Wine in abundance Having pretty well satisfied our selves, he discoursed with us concerning our Adventures, and related to us the manner of his Adventures, since his coming from Lisbon, after this manner. The Adventures of Vasques de Pagna, from the year 1646, to November 1670; as it was related by himself to Henry Schooten. hundred forty-six, upon the same account that you did from Amsterdam, and by accident made this Island: being curious in the Discovery, I first Coasted about the two Islands, and then put into the Fretum, that parts the two Islands; and observing this River that runs up into the Country, I ventured into it; resolving to venture so far till I could see either Houses or Inhabitants; but by the neglect of my Mate, not being careful enough in sounding the Channel, my Ship unfortunately struck upon a Sand, and split in a very short time, giving us little space to shift for our lives; in this streight every Man endeavouring to save himself, my self with two more got safe to the Shore; but of the rest of our Company I never could hear of since, and therefore conclude they were all drowned. We sought about for shelter from the Cold and Rain, it being about the time of the Winter-Solstice, at which time it is rather Colder than it is with you in Europe. At length we found a large hollow Tree, into which we entred, and slept for that night. The next Morning as soon as we could see, we went to the Water-side to see whether any thing was driven a shore, or floated near to Land; when we came there we espied several pieces of our Ship floating about; and walking along by the shore we found a Barrel of Bisket, and near to that our Jack-Flag, both which we took up and went away very joyfully towards our Arbour, where we secured them, and gave thanks to God for his great mercy in making such Provision for us: Upon this Bisket we lived about three Months, and spent our time in Prayers, and walking the Grounds near to the Tree, retreating upon the least noise to our Harbour: In the second Month one of my Companions fell sick and died, and at three Months end my other Companion. Now was I left in a miserable Condition, my Company dead, and my Victuals almost spent; but however I comforted my self with these thoughts, that the same God that hitherto had so plentifully provided for me, would still take care of me; I now resolved to travel up farther into the Country, and if there were any Inhabitants (for as yet I had seen none) to commit my self to their mercy; being thus resolved, I thought to leave some Memorial behind me, that if it should happen that any European should light upon this place, they might know what Adventure I had made; I therefore took the Jack-Flag, and with a black-lead Pencil writ these Words as plain as I could, Vasques de Pagna of Lisbon was here; and then secured it in a convenient place in the Tree, where it might be secure from the injuries of weather. Then I took the remainder of the Bisket, and desired God to prosper my Journey, and travelled into the Country. In two days travel I discovered hairy people, such as you see; at first I was something fearful of them, but my fear was soon taken away, for I found them to be more fearful of me, admiring at my Clothes and Complexion; and were ready to adore me. Walking a little further, I could espy, as it were, a grove of Hills which were their Houses, whose pleasant Verdure was very delightful; being come near to the Town, I was surrounded with hundreds of these Hairy- people, admiring me, and making offers to adore me, supposing I was a god; but I did what I could to hinder them. At length it came to the King's ear, who came himself with several Priests to visit me, and made signs to me to let them know what I was; first lifting up their eyes to Heaven, and then pointing to me, and then to the Heavens again; but I let them understand by the like signs, that I did not come immediately from Heaven, but hoped to go thither; and this I did by first pointing to the Earth from whence I came, and to the Heavens whether I hoped to go. With which they were well satisfied, and conducted me to the Caciques House (for so they call their Kings): The Cacique telling his Priest (as I have been since informed by his Daughter my Wife) that I was of Coelestial Extract, and fit for no Company but the Gods and Kings. At this Palace I fared very well; and having very small hopes of returning to my Country, or seeing any of Europe, I thought it my best way to assure my self of a Being amongst them, and this I did by ingratiating my self with the Cacique's Daughter, whom I found very ready to receive any kindness from me; her Father likewise casting a pleasant aspect on both, did give me encouragement to make some offers of Amours, which was kindly received, and we in a short time married according to the Custom of the Countrey; of which with their other Rites and Customs, I shall give you a full account hereafter. Being married, he gave me Two hundred Slaves, and bid me chuse out a place in the Island to inhabit, and build a Town that might be called by my Name. Having taken my leave, I with my Wife and Slaves with store of all sorts of Provision, came towards this place, which I the rather made choice of, because it was the place I formerly had taken possession of; likewise hoping, that being near to this River, some European might at some time or other happen to sail into it, as I had done. A Continuation of the Relation, with the manner of the Portuguese treating us. us the hollow Tree they first lodged in, which stands at the entrance to his House, painted with a sort of red Paint, like to our Oker, but much brighter colour; with which Commodity that part of the Countrey doth much abound: Then he carried us, and shewed us the places where he formerly had buried his Companions, over whose Bodies he had caused to be erected Pyramids, covered with Moss, and curiously checkered with Boughs of Trees woven together crosswise. Having done this, he carried us into a stately large Room, whose Wall instead of Tapistry was bedeck't with Flowers and growing Moss, and checker'd with Boughs after the manner of the Pyramids before mentioned); on the upper end of which, on a Seat or Bank, sate his Lady with Four Children; his Lady was near Twelve Foot high, his Eldest Son, about Twenty years of age, was more than Twelve foot; his Second Son about Sixteen years of age, above Ten foot; his two Daughters, younger, one was Nine foot, and the other Seven foot in heighth. But that which was most remarkable, was, that his Second Son and Eldest Daughter were smooth as, we are, and yet retained the Nature of the Countrey as to height. Being pretty well satisfied with our entertainment and diversions, we desired his leave to return to our ship, but he would not grant it, telling us that we should lye there that night; and then conducted us into another large Room, wherein was Hammocks provided for us to lye upon; here he treated us again with two or three Movyles of Wine, (which Movyle contained about a Gallon); having drank up our Wine, he bid us good-night, and left us to our repose. Next morning as soon as Sun was up, he came to us, and asked us how we slept, and called for a Movyle of Wine for our Morning's-draught, and caused likewise some Venison to be brought to us, with which having broke our fast, he carried us to see his Town, and the Church which he had built. He told us, at his first coming to this place he was both King and Priest. And that he had converted his Wife, and had baptized her and all the inhabitants of the place, being all as his domestick Servants but since, the people encreasing, he had constituted other Priests. After this discourse in the Church, we returned to his House, where he gave order for a Dinner to be provided for us, in the mean time he entertained us with a farther relation of the Government and Customs of this Island in these words following. Of the Government, Religion, and Customs of the Inhabitants: With the nature of the Soil, and the several Commodities of the Island Benganga. this thousand years by the Family of Gangois, of which Family my Father-in- law is; who is called by the name of Conumbro Bengangois: his chief seat is Cubugnello, the Town where I was Entertained and Married. He is the Absolute Monarch of the Island, and hath Fourty petty Kings that live about him, that do Homage, and pay Tribute to him yearly. They worship in all parts of this Island, except mine, the Devil, who appears to them very often in a misty cloud, uttering or mumbling out some words concerning his will; which if they do not punctually perform, some great misfortune happens, either to them or their Children soon after. They believe that they that live well here, and do no man any injury, and obey the Laws of the Cacique, they shall enjoy much happiness after death, in pleasant fields, behind the Hills. At three times of the year they offer Sacrifices to their Dieu (as they call him) who appears in a Cloud upon a high Mountain all the time of their Sacrificing; and these Sacrifices are sometimes Goats, and sometime Children. Their manner of Marriage is in this manner: The Parents of both parties being first agreed, the Father of the Maid brings out his Daughter to the Young-man, and they immediately upon the first sight declare to their Parents their liking or refusal of each other; if they declare their liking, the Father of the Damosel in the presence of one of their Fritazeers, or Priests, gives his Daughter to the Young-man, and with her gives her Dowry, which is one or more Servants, according to his ability and their former agreement; after this the Fritazeer offers a Sacrifice to the Dieu, and the Marriage is celebrated. They are here allowed to have but one Wife; and if either die, they are not permitted to marry again: Both Men and Women here are very chast and temperate in meat and drink: Their Women are not so fruitful as in Europe, it being a rare thing for one to see four Children in a Family. Theft and Murder are here severely punished with cruel Tortures unto death; so that a stranger may safely travel in this Island without fear of harm, except it be from Bears which lurk in the Woods, with which this Island is well stored. The Commodities of this Island are Saunders, Palm-trees, Konock a sort of paint, Cassanack a kind of Pults of which they make their bread; great plenty of Goats and Deer, Fowl of several sorts, Fish in abundance, Otters and Beevers good store. Here are also several Gold and Silver Mines, but they are not much regarded by the Inhabitants, they adorning themselves more with Pearl and Amber, with which this Country is well stored. Their Drink is Palm-Wine, which they make after this manner: They bore a hole in the tree, and put into the hole a hollow Cane, and at the end of the tap they hang a vessel to catch the liquor: in an hours time if the Tree be any thing large, there will run out a gallon; this liquor is fit to drink presently, and is very pleasant and spiritous, intoxicating the brain, as soon as the most generous Wine in Europe; here are several acres of ground yearly planted with these Trees, which serve for the use aforesaid. They have here a certain Tree which they call Cocotonuch, of the Bark of which they weave a Cloth which serves them for Hammocks and Mantles which they use in the Winter time; it being full as cold, or colder about June as it is in Europe in December. The people here by reason of their Temperance and Chastity live longer than they do in Europe; the generality of them living till they are a Hundred and twenty, or a Hundred and fifty years of age: The like reason might be given for their extraordinary stature. The Women here are very comely, and well featured; their faces indifferently smooth, but the Men are so rough and hairy in the face, that they look like so many Island-shocks. Thus having given you an account of the Country in general, I shall give a particular account of my own Jurisdiction. A Discourse of the Government of Terra de Pagna, the particular Jurisdiction of the Portuguese Vasques de Pagna. Pagna after my own name. My Government and Laws are of two sorts, after the manner of the Europeans, viz. Ecclesiastical and Civil: My eldest Son I have made Judg in all Civil matters; and my second Son in Ecclesiastical: The Ten Commandments is the rule of our Government; the Lords Prayer and Creed the rule and foundation of our Devotion: These things I have taught them in their own language, and they have them so imprinted in their memory, that I think there is no person in my bounds that is above ten years of age, but will readily repeat them. The Limits of my Jurisdiction is ten Leagues round from the River. In it are four Towns near so big as this, governed by Deputies. A Continuation of the Relation. which we was conducted: were was a noble Entertainment, with Venison of several sorts, Fowl plenty, and Wine in abundance; his Lady and Children honouring us with their Company. During our sitting at Dinner, his Lady who had learnt to speak Portuguese, made several Enquiries of us concerning Portugal and Europe; asking us if Europe was as big as this World she lived in? We told her, That this place was as small in comparison of Europe as this Town was to the whole Island of Benganga. After this manner we discoursed, till night drawing near, put us in mind of going to our Ship; we therefore earnestly desired leave to depart, which the Governour very unwillingly granted, but made us promise that (if God would permit) we would return again, or at least acquaint the European World with this place, and more especially his own Country; desiring them to send over some Religious men to assist him in planting the Gospel amongst these miserably deluded people. Thus we took our leave, and came to our Ship, where we reposed for that night, and the next morning weighed Anchor and hoised our Sails, and departed, saluting the Town with all our Guns, which we suppose put the Natives into some fright, not being acquainted vvith those noises. As we passed along the Fretum we espied some few hairy men of the same stature with those of Benganga. Passing by a great Marsh, where there was no danger of Ambush, we ventured ashore, and struck down our Ancient in token of possession, giving it the name of Coma, by reason of the Hairy Inhabitants. Having done this, we came again to our Ship, and in Ten Months time arrived at Amsterdam sufficiently satisfied with our Discovery. This is a true Relation of our Voyage and Discovery. Henry Schooten. Master. Cornelius Groot. Mate.
