 The First Part . were therefore the more surpriz'd at his Fall. She had rais'd him to the highest Dignities of Her Kingdom; and he continued then General of Her Army in Ireland , against the Earl of Tyrone , who had rais'd a Rebellion there. His Endeavours to divert his Misfortune were vain; and after an obstinate Resistance, he was brought up to London , and confin'd to his House. The Services he had done the State by his Valour, were very considerable; but the Favours the Queens Goodness had heaped on him, proceeded from a more secret Cause, and more pressing Motives. Had the Earl of Essex never signaliz'd himself by the Glory of his Actions, the Kindness She had for him would have made Her distinguish him from the rest of Her Subjects: And 'tis certain, Her Affection had made him Her Favourite, before he could pretend to it in the least by his Services. She was highly Renowned above the Women of Her Time, for Courage, and Strength of Mind; yet too Weak, to be Proof against the Impressions of Love. She had a passionate Tenderness for the unfortunate Criminal; which was his Advocate, and defended him from the Severity of Justice; and was so far from taking pleasure in a publick Revenge of him, that She abhorred in Her Heart, those cruel Maxims that crost Her Inclinations. She kept Her Bed to prevent publick Discovery of a Trouble it was not in Her Power to hide: And admitting of no Company, but the Countess of Nottingham , (Her intimate Confident) She gave Vent to Her Tears, and freely lamented the Misfortune that threatned the Repose of Her Life. The Countess had a little suspected the Queens Inclinations; and thought her self obliged by powerful Reasons, to find out the Misery. But this being a tender Point, and having to deal with a Princess naturally of a very high Spirit, the Countess was silent. But the Queens Grief was too violent, to continue long Mute: Her Sighs confirm'd the Suspicions of the Countess ; and Her repeating in Her Trouble, the Earl of Essex's Name, convinc'd the Countess of the Truth of what till then she had but slightly fancy'd. The Countess had that Command of her self, she easily conceal'd her Concern in the Adventure; and appearing only sensible of the Trouble of the Queen , she us'd all the Art she had to comfort Her; and fail'd not to put Her in mind, how serviceable on that occasion Her Vertue might be to Her, which had already made Her the Wonder of the World. Ah, Madam! ( says the Queen, interrupting her ) You do not yet know Me. The Force I have long put upon My Self, hath made you think, with the rest of the World, That the Heighth of my Spirit, hath raised Me above the Infirmities of Nature; and the Greatness of my Thoughts, secur'd Me from the Troubles of Life. But, Alas! poor Elizabeth is a Slave to Her Weakness; and hath all this while but sacrificed to Reputation, all the Quiet of Her Soul, and Happiness of Her Days. 'Tis high time, Madam, to reveal the Misery. My Heart, Madam, is sensible and susceptible of the deepest Impressions: And what I have, in appearance, condemn'd most, is perhaps the only thing has most Power over Me. The Earl of Essex is no less Famous for the Victory gain'd over My Heart, than for his Treasons against Me: And I, who have maintain'd the Freedom of My Soul, and preserv'd the Liberty of My Affection, from submitting to the Efforts of all the Princes of Europe , and the Greatest of My Subjects, have now the Misfortune to find my Inclinations violently sway'd in Favour of a Person, as Ungrateful as Faithless. You know what I have done to Raise him; nor can you be ignorant, how ill he hath Requited Me by his Crimes. A Man, who being Governour of Ireland , General of my Army, in quiet Possession of the best Offices of My Kingdom, and Master of My Affection; yet could not forbear Conspiring against that Authority. I was but too much inclin'd to Give him a Share of; and perhaps, against a Life I took no other Pleasure in, but the Opportunities I had by it, to make His Happy---  It was not in the Queens Power to say a word more: And the Countess , more than ordinarily concern'd at the Discourse, grew so much the more Curious; and pretending to Comfort the Queen , Engag'd her dextrously to a further Discovery. No, Madam, ( replyes the Queen) There's no Hope of Comfort for Me, if the Earl of Essex Dye. By the Condition you see his Imprisonment hath put Me in, you may guess what I am like to be Reduced to by his Death. His Crimes I Abhor, but am in Love with his Person; and find, that as I have been so Weak to let him know it, I shall again be so Weak to Pardon him all. You do not know his Carriage towards Me. And perhaps, My Affection will as easily find Excuses for his Ingratitude, as it did for My Kindness. I will give you the Relation of it; but Conjure you to Reproach Me so plainly with the Shame I expose My Self to, that I may at last prevail with My Self, to abandon the Ingratefullest of Men, to the Rigour of his Fate. what the Earl of Essex stands concern'd in. I will pass by the Obstacles rais'd against My Establishment; and tell you only, I quickly gain'd Possession of the Throne, was Ador'd of My People, and Happy beyond the Hopes of a Person of My Sex. But Elevation is not always attended with the Pleasure of Life; and that smooth Gale of Felicity and Repose in the beginning of My Reign, quickly blew over, at least in My Opinion. Being settled in My Government, I found My Court throng'd with Suitors of Sovereign Grandeur, striving to merit the Choice it was in My Power (at once) to make of a Husband , and a King: The Earls of Somerset, Leicester, Arundel , and Heriford , had most Right to pretend to it. But finding My Self disturbed by their Importunities in My most serious Affairs, and not at all inclin'd to entertain their Suits; I formally declar'd to them, I design'd to Live single; and endeavoured to make them amends by considerable Imployments, and Allyances I bestow'd on them. Three of them openly quitted the Hopes they had conceived: Only the Earl of Leicester , more Ambitious, (or more Constant) than the rest, kept a foot his Pretensions, and publickly continued his Services: But it was not ordain'd, his Perseverance should be Crown'd with the Reward of My Affection. The Earl of Essex having signaliz'd himself against the rebellious Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland , made about this Time his first Appearance at Court ; and found with more ease the Secret to please Me. Those who presented him to Me, spoke much in Commendation of him. And I was too much an Eye-witness of the Merit of his Person. I look'd upon him, as an Extraordinary Man. Nor could I but think it equally Extraordinary, to find My Self so strangely affected with him at the first Sight. The Reception I gave him, was very Obliging; and the Acknowledgements he made Me, were full of Respect: So that, for the time, I saw no Cause to check My Inclination. I may Date from this first View, the loss of my Repose. I presently fell into a Disquiet I had till then been altogether a Stranger to: And in spite of My high Spirit, I could not but inwardly acknowledge the Cause. And all the Efforts of My haughty Humour against it, serv'd. only to make the Triumph of the Earl of Essex more Glorious. You would better comprehend the Condition I was in, did you know the Resentments of a Great Soul, jealous of its Reputation, in Extremities of this Nature; the Combats it undergoes, and the Confusion that attends the Defence. I fear'd My Eyes would discover the Pleasure I took, in Looking on the Earl of Essex , and My Weakness occasion Discourses in the World, to the Prejudice of My Glory. I shun'd the Sight of him; but to little purpose, when I carry'd the Idea of him in My Heart. I was angry with My Self for it, and summon'd My Reason to My Assistance, to deface it: But Love had so violently seiz'd My Heart, that I struggled in vain to dispossess him. By little and little, I yielded My Self Captive to that Powerful Inclination, which had at first sight made Me so much in Love with the Person of the Earl of Essex: And pretending the Services he had done Me against the Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland , and the Memory I had of the Good Services of his Father, as the ground of My Favour, I made him Knight of the Garter, Master of the Horse , and of the Privy-Council , though under Age. Thus did I Cherish and Indulge the Weakness I had so long struggled with, and condemn'd My Self for. The higher he grew in Office, the nearer he was to My Person. His Complaisance, his Respect, his Looks, (which to Me appear'd all Kind and Languishing) and especially My Affection, which had Tenderness enough, to give a favourable Construction to the least of his Actions, conspir'd to Betray Me. Envy rais'd him Enemies: The Earl of Leicester (concern'd to be Jealous of him) quickly suspected the Truth. And looking on the Earl of Essex , as a Person of Merit, capable to cross his Pretensions, he made it his business to Supplant him; which I presently observ'd. I easily fore-saw the Trouble My Favour might cause between Persons so Considerable: And the better to countenance the Kindness I had for Essex , I affected a little Complaisance for Leicester , which somewhat abated the Edge of his Jealousie. About that Time, the King of Swede , the Emperour for his Son, and the Duke of Anjou , made Me their several Proposals of Marriage, which I was forc'd to Receive; but wanted not Pretences to send Home their Ambassadors, without any Fruit of their Negotiation. How contrary to the real Motive of My Actions, were the Interpretations Men made of My Refusal of Marriage with these Princes! It redounded much to My Honour; My Glory was increas'd by it, and the World admir'd My Contempt of Love , even then when My Soul was wholly possest by it. The Aversion I exprest for Forreign Allyances, rais'd the Hopes of the Earl of Leicester ; and Essex seem'd over-joyed at it: Not (said he, as I heard afterwards) but that the Queen is Discreet in all Her Actions; and Her Choice, had She made One, had been Decent and Just: But that I think Her so fit to Reign alone, that I could not without extream Trouble, see Her share Her Authority with a Husband, who perhaps would in time be Her Master . The Construction I made of the Earl of Essex's Zeal, was suitable to My Affection, and the Desire I had of gaining his Heart; which I wish'd so passionately, that I fancy'd it done; and that the pretended Severity, that made Me slight Kings , was the only thing that frightned his Respect; and that he had declar'd his Love to Me, could he have thought he durst presume to do it. The Duke of Alanson (not discourag'd by My refusal of his Brother) began soon after to make Addresses for himself; and it was not in My Power, to deny My Consent for his Voyage to London . But what Advantages soever he pleaded in his Favour, certain it is, the Earl of Essex lost not any he had gain'd over Me. The Stay of that Prince in England , fortify'd the Earl's Interest: He was constantly at My Elbow. When the Duke of Alanson spoke to Me, methought I read Reproaches against My Self, in the Earl of Essex's Eyes. The Earl of Leicester watched Me as carefully; though not with equal Regard from Me. I rais'd so many Difficulties against the Duke of Alanson's Design, that he was forc'd to desist: And I rid My Hands of his Person, and his Suit, without giving him Cause of Complaint. You know, that after the Death of the Queen of Scots , the King of Spain (who still makes himself indispensibly subject to a Necessity of Opposing Me) entred into a League with the Pope , against Me. And having fill'd the World with Injurious Declarations against My Right to the Crown, they joyn'd all their Forces, to pull it off My Head. The Spaniards made themselves, on the sudden, Masters of Daventer: The Duke of Parma laid Siege to Sluys . It was high time to provide for Defence; and the Earl of Leicester was sent away with all the Nobility of the Kingdom, in the Head of a numerous Army. The Earl of Essex was one of the first to follow him: And as strongly inclin'd as I was to stay him, yet I thought, the Man I lov'd, ought not to be Idle, when he had Opportunity by Glorious Actions, to merit the Kindness I had for him. I will not spend time, in giving you a Relation of a War, which perhaps you are sufficiently inform'd of, and concerns not the Secrets of My Life. It tended to Our Advantage; all (to the very Winds) having favour'd Our Side. When the Generals of the Army arriv'd at London , I was carry'd in Triumph to St. Pauls: Yet the Joy I had to see the Earl of Essex , was greater than that for the signal Victory obtain'd. Amongst an infinite number of Persons of several Ranks, My Eyes were fixt only on him: And much ado I had, sometimes, out of Policy, to cast a Look on the Earl of Leicester . Both of them had done very Great Actions: I commended them publickly; and particularly, joy'd the Earl of Essex , for the Success of his Valor and Conduct; who spoke so much in Praise of the Valor and Conduct of the Earl of Leicester , that he was forc'd in requital, to do him Right, in giving him openly the Elogies he deserv'd. Not long after this Expedition, the Earl of Essex fell into a very deep Melancholy. I was the first that perceiv'd it; and took it for an Effect of some secret Passion. I wish'd now and then, he would once take the Boldness to declare himself; but presently My Reason, upon Second Thoughts , set before My Eyes the Confusiion would certainly follow an Explication of that Nature to the Ruin of My Reputation, and that high Esteem the World had for Me: Yet (to speak Truth) I could not resolve what to do, or to wish. I am in Love; I desir'd to be lov'd again; and that was all I could make of it. The Earl of Essex , in the meantime, continued Sad: I was troubled to see him so; and fancying My Self the cause, I was desirous to know it; and resolved to fetch it out of him. He had full Liberty of Access to Me; and I enlarg'd it dayly: But not to Expose My Reputation in forcing him to declare himself, I pretended an Inclination to Favour the Earl of Leicester ; who since his late Victories, had entertain'd New Hopes. One Day, as the Earl of Essex came to thank Me for the Government of Ireland I had bestow'd on him, I was loth to lose the Opportunity; and, interrupting what he would have said in Ackuowleddgment: You need not enlarge your self (said I) on a thing, I am fully assur'd of. I take Pleasure in Raising your Fortune; and wish I could as easily remove your Melancholy, as I am pleas'd to give a New Proof of the Sense I have of your Service. You may, in your Turn, oblige Me (added I) who am fallen into a Troublesom Conjuncture, and find it very difficult to reduce My Affections into a Complyance with the Necessity of the State. This presses me hard to provide England a King: This Choice is difficult; and I have not a Mind to make it among Forreigners. You are Discreet, and (I have Reason to believe) not the least Loving of My Subjects. I will take your Advice; speak your Mind freely, what Man in England you think best deserves this Fortune . I look't on him with that Kindness, as would have inspir'd the most Feareful with Boldness: I observed in his Eyes extraordinary Emotions, and all the Symptoms of a Secret ready to break out. The Point appear'd Tender, and My Imagination flatter'd Me, all would be as I wish'd. Your Majesties Resolution (answers he) will render a Man more Glorious by the Quality of Your Husband, than of the Greatest Monarch on Earth. Remember (said I) I expect not a Panegyrick, hut Advice from You: And that your Business, at present, is to Nominate the Man I am to Make King; not to Commend his Good Fortune, in being so. The Business is so nice, Madam , (replyes he) I dare not Speak my Mind, though Your Majesty order it. Did you know (said I) what moves Me to this Confidence in you, you would perhaps express your self with a great deal more Freedom. But because, to bring you to it, I must proceed further; tell Me, Whether you think the Earl of Leicester deserves to be your Prince? The Earl of Leicester (answers he) is Well- Born, and a Person of Great Merit, and will answer the Honour your Majesty intends him. Is that all you have to say to Me? said I. Ah Madam ! (answers he with a Sigh, which made Me expect something more Pleasing) I should have more to say to you for my Self, then the Ears of Leicester. What hinders you? (said I.) The respect I have for Your Majesty , answered he. I am in Love, Madam; but 'tis not a thing fitting, to make my Queen my Confident . I Blush'd at those Words, and was in a mind not to proceed further. But I look't upon him; and there needed no more to declare My Weakness: I have that Esteem from you (added I) that I am not unwilling to be of your Councel. Well, Madam, since you will have it so (continues he) I must acquaint You, I am desperately in Love with the Countess of Rutland; and that I cannot Live, if your Majesty consent not, that she shall make me happy . You may easily guess what an Astonishment I was in at this Explication; having, upon so good Grounds, expected to have heard My Self named. It was well for Me, I had not altogether lost the Haughtiness of My Nature: The poor Remains of it were My only Help to preserve Me from discovering more Weakness to the Earl , than he had discover'd Love for his Mistress. His Transports help'd Me to cover Mine: He perceiv'd not the Blow he had given Me. And sacrificing My Grief to My Glory, I affected to appear calm and unconcern'd, when My Soul was full of Trouble and Confusion. You have made a good Choice (said I) and the Countess of Rutland will very well deserve the Kindness you profess for her. Madam (replyes he, with Satisfaction in his Looks, which heightned My Grief) You have done more for me, in approving the Passion I have for the Countess of Rutland, than You could have done, had You procur'd Me the Empire of the Universe. It is your Desire then (added I, with a Sigh My Despair forc'd from Me) that I should give her to you. I desire any thing (says he) that may preserve me from dying for Love of her. Go your way then (said I, to be rid of him, and ease My Self of the intolerable Constraint I was under) Be assur'd, I will concern My Self in your Amour: You shall know it in time. But take heed you give not the Earl of Leicester the least intimation of the Secret I have imparted to you. Not before I have Order from Your Majesty (answer'd he) to congratulate his Happiness, and pay him the Devoirs of an Affectionate Subject . Had you seen with what an Ayr he pronounced these words, you would have abhorr'd him for his Ingratitude. As for Me, I was left in so desperate a Condition, it was long e're I could recover My Reason out of the Entanglements of Love, Anger , and Jealousie . I was partly the Author of My Misfortune, by calling to Court the Countess of Rutland , after her Husband's Death, without considering she was one of the handsomest Ladies on Earth; and but Sixteen Years old. I had not observed any particular Kindness the Earl of Essex had for her: He visited her as other Ladies of the Court . But their Intrigue was mysterious; and the more secretly it was carry'd, the Engagement was the stronger, and the Affection more tender. It is impossible to express the Trouble I was in, when Anger seiz'd the Place Grief had possest in my Heart. Though the Earl of Essex had been ignorant of his good Fortune, I could not forbear reproaching him for slighting it as he did; and forgot not to charge him with Treachery and Ingratitude. But when I consider'd he was so far from apprehending My meaning, that he was gone directly to make a solemn Tender of his Love to another, and carry her the joyful News of his Success with Me; I resolved, at least, to delay the Pleasure of it for a time; and went out of My Closet into My Chamber, to call him back. I thought I heard the Earl of Leicester's Voice, and his, in the Anti-Chamber ; and going to the Door, found I was not mistaken. Leicester's Jealousie, had, in all probability, made him watch Essex as he entred my Chamber; and when he saw him return with Satisfaction in his Looks: You are happy (says he) in a Priviledge, to entertain the Queen as long as you please; when others, who as passionately desire it, cannot obtain that Happiness for a moment. I am perswaded (replyes Essex) you better deserve it; and make no doubt, but you will find more Pleasure in it. I will leave you at liberty to go in Search of it; and you may do me a Favour, not to stay me, being call'd another way, on a very pressing Occasion . He had no sooner said so, but he went his way; and I was so confounded with this new Sight, I scarce knew where I stood. Having at length recover'd My Reason, I had the Discretion to hide My Weakness. Presently My Anger would have vented it self on the Countess of Rutland: But I consider'd, her only Crime was her Beauty; and that she knew not My Concern for her Servant. The Earl of Leicester having at his entrance perceiv'd Me in Disorder, durst not take notice of it; but after a short Visit, withdrew. A little before, I had sent to Congratulate the King of Navar , upon his coming to the Crown of France ; and having Intelligence he wanted Aid to secure his Government, I resolved to send him some under the Conduct of the Earl of Essex , in hopes his Absence might Cure Me. I would have perswaded My Self, the Cause of my removing him on that Occasion, was My Desire to forget him: But upon second Thoughts, I must confess, it was rather the Desire of removing him out of the Sight of a beloved Rival. Being resolved on the Point, I hastned the Execution; and having ordered the Earl of Essex to attend Me: You love Honour (said I to him) and I cannot think, you will prefer the Pleasure of Sighing before a Mistriss, to the Opportunities of acquiring Glory: I have provided One for you; and am resolv'd, you shall Command the Troops I am sending to the French King. And to fortifie your self against the Troubles of Absence, you need only think of the Pleasures of a Return . His Answer was only in Sighs; and that passionate Language made Me hasten his Departure. Soon after, the Countess of Rutland (whom I could not forbear using very coldly) desir'd leave to go into the Countrey, a considerable distance from London . I had then so little Love for her, I did not desire to have her near Me; but readily consented she should retire. The Hopes she had to see the Earl of Essex return, supported her so, that she, with much moderation, saw him take his leave: But I am assur'd by Experience, the Grief for his Departure, equall'd (at least) the Hopes of his Return. When he was Arriv'd in France , Fame spoke aloud in Commendation of him: His Absence alter'd not My Affection; and, in spite of all I could do to the contrary, I had a sensible Pleasure to hear him commended. Had I been desir'd, I should have call'd him Home as soon as France was in Peace: But I sent him new Orders to joyn Admiral Howard , who was going for Spain: And I gave him the like Commission for this Expedition, as for that of France . He did Wonders in Spain: His single Valour frightned the Enemies. And having taken Cales , and pillag'd the Coast of Portugal , he put again to Sea for England . The Fleet was scattered by a Storm, and We had News the Earl of Essex was lost. Then it was, I knew better than ever, the Kindness I had for him. I could no longer perswade My Self, that his Indifference for Me deserv'd Mine for him. I accus'd the Sea a Thousand times, for having taken too unreasonable a Revenge for Me; and was under Sufferings more cruel than Death, when News was brought Me, that by the Assistance of the Admiral of Holland , he was Arriv'd at Plymouth ; from whence, in few days, he came to Court . To shew you how little Reason we have, when we are in Love, and how fickle are the Resolutions of a tender Heart, though provoked by Slights and Contempts: I had lamented the Death of the Earl of Essex , and receiv'd the News of his being Alive with a thousand Transports of Joy. I was extreamly pleas'd with the Report of his Arrival at London . But when I consider'd I should see him full of Love for another, and that perhaps I should not be able to conceal My Jealousie, I was tempted to order him to give the Council an Account of his Conduct, and not admit him into My Presence. I was sometimes of the Opinion, I should be able to do so: But this weak Heart of Mine, so prepossest in favour of him, revolted against all My Resolutions. I must follow My Inclinations, and see the most dangerous Enemy of My Repose, the Troubler of My Rest. He came to Whitehall: I admitted him to My Presence: I lookt upon him; and, spite of all My high Spirit, he saw nothing but Kindness in all My Actions. You may imagine, what an agreeable Surprize it was to Me, to find at our first Conference, that Absence had wean'd his Affections from the Countess of Rutland . He appear'd no longer in that Langushing Melancholy I observ'd him in, before his Departure: He had Satisfaction in his Looks: The Air of his Actions were Smooth and Calm. And I fancy'd as much Joy in his Face, (though the Countess of Rutland was Absent) as I felt in My Self at the Explication he made. I see you again return'd with Victory , (said I:) But am sorry, it is not in My Power to reward your last with a Sight of the Countess of Rutland. But if any thing I can do, can comfort you ---I am easily Comforted for her Absence, when I am permitted to see Your Majesty , (answer'd he.) I have no Passion now, but for the Glory of Serving Your Majesty; and the Countess of Rutland is now to me, no more than other Ladies of the Court. Are you not longer in Love with the Countess of Rutland? (replyed I, between Joy and Distrust.) You have spoken too fast. When you see her again.--- When I see her again (sayes he, interrupting Me) it shall be without those Transports I exprest for her, not forgetting the Respects due to your Majesty. What , (answered I) are you not afraid of the Reproaches of a provoked Mistriss? No Madam (said he, in a free and unconcern'd manner:) All I am concern'd for, is to do my Duty, and approve My Self worthy your Majesties Favour. This (answer'd I) deserves My Acknowledgment; and time shall let You see, I am not ungrateful . Thus did the Earl of Essex assure Me, he was Cur'd of his first passion: And I was in Hopes, it might be in My power, to see him one Day entertain another. A Week after, he desir'd Leave to go into the Country about his Private Affairs: He was absent a Fortnight; and return'd more calm, and unconcern'd, than ever. The Earl of Leicester had doubled his Importunities, in the Absence of the Earl of Essex in France and Spain ; and obliged Me, at last, to put him out of Hopes. He is naturally Bold; and was so blown up with the Opinion of the Glory he had gain'd by some Late Atchievments, that he proceeded to telling Me plainly, He was Jealous of the Earl of Essex: And would have made a Crime of the Discourse I told you of, past between them, as Essex left My Chamber. The Answer I made him, was an Absolute Command, He should be Silent: Which was so far obey'd, that after some dayes Murmuring, he held his Peace. Yet this put Me in mind to observe some measures, and not to follow openly My Inclinations. Things continued in this State, till the Troubles of Ireland . I have often open'd My Mouth, to let the Earl of Essex know the Advantages he had over Me; but Modesty shut it again: Yet seeing him under a Necessity of going for Ireland , when the Earl of Tyrone had rais'd a General Rebellion, I had not the power to let him take Leave, without acquainting him, The Kingdom was at his Command . Upon the first News of the Troubles, he threw himself at my Feet, begging the Honour of My Command to go Quiet those Disorders. You have done enough , (said I) and there's no need you should (by exposing your self to New Dangers) oblige Me to New Acknowledgments. I doubt not, Madam , (answer'd he) but the Favour I beg of Your Majesty, will be envy'd me: But I take the Boldness to say, Your Majesty cannot refuse it me, without doing your self Injury: It being an Occasion may contribute to my Meriting the Favour you have already Honour'd me with. The Ardour you express for undertaking Great Actions , (replyed I) is not perhaps so Pleasing, as you imagine: And all the Good that may Redound to England though your Valour, is less Considerable, than the Trouble is given Me, who take less Care of My Crown, than your Life. I am Ambitious: Yet--- Ah! My Lord, Save Me the Confusion of a more particular Explication of what you ought and might easily have long since understood. I might perhaps, presume too far in my Wishes , sayes the Earl , in some Disorder. Wish boldly , (answer'd I) I Love you; And if I Blush to tell you so, 'tis not that I am either Asham'd, or Repent of it. You may believe this Acknowledgment a very hard Task for a Person of My Humour, who have seen you Sigh for another; when I slighted Kings for your Sake, and would have Sacrificed more to your Satisfaction . What, Madam! (cryes he, like a man astonisht) Have You lov'd me, and I been so Unfortunate, to make my self unworthy Your Kindness by those Sighs I now disavow? Did My Eyes never tell you what I lookt for in Yours? said I. I never had the Boldness (answer'd he) to make any such Construction of Your Looks. Your Fear was the Effect of Indifference , (said I) But no more of what's past. Tell Me now, Can you love Me? Rather ask me, Madam , (answers he) if all the Affection of my Soul can merit Your Love? And, Whether the Earl of Leicester (whom You design to make the happiest Man on Earth) shall not carry the Day from me? The Earl of Leicester (said I) was but a Pretence to make you speak. I told you then truly, the Thoughts I had of you . My Trouble for you was not small, both in your Absence, and since your Return: But all is forgotten. Be henceforth as I wish, and doubt not of being happy . He answer'd Me with some Disorder, which I fancy'd the Effect of unexpected Joy. I thought it time to be no longer Scrupulous; and that it was in vain to have any Reserves, when I had said so much. I will not let you go under any Uncertainty , (proceeded I) but to convince you clearly of the Truth of what I've said, take This , (said I, delivering him a Ring , as the highest Mark of My Favour) keep it as a Pledge of My Kindness; which I conjure you to preserve in the State it is in: And on that condition, I promise you, never to deny you any thing you shall desire of Me, when you shew Me this Ring , though it cost Me My Life, and My Fortune . His Joy and Acknowledgments at receiving the Ring , were in appearance, extraordinary and unparallel'd; and attended with Promises of as high a nature. He went for Ireland in few days, leaving Me fully perswaded his Thoughts were wholly taken up with Me. But he had scarce Advanc'd up to the Rebels , but he was Charg'd with all the Crimes which occasion'd his Imprisonment, and that of the Earl of Southampton . Then it was, I began to repent I had not given Ear to the wholsom Advice Cecil would have given Me, concerning the secret Conduct of the Earl of Essex . In a word, While My Thoughts were wholly implor'd to make his Fortune glorious, he was plotting with the Earl of Tyrone , to surprize and make Me Prisoner in this Palace. You know the rest, Madam ; His obstinate Resistance, his want of Respect for My Orders, his Imprisoning My Ministers, his Murthering My Souldiers, and his intolerable Pride in all his Misfortunes. Thus ended the Queens Discourse; which having call'd fresh to Her Mind, all that had pass'd between Her and Essex , She was more troubled than ever. The Countess of Nottingham hath heard Her, with Attention suitable to her great Concern, in the Discourse. She, as well as the Queen , had been in Love with the Earl ; and advanc'd many steps, (but in vain) to raise a Passion in him: And having newly understood the cause of his slighting her, it added infinitely to her former Resentment. She had no mind to condemn the Queens Weakness, knowing her self guilty of the like: Nor was she inclin'd to speak in favour of a man, who was grown so much the more odious to her, as she had formerly passionately lov'd him. She thought it sufficient to comfort the Queen with Discourses, that seem'd to proceed only from Zeal for her Service; when, in truth, her Thoughts were wholly bent for the Ruine of an ingrateful Lover; who, in her Judgement, deserv'd nothing but Hatred at her Hands. Though Love thought not fit the Earl of Essex , should admire the Countess of Nottingham ; yet another was her Captive, whose Character did (in a manner) make her amends: It was Secretary Cecil ; who amidst his great Offices, and the Gravity that became them, discover'd in the Beauty, Ingenuity, and high Spirit of the Countess of Nottingham , some Charms, that made him capable of a strong Passion for her; which was heightned by the Hatred both of them had profest against the Earl of Essex; Cecil having always lookt on him as the invincible Obstacle of his ambitious Pretensions: And the Countess had against him, all the Rage and Aversion, that usually succeed Kindness abus'd. They were glad of the Imprisonment of the Earl of Essex ; but the favourable Inclinations the Queen exprest for him, Alarm'd them. The Countess had no sooner taken leave of the Queen , but she gave Cecil an Account of all she had learnt. Having consider'd the Consequences, they concluded it necessary, while their Princess sigh'd secretly for the Prisoner, means should be found by private ways, and an artful Conduct, (without their appearing to have any such Design) to take away the Mercy, which Love might inspire into Her. Cecil , for the first Step, press'd the Queen to bring Essex to his Tryal; and caus'd certain News of his Death, to be spread throughout England . Essex , in the mean time, was busi'd with Thoughts of more weight, than those of his Life. He knew well enough, his Queen lov'd him; and knew as well, he had deceiv'd Her; and that She might with a great deal of Justice, not only Reproach , but Condemn him. The Queen had not seen him since his going into Ireland: But having not the power to give him up to his ill Fortune, without having heard him, She resolv'd to go to his House, (where he was Prisoner) to Reproach him, as he deserv'd; and endeavour, if possible, to find him innocent. It is not far from Whitehall to Essex-House: And the Queen took so good Order in the Matter, that no notice was taken of the Undecency of the Visit; having been introduced by Her Confidents alone into the Chamber of the Criminal. He was surpriz'd at the presence of the Queen: The languishing Condition She was in, made Her sigh. All went for him, and the Victory seem'd easie. He saluted Her with a profound Respect: And then fixing on Her Face, those Eyes of his, which had so often charm'd Her, he fetcht some Tears from Hers. Well, My Lord , (says She, drying them) you see what I do for you, notwithstanding all the Crimes I can reproach you with. I am come to you; and with a design to hear you, if you have any thing to say, to justifie your self. I have lov'd you too well, not to wish it above all things: And, would Heaven were pleas'd, your Justification might be purchas'd with any (the most precious) Thing in My Power. My greatest Crime is, That I thought my self too happy , Madam , replyes the Earl , sighing. Had you rested there , (said the Queen) I should have been too well satisfied, to have complain'd of you. But to believe your self happy, Was it necessary you should betray Me? And, Must you needs have made use of violent Means, to make your self Master of a Fortune I was willing to share with you? What Reason could you have, to seek the Protection of the Kings of Scotland and Spain? Did any Interests oblige you to secret Correspondencies with Tyrone? And, Was it for the Safety of My Person, you design'd to make Me your Slave, and his? All you have done since, to My Subjects, against My Orders; Are those the Expressions of your Respect? Is it by Fury and Treason, you shew your Zeal for Me and the Publick? Or, Is all We have seen and heard of you, but Illusion and Fancy? Yes, Madam , (replyes the Earl) those Accusations of Treason, and ill Designs, have run me upon the desperate Resistance I made. You have been pleas'd to heap Favours upon me; and I (too proud of what I so little deserv'd) flatter'd my self with expectation of a thousand Pleasures, which You had not absolutely forbid me to hope for. This let loose the Envy and Jealousie of others, against my good Fortune: They abus'd Your Majesty with Mis-informations; and I had the Misfortune to be assur'd, Your Majesty had order'd I should be Arrested; though my Innocence would have perswaded me the contrary. I confess , Madam, I was in a Rage, to see my Enemies insult over me; being, abandoned by Your Majesty, and on the point of suffering (perhaps) a shameful Death. I thought it neither for my Reputation, nor Your Majesties Honour, I should die as a Criminal. This put me upon having Recourse to those Succours and Assistances they reproach me with; and the Resolution I took to go out of England, in hope to confound my Accusers. But I found all the Passages stopt: And I must acknowledge, in that desperate Condition, I vented my Fury, by taking Revenge on Your Ministers. They , Madam, and only They, were the Objects of the Rebellion I am charg'd with. My Design was, only they, who had so industriously labour'd to make me appear guilty, should do me Right, in declaring my Innocence; and permit me to lay it, and my Life at Your Majesties Feet. I never doubted, but Your Majesty would have done me the Honour to hear me: And that, by a clear discovery of the Truth, I should have certainly confounded the Envy of my Enemies. But their Malice hath had the Success to see me a Prisoner, hated by my Sovereign, despis'd by the World, and made a Sacrifice to their Rage: And now, What remains, but that I receive the Sentence of my Death pronounc'd by them; and see Cobham, Cecil, Rawleigh, and their Fellows, share the Favours You honour'd me with. You are well assur'd, I hate you not , (says the Queen , interrupting him:) But, Should I believe you? Yet should I not believe you? Can I give you up to the ill Fate that threatens you? I shall never murmure against Your Majesties Orders , (replyes the Earl) but submit to them readily, whatever they be. But, I confess, it would make me mad, should my Enemies have the advantage to condemn me . The Earl of Essex knew the weak Side of the Queen ; and easily reviv'd in Her, that Tenderness he had formerly inspir'd Her with. No , (says She, having paus'd a while) you shall not die: Make use of your Advantages; triumph over a Heart, whose Inclinations you very well know. I will believe your Intentions less criminal than they appear. But, My Lord, I conjure you by that Kindness of which you have such particular experience, That you give Me no Cause to repent of it. Trouble not your self for your Reputation and Honour, I will take care to repair it: And, before two days be over, I will restore you to the highest Place you ever had under Me . Essex , Transported with Joy for the Happy Success of this Conference, affected the Queen so much with Submissive Acknowledgments, that he Restor'd Her Spirits to perfect Tranquility. At parting, She promis'd to Call a Council on the Morrow; and in a Glorious Manner, to Declare him Innocent. As soon as it was Day, She sent for Cecil : and the Countess of Nottingham waited on Her. Having told them, in few words, of a great Conflict past between Her Justice , and Her Mercy , She concluded for the Latter; and Ordered Cecil to Summon the Council , that She might Declare to them, the Design She had to set Essex at Liberty; assuring him, She had Invincible reasons for doing so. This was a Mortal Blow to the Ambitious Cecil , and the Countess of Nottingham . They presently Look't on one another, as if they would have ask'd each others Advice, what Course to be taken: Afterwards, they spoke to the Queen , in hopes to Divert Her; but She was Inflexible: And Cecil was forc'd to order an Extraordinary Call of the Council . But while the Earl of Essex's Enemies thought his Good Fortune on the Point of being Reconcil'd to him, Chance labour'd for them with unexpected Success. As the Queen was going to Council , Word was brought Her, the Countess of Rutland desir'd to wait on Her. The Queen Blush't, remembring what was past: And looking on the Request as Unseasonable and Unlucky, She was minded to have put off the Countess to another Time: But considering, She us'd not to deny any Person Access, and that the Countess of Rutland was a Lady of the best Quality; She Commanded, she should be Admitted; and the Countess immediately came in. Though her Eyes languished, her looks were Sad, her Dress and her Gate very Careless; yet her Beauty was Conspicuous and Moving: She threw her self at the Queens Feet; and with Extremity of Grief in her Looks: Madam , (sayes she, with a great deal of Pain) I come to implore Your Majesties Goodness, for the Unfortunate Earl of Essex. For the Earl of Essex, Madam? (answers the Queen.) How come you Concern'd for him, who hath quitted you with so much Indifference after so many Promises of Extraordinary Kindness? I expect you were rather come to join your Resentment with Mine; and desire Me to take a full Revenge, for the Injury done to your Beauty. No, Madam , (reply'd the Countess) Not the Transports of a Forsaken Mistriss, have brought me now into Your Majesties Presence; but the tender Affection due from a Virtuous Wife, to a Husband she loves: in begging for the Earl of Essex, I beg for Mine. This Confession may perhaps add to our Guilt; but 'tis no Dallying for those, who are on the Brink of Destruction. I acknowledge, Madam, That after a thousand Crosses, we had that Tender Kindness one for the other, we Marryed privatly, contrary to the Respect due to Your Majesty. This, Madam, this ouly, and his Fear of Your Majesties just Indignation, put the Earl of Essex upon seeking Refuge out of Your Dominions: He thought it fit, I should go out of Them; but never harbour'd a Thought of Conspiring against Your Majesty. However this hath Ruin'd us; and if You Protect not an Unfortunate Person, whom You have so much Honour'd, he is Irrecoverably lost. Consider I beseech You, Madam, That a few Drops of Blood at Your Dispose, and a poor Life You are Mistriss of, are not a Revenge suitable to the Grandeur of a Queen, Ador'd for many Vertues; yet chiefly, for Your Clemency . The Queen was so astonish't at the Discourse, that the Countess had full Liberty to end without Interruption. But this was sad News to a Heart lately full of the Delights of a pleasing Reconciliation . What a Torrent of Anger overflowed Her Constancy? A Queen as She was, High Spirited, Haughty, and passionately in Love; to see Her Self thus cruelly Betray'd, and find it out at a time, when a blind Credulity had stifled all former Resentments! Yet She forced Her Self to dissemble Her Grief; and fixing a severe Look on the Countess of Essex: The Life you beg of Me , (sayes She) is not in My Power: The Peers are his Iudges. Ah, Madam ! (cryes the Countess) My Husband is lost, if You give him up to their Fury: Their Jealousie will do that, which Justice cannot. Why should you trouble your self, if he be not Guity? sayes the Queen. Though I am satisfi'd of his Innocence, Madam , (answers the Countess) yet Your Cruel Ministers are not dispos'd to believe it. Let me intreat You, Madam, (if Your Majesty will Grant me no more) You will be pleas'd to allow me the Privilege of being put into the same Prison with him: I am as Criminal as he, and perhaps more. I wish it in My Power, to Grant your Desires , (sayes the Queen) but Common Policy forbids any Correspondence to be allow'd between so Considerable Persons, in your Circumstance. You may (if you please) wait his Fate, and your own, in a Chamber in this Palace. Ah, Madam ! (replyes the Beautiful Countess) Consider the last Favour I beg of You, is, That I may be put into Irons. Can you apprehend we shall Attempt any thing against You, in so deplorable an Estate? This is the Eve of our Greatest Disaster: That Barbarous Justice, to which you absolutely commit the Care of Your Vengeance, will to Morrow perhaps Part us for ever. Deny us not, at least, the Comfort of Mixing our last Tears. What can you fear from a Grief without Power--- I fear being troubled with it; and I will be Obey'd , answers the Angry Queen , and goes away into Her Closet; while the Countess of Essex was carry'd to a Chamber, where she was left under Guard. Never was Fury equal to the Queens : The Madness She was in to see Her Self deceiv'd, made Her for some time forget all Her Tenderness. Her Thoughts were wholly bent on Revenge, and giving up to the Severity of Justice, a guitly Person She had too passionately Lov'd. Death ! (sayes She) shall be the Reward of his Ingratitude; and I will make his Punishment an Example to the Universe . With these Thoughts She came to the Council: When She had Declar'd Her Self, the Peers were nam'd for Trying the Earls of Essex and Southampton . Arm'd as She was with Resolution to do it, She trembled at the doing; and could not forbear mixing some amorous Sighs, with the violent Expressions her Anger forc'd from Her. She withdrew under very great Trouble, and admitted no Visit for several days. 'Tis hard to express, what a pleasing Surprize it was to Cecil , to see the Queen angry, and declare Her Self against Essex , whom he thought Her resolv'd to pardon. He carry'd the News to the Countess of Nottingham ; who was as joyful at it, as a cruel person could be on such an occasion. Yet they could not think all sure, while the Earl of Essex was only Prisoner in his House; from whence his Friends (if minded to do it) might get him out. They concluded, to take the Opportunity of the Queens Anger, to obtain Her Order for putting him into the Tower of London ; which Cecil , under a cloak of Zeal for Her Majesties Service, easily gain'd, and readily executed. The Earl of Essex was generally belov'd; and Cecil fearing Commotions and Tumults, if he should be carry'd through the City, order'd him to be sent to the Tower by Water: Which was accordingly done. The Earl of Essex , not able to guess at the Cause of a Success so unsuitable to the Promises of the Queen , prepar'd himself for the worst that might happen; and in few days, had Resolution enough to bear his Misfortunes. The Queen was as full of Trouble, as Cecil and the Countess of Nottingham were of Hopes, to see their common Enemy condemn'd in few days. The Countess of Essex , having no Comfort but her Tears, nor Company but her Fears, endeavour'd from the pity of her Guards, to have some Intelligence of her Husband's Condition. She was told, His Judges were appointed, and that he was in the Tower: Worse News she could not have. The Queen was irreconcilably angry: Nor could she by Letter, convey with safety to her Husband, the Advice she thought good for him. A Conference she thought better; and Money being a Charm seldom resisted, she did by some Presents of Value, prevail with her Guards to serve her to her Mind. Having fully possest them, she neither design'd her own Liberty, nor her Husband's: All she desir'd, was a minute of private Discourse with him; which her Guards undertook, and brought happily about. The Guards at the Tower , gain'd by their Companions, easily introduced the Countess into her Husband's Chamber. He knew nothing of the Passages at Whitehall . But when he was told, he was in few days to appear before his Judges , he expected with a great deal of Resolution and Constancy, the end of his Misfortunes; comforting himself with the Thoughts of the Countess being retired into Scotland . But seeing her so near a Danger, he thought her so remote from: Ah, Madam! (says he, with Eyes full of Tenderness) What come you to look for in these fatal Places? And, In whose power was it, to bring you hither? My Grief, and my Guards have brought me hither? answers the Countess. What, Madam! (cryes the Earl) Are you the Queens Prisoner? And, Does She know we are Married? Yes , (replyed the Countess , mournfully) and is so angry, we are past Hope. I was absenting my self from you, as you had desir'd me; but the News of your Death, stopt my Retreat. And it was not in my power, to betake my self into a Place of Safety; there to attend the issue of your Troubles: If it were not in my power to ease you of them, I thought it my duty, at least, to share with you in them. This made me present my self to the Queen; and omit nothing, that might move Her Compassion: But She prov'd altogether inflexible. Ah, Madam! (says the Earl , interrupting her,) Your Impatience hath ruin'd us: Had you not appear'd, I had been at Liberty. By a dextrous Justification, I had regain'd Her Confidence; and you should have in few days, seen me come in search of you, in Scotland: But now, there's no Hopes; the Queen will be reveng'd. What? (says the Countess) Hath all I have done, tended to your Ruine? Make use of your Advantages, I conjure you: The Queen retains some Tenderness for you; you may easily revive it. Oh! Be not a Sacrifice to Her Anger. Invent any thing, in excuse of our Marriage. Disown it, if you please: I will consent to any thing, rather than see you condemn'd to Death. Let Her banish me into any part of the World; I will go most willingly. And, if, it may conduce to your Safety, make use of the Pledge She gave you .--- Ah, Madam! (replyes the Earl) Can you give such Advice to a Man, who (you know) adores you? Have you found by any of my Actions, that I love my Life more than I love you? No, I love it for nothing else, but to spend it with you: And I will part with it, with all my Heart, when I must be depriv'd of that Pleasure. My Fears were only for you; and, Can you believe, I could have the least Satisfaction in the Queens Favour, when Her Jealousie should make Her banish you? Let it break out, let Her ruine me; I will glory in my loving you, and telling it to Her Face. I know, the precious Gift She bestow'd on me, leaves me some Hopes; and I may make use of it: But I would do it with safety; and it may prevail for more than my Life. I apprehend you , (says the Countess) you would reserve all for me, and neglect your own Safety: But you cannot incur a Danger, wherein I have not a share; and the way to preserve my Life, is to secure yours . This Dispute lasted somewhat longer: But the Countesses Guards minding her, it was time to withdraw. She dispos'd her self, to bid her Husband Adieu . Their Separation was moving, accompanied with abundance of Tears; to which, a multitude of tormenting Inquietudes succeeded, and ushered in a Day; that instead of diminishing, heightned their Sorrows. The End of the FIRST PART . THE Secret HISTORY OF THE MOST RENOWNED Q. Elizabeth. AND THE E. of Essex. The Second Part. By a Person of Quality. COLOGNE: Printed for Will with the Wisp , at the Sign of the Moon in the Ecliptick , 1680. The Second Part. of Essex in her Husband's Impeachment. The morrow after their Conference, the Peers met in Westminster-Hall , and the Earls of Essex and Southampton were brought before them by the Constable of the Tower . The Particulars of the Tryal are set forth at large, in the Histories of the Time: It shall suffice to insert here, That the Prisoners being Charg'd to have held criminal Correspondences with the Kings of Scotland and Spain , and entred into secret Allyances with Tyrone , and Traitorously laid and carry'd on a Plot against the Queens Authority, made a very stout and resolute Defence. As politick as Cecil was, he could not hide the Malignity of his Intentions; but it was observ'd, he was not only a severe Judge, but a dangerous Enemy: The Heat and Animosity he discover'd against the Earl of Essex , were answer'd by him with a flighty Resolution, and undaunted Constancy. Yet, for all he could say in justification of himself, he was condemn'd with the Formalities usual on such Occasions. Sentence was pronounced by the Lord High-Steward , That the Earls of Essex and Southampton were Guilty of High-Treason , and should be Beheaded. The Earl of Essex was not mov'd in the least, to hear himself nam'd; but appear'd heartily sorry, to find the Earl of Southampton under like Condemnation; and conjur'd the Judges, to examine with less Severity, the Conduct of a Person whose only Crime was, the Love he had for him. But not able to prevail, he melted into Expressions of the greatest Tenderness in the World, for his Friend. The Queen being inform'd of the Condition of Things, gave secret Orders to delay Execution. She was of a high Spirit, and highly provok'd; yet found it very difficult, to raise Her Anger to a pitch equal to Her Tenderness. Cecil trembled to find the Execution of a Sentence deferr'd, which he had with so much pleasure heard pronounc'd. The Countess of Nottingham was equally Alarm'd. The Proofs were but slight against the Earl of Southampton ; and the Queen , sensible his long Friendship with the Earl of Essex , had chiefly engag'd him in the Matters in Charge, pardon'd his Life at the Request of his Friends. News was brought of it to the Earl of Essex , whose truly brave and generous Soul immediately broke forth into sincere Protestations, He should die now with Satisfaction and Content, since the Queen had own'd by Her Pardon, the Innocence of Southampton. While the Earl of Essex expected with a resolute Constancy, the Catastrophe of his Tragedy, the Countess (his Wife) was inform'd at Whitehall, He was Executed . Till then, she believ'd it uncertain; but this News surpriz'd her so terribly, she fill'd the whole Court with her Lamentations. The Queen heard them, but was not concern'd, as the rest were, for them. Let her cry , (says She to the Countess of Nottingham) she must shed many more, to wipe out the Score of those Tears she hath cost Me . The Countess of Nottingham was so far from endeavouring to Pacifie the Queen , that all her Care was to keep up Her Anger. And because she was ignorant of many things she thought her self concern'd to know, she took advantage of the Trouble the Countess of Essex was in, and made her frequent Visits; not to bemoan her Affliction, but to find out something to render her more miserable. It must needs have been an unparallel'd Cruelty, not to pity the handsomest Lady on Earth, appearing to our Eyes in a Condition more deplorable than can be exprest. She fell every minute, for very Weakness, into the Arms of the Women about her; and recover'd her self only to lament the more pitifully: Which affected all but the Countess of Nottingham , who saw all this with an Unconcernedness, suitable to the hardness of her Heart. Ah, Madam! (says the Countess of Essex , as soon as she saw her) Will you not use your Interest with the Queen, in favour of the Earl of Essex? You know my Lord of Southampton hath his Pardon , (replyes she) and the Queen, perhaps, will do as much for your Husband. Madam , (says the Countess of Essex) 'Tis not the Crimes charg'd on my Husband joyntly with the Earl of Southampton, nor those common to both, that render the Queen inexorable: You understand me, when I tell you, There are others She more deeply resents. And She hates the Earl of Essex less for the Attempts attributed to his Ambition, than his Engagements with me. But, Madam , (replyes the Countess of Nottingham , willing to find out the Mystery of their Love she was yet ignorant of) If you thought the Queen would oppose it, or be unsatisfi'd with it, Why did you not quit a Business wherein you were to expect nothing but Crosses? If you were ever in Loue , (says the Countess of Essex) you know uery well, we haue not always our Wits about us when we are deeply engag'd in Affection. Howeuer, Madam, when I Marry'd my Lord of Essex, I did not know the Queen was so much concern'd for him. Perhaps , (answers the Countess of Nottingham) I might do you some Seruice, were I throughly acquainted with particular Passages between my Lord of Essex, and You. I am not in a very fit disposition to discourse you, Madam , (says the Countess of Essex.) But if I could by any Confidence, prevail with you to do something for us, I would give you an Account of all you desire. I will not promise you, I shall certainly prevail with the Queen: But, Madam , (adds the cunning Countess of Nottingham) I will use my Interest, and, perhaps, effect more than we haue Reason to hope for. Have a good Heart, Madam; Do not despair; the Queen is good: And I will zealously serve you, when I am instructed what Course to take . The Countess of Essex yielding to the Perswasions of her bitterest Enemy, dry'd up her Tears; and after a short pause, spoke to this purpose. obliging him to a Constant Attendance at Court , he committed the Care of my Infancy to a Sister of his, settled about a Hundred Miles from London . He could not, at that Distance, see me so often as he would; so that, when I came to Fourteen Years of Age, he thought, by Disposing me in Marriage, to bring me nearer him. The Earl of Rutland had but one Son; and the intimate Friendship between my Father and him, induc'd them to think of a stricter Allyance. Our Fortunes were equal: And the Earl of Rutland's Son being Return'd out of Italy , his Father acquainted him with his Design of Marrying him. His Affection was no way Engag'd to the contrary: And the Business was agreed on without my Knowledge, who was look't upon as too Young to be Consulted with, in a Cause of that Nature. Yet, Madam, my Heart was sensible so Early, and capable of Discerning between Person and Person; and made it appear by Experience, Obedience and Affection do not alwayes agree. The Equippage of the Young Gentleman was no sooner ready, but he came where I was. Being not in Love, not expecting much Pleasure in waiting on a Mistriss he had never seen, and was represented to him as a Child, he pray'd Three of his Friends to Honour his Nuptials with their Presence: The Earl of Essex was one of them. When they Arriv'd, my Looks were divided between several Men, all much of an Age, and equally unknown to me. I knew well enough, the Earl of Rutland's Son was design'd my Husband; and I presently wish'd He were the Man whom I afterwards knew to be the Earl of Essex ; at the first Sight of whom, all my Trouble for being Marry'd so Young, was presently over: He was the First spoke to me, and look'd on me more earnestly, than any of the others. This made me believe, it was as I wish'd. But I was sadly Undeceiv'd, when the Young Earl of Rutland was Presented to me. I Blush'd, and Sigh'd, not knowing the Cause. The Earl of Essex did also the like: His Eyes went still in Search of me; and I was not Reserv'd enough to avoyd them. The Trouble I appear'd in, was attributed to the Innocence of my Age; and I quickly learnt to take care to hide it. Our Parents being Arriv'd, we were Marry'd, without being ask'd by them, If we were willing. The Earl of Rutland's Son appear'd pleas'd with his Fortune; and, perhaps, found me more amiable than he expected. I, Madam, was so in Love with the Earl of Essex , all I could do, was, not to hate my Husband. Yet I had the good luck, my Kindness for my Lord of Essex was not so much as suspected. 'Twas believ'd, I was then sensible of no other Pleasures, but what Children delight in; but no Age is a Stranger to Love. I quickly knew what it was to have a Kindness; and soon complain'd, the Liberty of my Inclination had been usurp'd upon. I had little joy in being so far Mistress of my self, as to wish I could love my Husband, and endeavour it; and to have an Indifference for the Earl of Essex ; for all my Efforts to that purpose were vain. The first Resolution I took, was, to avoid the sight of a Man, who could only contribute to make me more unhappy. And when he had taken his Leave with the rest of my Lord of Rutland's Friends, I pray'd my Father to spare my Youth for some time, and not to expose me so early to the Court , where I never had been. My Desire was granted; and when my Father return'd for London , to satisfie me, they took me to Rutland . But the Course I took, produc'd not the Effect I propos'd: The Idea of the Earl of Essex accompanied me in my Solitude. And my Father-in-Law being dead, we were forc'd to go to London , after a years stay in the Countrey. I trembled to think, I should see the Earl of Essex again; and resolv'd with my self, I would be the most retir'd Person on Earth, to avoid all Occasions of meeting him; when News was brought me, He was gone with the Earl of Leicester , into the Low-Countreys . The Queen receiv'd me with that Kindness She usually expresses to those She intends to Honour. I admir'd Her Merit; and the pleasure to see my self respected by Her, suspended a while my secret Inquietudes. But within less than half a year, my Father died, and (soon after) my Husband. I was much afflicted at these Losses: I bewail'd my Father's Death a long time: And if I had not for my Husband that great Kindness, which is rarely met with in Marriages of Obedience, my Reason, and his Complaisance had forc'd me to esteem him, and to express Acknowledgments sincere enough, to save me the trouble of any just Reproach from my self, or any other. The Queen having told me She desir'd to have me near Her, I quitted my House for an Apartment in this Palace; and my Fortune (which was very considerable) gave me such Charms, as drew about me a number of Suitors, who pretended mighty Kindness for me; but were really rather a Trouble, than Pleasure to me. In this Condition was I, when the Earl of Essex return'd to London . The Queens Army had been victorious; and She order'd a publick Thanksgiving, when the Generals arriv'd. I waited on Her to St. Pauls ; and had not the power by any Consideration, to be so reserv'd, as not to single out from all the Nobility of the Kingdom, the Earl of Essex alone, to fix my Eyes on. The morrow, he was one of the first to wait on the Queen: I was with Her before. I was mov'd at the sight of him: We lookt on one another several times, with equal Concern. Madam , (said he, as soon as he could speak to me) I have not had a moments liberty to signifie to you, how great a share I bear in your Losses. I believe (answer'd I) you are sorry for my Misfortunes. 'Tis natural for every one to be concern'd for such a Person as you are (adds he:) But, Madam, I am much more concern'd than any other . The Queen interrupted us: But in all the Respects the Earl of Essex paid Her, I could not but observe his Eye was towards me. I confess, I was glad to see him so eager; and perhaps, I answer'd him a little too soon: But I was young, tender, and Independent. His Merits were then extraordinary; and he had the advantage of my first Inclination. He came the same day to see me in my Apartment; and fail'd not to do it constantly afterwards. All his Actions perswaded me, at length, that he lov'd me; and it was not long, ere he let me know it. Madam , (said he one Evening, having brought me to my Chamber, after I had left the Queen) Do you remember the time we accompany'd the Earl of Rutland to your Countrey-House? I have not forgot, Sir , (answer'd I) that you were one of them that did him that Honour. Is that all you remember of it? (adds he.) Did you observe nothing in my Eyes worthy taking notice of? And, Was it possible, you should inspire into me so much Love, without feeling the power of it in your self? The Friendship I had for the Earl of Rutland, and the Progress he had made, prevented my speaking of it. Yet Time and Absence have but increas'd my Passion: And I protest sincerely, from the first moment I saw you, my Heart was never affected with any but your self . A Discourse of this nature, may perhaps be thought unsuitable to the Condition I was then in; who mourn'd for a Father , and a Husband: Yet I had not the power to be offended with it. The Earl of Essex assur'd me, I had gain'd his Affection: I was willing to gain his, and I car'd for no more. You will give me leave, Madam, to pass over my Answers; and tell you only, The Earl of Essex was very well satisfi'd with them; that we then settled the Correspondence we have so long maintain'd; and that we found Occasions, and Opportunities to polish and perfect it. Thus far you see me ignorant of the Queens Inclinations: I, as well as others, attributed the Favour we saw the Earl of Essex was in, to his Services, and his Dexterity in setting them out to advantage. But in time, I perceiv'd my Mistake: And as reserv'd as the Queen was, found out the Mystery, and trembled at the Discovery. The Earl of Essex had an elevated Soul , and capable of Greatness. Ambition might rob me of him; and I was willing to fortifie my self against all Misfortunes, and to reserve only an Esteem for him. But, What Hopes of doing that now, which all my Reason, and two years Marriage, had not effected? At last, Jealousie succeeded my Fears; and I began to believe, the Respects the Earl of Essex had for the Queen , might proceed from a secret Affection. I fretted at this, and griev'd at the Heart: The Earl perceiv'd it, and solicited me long to tell him the Cause. I refus'd as long as I was able. I am jealous , (said I to him, at last, with a little Heat) and afraid I shall lose your Affection. 'Tis not an Unhappiness , (answers he) to see you love me so, as to doubt of me: But there is no Cause to question my Faithfulness, who never lov'd any but you. The Queen loves you , (said I;) and Her Kindness for you, with the advantage of Her Grandeur, may be dangerous Temptations to your Perseverance. The Queen love me, Madam! (replyes he) How you interpret her ordinary Bounty, which hath (perhaps) too generously recompens'd my Services beyond their Merit? She is too Haughty, and too Great a Mistress of Her Self, to fall into such a Weakness. You know, what Illustrious Allyances She hath slighted; and are to believe , She is above the reach of Love. There is not a Monarch on Earth, but I would prefer you before him , (answer'd I;) and measuring the Queens Affection by mine, I am easily perswaded, She may do so too. Her Eye is always upon you, spite of all Her Precautions, and is never else satisfi'd; and I have observed some Sighs from Her, which a Heart concern'd as mine, cannot hear without Trouble. I did not till now know how happy I was , (says the Earl of Essex;) but your Jealousie makes me sensible of it. Yet, Madam, give me leave to assure you, You have no Cause for it. Were the Queen weak, as you imagine; did She offer me Her Crown, and Her Kindness; I would, by my Refusal, let you see (though I have Ambition) my Love for you infinitely exceeds it. To satisfie you of your Mistake, allow me to procure Her Consent to our Marriage. You have mourn'd long enough, to avoid all Imputations of Indecency: It is in your power, to make me the happiest of Men, and to clear all the Doubts you have of my Faithfulness . I was far from opposing the Proposal he made; and if I was not fully convinc'd the Queen was not in Love with him, yet I thought, if She was, he knew it not. To let you see , (adds he) I will not conceal from you any Kindness the Queen hath exprest for me; I declare, I sacrifice to you one of the handsomest Ladies of the Court, who hath a thousand ways invited my Love . I prest him to let me know her Name; but he conjur'd me to be satisfi'd with what he had said; and, not to force him to further Indiscretion, I gave over Pressing him. ["The Countess of Nottingham Blush't at this Part of the Discourse, having Reason to believe her self the Person intended. She Hated him the more for't; but had the Command of her self, not to interrupt the Countess of Essex ; who proceeded in her Story."] This Freedom of the Earl put an End to my Suspicions. I left him to take his Time, for speaking to the Queen : When he went to Thank Her for the Government of Ireland bestow'd on him, he return'd to me with a Transport of Joy, to tell me; The Queen had not only Consented to his Desires, but intended to make the Earl of Leicester King of England, This quieted my Spirit, and made me acknowledge, I had no Cause to be Jealous. We spent some dayes with a great deal of Pleasure; but were Cruelly interrupted by the Order the Earl of Essex received to go into France , to Command the Forces the Queen sent in Aid of that King . I had not time to Express my grief to him, or to be a Witness of his. We parted in Haste: And then it was, I repented I had Believ'd him; and that the Queens Coldness towards me, convinc'd me of the Truth of my former Suspicions: and that Her sending away the Earl of Essex , was but to Remove him from me. I left Court , as soon as I could, with Decency, ask the Queen Leave to retire into a House of my Fathers, about Fifty Miles from London . I will not tell you, how I was Alarm'd at the News of the Earl of Essex his Death, in his Return from Spain ; nor how we Writ to one another, in his Absence. I was ready to Dye for Grief, when he Arriv'd at my House more Respectful, and more Amorous then he had ever appear'd. He would have put me out of my Opinion, concerning the Queen : But I obstinately maintain'd it True. When I had Convinc'd him of it, he offer'd to leave England if I would name a Place where we might Live quietly. I had Affection enough, to incline me to Consent to this Proposal: But considering it Unjust in me to spoil the Progress of his Good Fortune, and put an End to his Hopes by an Unexcusable Retreat, I told him, it was impossible. And ushering with a Sigh the Advice I was going to him: Forget me, Sir , (said I) for I see, your Fate will force you to it. The Queen will still Cross us, and never want Pretence to Separate us: 'Tis better breaking off an Engagement, that suits not with your Affairs. Nothing in the World, can be a greater Misfortune to me; but I will submit to it, if it be for your Good. You suspect me of Indifference , (said he, interrupting me;) and you have the Cruelty to Advise me to it. Did you love me more, you would Know me better: And were I capable of doing an unjust Thing, I believe you would Exhort me to forget you, for no other Cause , but that you might think of me no more. But , Madam, to shorten our Discourse, and our Doubts, which almost make me Mad; Believe it, I Love you above all things in the World: There is a Sure and Easie Way to satisfie you of it. You are not willing to go with me out of England; and yet you are still afraid of the Queen: Let us Marry Privately, and Conceal it till we see a more favourable Time. This will Frustrate the Queens Designs to our Prejudice; You will no longer doubt of my Affection: And if the Business be Discover'd, 'tis but flying out of the Reach of the Resentments we fear . I was strangely mov'd at this Discourse: Every thing oblig'd me to believe him. Yet considering it would reflect upon my Reputation to be privately Marryed, I was afraid to Consent. The Earl Complain'd of me; I Cry'd: Love was our Arbitratour, and Decided the Controversie in his Favour. After long Resistance, I agreed to a Private Marriage; on Condition the Earl would go for London on the Morrow; and appear dis-engag'd to the Queen from all the Kindness he had had for me. We agreed to be Marry'd at the Earl of Southampton's , his particular Friend; where I was to stay, while he went for London . Thus we parted. He took London -Road; I went for Southampton , Attended by Tracy , a Domestick of the Earl of Essex's , in whom he repos'd an entire Confidence. As the Earl was on the Road he had Leisure to consider what Measures to take. My Lord Southampton came to to Receiue me at his House; where the Earl of Essex Arriv'd, soon after he had obtain'd Leave from the Queen , to Absent himself a few Dayes. We are now come to the Instant, that usher'd in our Crosses. We were Marrry'd in the Presence of my Lord Southampton, Tracy , and some Women of mine, and a Kinsman of the Earl of Essex . He gave me an Account, how the Queen had Receiv'd him; and began to confess, he believ'd, She Lov'd him. He staied but six Dayes at Southampton ; in which Time we agreed what Course to take. I was too far from London , to see the Earl often, without Discovering our Correspondence, Nothing seem'd more proper to Conceal it, than a House he had within few Miles of London , on the Thames Side: It stood alone, and was Strong enough to prevent a Surprize. Having settled my Affairs, I was Conducted thither by my Lord Southampton , and Tracy , while the Earl of Essex return'd for London . Nothing could be more Pleasant, than the Solitude I was in. My Lord of Essex came to see me every Day: And I spent there Two Years, without a Moments Trouble. At last, an Accident happen'd that Miserably perplext us. The Earl of Essex had an Infinite of Enemies, who Envy'd him; and for all his Caution, they took Notice of his Extraordinary Assiduity for the place I was in. They told the Queen of it. She was disturb'd at it; more, perhaps, for the Suspicion She had of some Private Gallantry of his there, than for those Matters they would have Possest Her with. I gave Her no Trouble: The Earl's Dis-engagement, with my Pretended Journey into France , had secur'd Her as to me. Yet She would go see whether the Earl frequented that House, only for the Pleasure of the Place, or some hidden Cause. One Day, as the Earl was with Her, She gave Orders, Her ordinary Retinue should be ready to Wait on Her. I have long had a mind to see your Country- House , (sayes She to the Earl;) I have had a very Pleasant Description of it: The Weather is Fair; and, I belieue, a Walk so far, may do Me good . You may Imagine the Fears this put the Earl in: He durst not openly Oppose Her Design; but endeavoured to divert Her, by saying, His House deseru'd not the Pains it would cost Her, to go so far . When he saw Her resolv'd upon it, he begg'd Leave to go before, to put things in order for Her Reception. No , (sayes She) you shall be My Guide: There's no need of Preparation . The Earl , at these Words, trembled for me. He was depriv'd of all Means of Precaution: And the Concern he appear'd in, made the Queen more Curious. Imagine what a Trouble he was in by the way, and how often he wisht something might hinder their Arrival. But Fortune favour'd the Queens Designs so far, that they came safe to the House; and She would presently go see the Lodgings. The Earl astonisht, gave Her his Hand. The Chamber I us'd, was the best in the House; and the first the Queen stay'd at. The Earl seeing no Remedy, steps to the Door, (which he found open, contrary to Custom) and was pleasingly surpriz'd, to find only Tracy there, sleeping, or rather pretending to sleep, on a Couch. He was quickly awak'd; and having exprest his Surprize, and Respect, immediately withdrew. The Earl of Essex , who thought him at London , began to take Heart, fancying his good Genius had reveal'd the Adventure to Tracy . But a new Trouble arose: My Picture hung in the same Room, under a Curtain. The Queen askt, If it was the Earl's? He answer'd, with some Trouble, It was not . The Queen drew the Curtain, and saw Her Self drawn at length, where the Earl thought my Picture would appear. Then it was, he was perswaded, the faithful Tracy had had an Intimation of the Journey. The Queen exprest much Joy, to see Her Picture in the Earl's Chamber. From the House, She went into the Garden; took a short Repast, (during which, Tracy found the opportunity to whisper the Earl, He need not trouble himself \---) and return'd to London , without the least suspicion. Thus Matters pass'd on their Side. As to ours, The very instant the Queen told the Earl of Essex, She would see his House , the Earl of Southampton was at Her Chamber-door. You are come in very good time, to go along with the Queen to the Earl of Essex's, says the Officer, who was going to provide the Equipage. The Earl of Southampton , by these few words, quickly discover'd the Storm that threatned his Friend: And to provide a Remedy; I am not very well , (said he to the Officer:) Perhaps, the Queen may command me to wait on Her; I will not go into Her Presence. Pray, Let Her not know, you have seen me . The Officer promis'd, She should not ; and Southampton hastned to the Earl of Essex's , to tell Tracy ; who immediately took the best Horse his Master had; and put him so well to it, that he was with me before the Queen left London . I was not a little troubled at the News. Tracy hid me, and my Women in a Quarter, where was no likelihood of our being discover'd; and then chang'd the Queens Picture for mine. That Evening, the Earl of Essex came to see me, and gave me an Account of the Tortures he had that day endur'd for me; and how Southampton and Tracy had deliver'd him out of them. The Irish rebell'd; I lay in at that time: The Earl of Essex , (who lov'd me no less than his Glory) had within himself desperate Conflicts. His Duty prevail'd: He desir'd he might Command the Army, the Queen granted it; and the same time, plainly declar'd her Affection for him; which I was before but too well assur'd of. She gave him abundance of very kind Expressions; and (to confirm the truth of them) a Ring , which still leaves the poor Earl of Essex some Hopes. He was sufficiently prepar'd to manage the Queen: And you see, by this time, Madam, whether he was not under a necessity of some Dissimulation. He gave me a faithful Account, of all pass'd between them; and being fearful for me in his absence, he resolv'd to remove me, and to go himself out of England , if Matters were discover'd. This put him on Search of some Places of Refuge. The King of Scots promis'd him, among others, the Palace of Dimbourg . The Earl of Tyrone made him many Proposals: But certain it is, he never hearkned to any of them. I was weak when he left me; and oblig'd to recover a little Strength; before I would undertake a Voyage for Scotland . I was on my way, Fortune stay'd me, the Earl of Essex was Charg'd with several Matters; and the Queen , prepossest by our Enemies, took our innocent Precautions for Crimes. At last, Madam, the Earl was forc'd to come, and shut himself up in the Place where I was; and was resolv'd to perish, in defence of me. You know what follow'd. Consider the Frights I was in, amidst so much Trouble and Bloud, I saw every day spilt. The Earl conjur'd me incessantly, to quit a Place, where he could not make any long Defence against so great Forces, as were imploy'd to take it. I exhorted him to yield, and implore the Queens Goodness. He protested, He would never do it, till I was in a Place of Safety . Thus was I forc'd to leave him, and go for Dimbourg . The faithful Tracy , who should have conducted me thither, had perisht already, in maintaining the Interests of his Master. The Earl of Essex committed me to the Charge of one of his Kinsmen: They forc'd me out of his Arms, to put me aboard a Boat, that waited for us on the Thames , and was to carry us to the Place where our Convoy attended us. My Fears, and my Grief put me into a Fever: This staid me some Dayes, at a little Village; where I had News of the Earl's Imprisonment, and the Queens Resolution to Ruine him. The Extremity of my Despair, put me on the Resolution of Presenting my self to the Queen , and endeavouring to obtain some Favour by an Ingenuous Confession. But, Madam, you know, I found in Her, no Disposition to Pardon us. My Conduct hath produc'd a terrible Effect: And I may justly Reproach my self, to have been the Cause of all my Lord of Essex his Misfortunes. This Discourse ended, in Tears. The Countess of Nottingham took small Care to stop them: She was too much Concern'd in more than one Part of the Story, which heightened her Fury: And leaving the Countess of Essex to the Horrour of Despair, she return'd to the Queen , whom she found almost drown'd in Hers. She us'd all her Art, to Revive the Queens Anger; and by her Cruel Address, effected her Design, without saying a Word directly against the Criminal. Cecil and She were Tormented, to see the Execution delay'd. What shall we do Madam, ( sayes he to her ) if the Queen , in the Height of Her Anger, will not give way that Justice be done? What are we to expect, when Her Anger is over? What are we not to fear from Her Love, if it once get the Mastery of a Heart, as Hers is? 'Tis no where so Imperious, no where so Absolute; and I very much doubt, whether all our Caution can prevent the ill Effects of it. In a word, Condemn'd as the Earl of Essex is, by an August Assembly, 'tis possible, he may Recover his former Favour with the Queen , and utterly Ruin us, as soon as he sets Footing at Court . I shall bestir my self a little, ere that come to pass, ( sayes the Countess of Nottingham;) I have the Queens Ear: I know how to speak; I am not suspected; nor am I a Stranger to the Secrets of the One, nor the Other: Yet we are not to Flatter our selves; the Earl of Essex is Master of his Fortune: If he Petition, the Queen will not have the Power to deny him. He hath a Pledge , which gives him an Absolute Power over Her: But, thanks to his Pride, he will not make use of it. Besides Whom can he employ in an Affair of this Nature, but we can Corrupt? I will not leave the Queen ; and, I'le Pawn my Life, I will Secure all with Her. Do your part, and let's not be Surpriz'd. Cecil knew the Countess of Nottingham too well, to doubt of what she said: He parted better satisfi'd; and thought of nothing, but what flatter'd their Common Hatred against Essex . The Queen had had a very ill Night, tormented equally with Sickness and Trouble. She consider'd the Unfaithfulness of the Earl of Essex ; his Plotting against Her Authority, his Private Marriage, his Giving himself wholly up to the Pleasures of it, (while he pretended to be Entirely at Her Devotion) and his Pride in the Depth of Misfortunes. She thought sometimes these Reflections strong enough, to Enable Her to see him Dye. But presently, the Pleasing Idea of him She would destroy, his Merit, his Services, and the Natural Inclination She had for him, Inspir'd Her again with gentle Resolutions. She thought it better see him a Criminal, then never see him more. The thoughts of his Execution put Her almost besides Her Self, though it was in Her Power to prevent it. The Countess of Nottingham was as Wakeful as the Queen , though for very different Reasons; and waiting on Her in the Morning, as usual, You find Me in a Lamentable Condition (sayes the Queen;) and if you help not to Comfort Me, I shall not be able to endure it much longer. The Wretch, who causes Me all this Trouble, is alwayes before My Eyes, in the most pitiful Condition imaginable. It is possible, I should do nothing for him in such an Extremity? Shall I permit him to Perish, as if I had no more Valued him than another; when I have Declar'd to him, I Lov'd him? Shall I Reproach My self one Day, with Cruelty to have Forsaken him, when it was in My Power to Save him? What Your Majesty shall be Pleas'd to do in his Favour (replyes the Countess of Nottingham,) will be the more Generous, for that he hath not Solicited it. If he Petition'd, Your Bounty would be look't upon as an Effect of Your Pity, and his Submissions: But now, it will proceed purely from Your Goodness , These words effected partly what she aim'd at. The Queen blush'd, sigh'd, and was silent a while. It must be confest ( proceeds She ,) That to do all for him, without putting him to the cost of one Sign of Repentance, is to approve of his Pride, and encourage him to carry it on to the highest Extremities. He would have My Kindness do all; and without any Reflexion on the Outrages he hath done Me, he believes, I shall think My Self too happy, in holding the Executioner's Hand. Never doubt, Madam, ( says the Countess ) but he makes account to triumph still over that Goodness Your Majesty hath always made appear towards him. Had he been carried from Westminster to the Scaffold; had You given him a sight of that Scene of Death, and pardon'd Southampton , without respiting the other's Execution, he would have been glad to make use of any means, in his power, to move You to mercy. But he knows the power he hath over You; and pretends, that by receiving a Pardon he vouchsafes not to Petition for, all the World will believe him innocent. But, Madam, if Matters be carried on thus, What will be thought of the Justice of the Kingdom? What will the World judge of Your Majesty? There is not a Person ignorant of this Adventure: And, if the Earl of Essex , without acknowledging his Crimes, sees himself at liberty; Will it not be said, That England is govern'd by a Queen , not so discreet, as Fame reports Her to be? At this, Cecil arriv'd, and fortifi'd extreamly the Countess of Nottingham's Party: He seconded her with all the Art of a cruel Eloquence, to perswade the Queen, She was concern'd in Honour, the Earl of Essex should die . The Queen , in a Pet, consented he should be Executed suddenly; and Cecil lost no time, in carrying Her Orders to those who were to be Actors in the Execution. The Earl of Essex (as the Countess of Nottingham had shrewdly guess'd) had no Thoughts of Petitioning for a Favour, which, in all probability, the Queens Kindness would of it self freely grant him. But when he saw himself on the point of being carry'd to the Place of Execution, he thought it his duty, not to neglect the Medicines he had in his power, to bring about the Queen . Then he resolv'd to implore Her Mercy, and put Her in mind of Her Promises and Oaths. And knowing the Countess of Nottingham was Her Favourite and Confident; though he had Cause to believe, she had no great Kindness for him, he was perswaded, she might have Generosity enough, to serve him in this important Mediation. He sent to desire the Favour of a Visit from her. The Countess, impatient to know the Cause, went directly to him, without acquainting the Queen . Who but a Barbarian , could have seen the Earl of Essex's Person, and at the same time known his Misfortune, without being melted into Compassion? Yet the Countess of Nottingham , at the sight of him, was all Cruelty and Revenge: But, feigning some Sweetness, she gave him way to declare himself thus: Can you, Madam, pardon the most unfortunate of Men the Trouble he gives you at a time, when he hath no Cause to flatter himself you have any Remains of Kindness for him? Yet nothing can be now of greater Advantage to me, than your Protection. I know the Power you have over the Queen ; and would you be pleas'd to joyn it to my Sorrow, and Repentance, for having offended Her, I doubt not, but we may prevail much. Tell Her then, Madam, ( continues he, putting his Knee to the Ground ) That you have seen me in this suppliant Posture, full of Grief for having deserv'd Her Hatred. Restore Her this Ring , which I have kept; and entreat Her to remember the Promises She made, when She gave it me. I beg my Life by this Pledge , and She cannot deny it me, without forgetting Her Oaths. I can no longer look on Life, as a thing pleasing to me; but a miserable Wife, and the Interest of a Son, press me to continue it, as long as I can. I cannot think, the Innocence of the One, or Infancy of the Other, needs my Justification: The Favour to be begg'd of the Queen , is for me alone. The Countess of Nottingham was transported with Joy, to see the Earl trust her with the Ring , which had so often Alarm'd her, and whose Power Cecil was still afraid of. She frankly promis'd what she had not the least intent to do for Essex , added feign'd Tears to her false Promises; and assur'd him, she would directly go use her utmost Interest with the Queen , in his Favour. But instead of going to the Queen , to give Her an Account of her Visit, she went to Cecil ; who waited for her, prais'd her Cruelty, and had the pleasure to see in his power, the sole Obstacle against Essex's Death. They went together to the Queen , who asking, How Essex receiv'd Her last Orders? He was never observ'd so haughty, Madam, ( answers Cecil;) he cannot prevail with himself, to shew the least Sign of Repentance. He thinks of nothing but his Wife, and she is the whole Subject of his Discourse to those who go to him. Let him die then, let him perish, ( says the Queen, very angry ) since he will have it so. Let Me be eas'd of the tormenting Uncertainties and Disquiets I am under. I am no longer against his Execution. This zealous Minister was unwilling to leave the Queen the least time of Reflexion: And while the Earl of Essex was in Expectation of the Effect of the promises of the Unfaithful Countess of Nottingham , provision was made for his Execution in the Tower , to avoid a Rebellion among the People, who lov'd him. His Soul was naturally great, and discover'd not the least Weakness, in the last Extremity. Never did Man go to his Death with more Constancy and Firmness. He did not Murmur, in the least, against the Queen ; though he might have Reproach't Her with Promises. He mounted the Scaffold Resolutely, Undrest himself, Recommended his Family to those about him; and having drawn Tears from all Eyes that were Spectatours of that last Act of his Life, he receiv'd his Death, without so much as giving way his Eyes should be Cover'd. Thus Dy'd this Famous Favourite of Queen Elizabeth . One of the best Qualifi'd Persons in the World; and a Man who had been too Happy, had not Love had too great a power over him. Soon after the Queen had Consented he should be Executed, She Relaps'd into Her former Irresolutions; and after a sharp Conflict within Her Self, She resolv'd to Pardon him; and sent an Officer of Her Guards, to forbid their Proceeding further: But it was too late: Cecil had fore-seen what might happen and Cruelly provided against the Effects of Her Relapse into former Kindness. The Earl of Essex was already Executed; and that was the Answer he carry'd to the Queen . Then it was, She lost Her ordinary Moderation; then Her Grief broke out Publickly. Cecil, ( sayes She ) What Mischief hath your Barbarous Zeal, and Impatience, done Me? With that, She burst out into Tears, and would not endure the Caresses, or the Comforts of any about Her. While the Queen abhorr'd Her Self, for the Orders Her Anger had given, Cecil , who had so faithfully caus'd them to be Executed, enjoy'd the Pleasure of having Procur'd them: And the Countess of Nottingham Triumph'd in her self, for the Revenge she had taken of a Man, who had slighted her Charms. 'Tis impossible to Express the Grief of the Countess of Essex : The most Stony Hearts had Tears for her. The Queen , (whose Anger was dead with the Earl ) sent to Comfort her, and assure her, she was at Liberty, and might Dispose of her Husband's Estate. Let Her take my Life, and keep Her Pity to Her Self, ( sayes the Countess to the Queens Messenger: ) She hath Rob'd me of all that made my Life dear to me; and 'tis not in Her Power, to Repair the Mischief She hath done me. The Earl of Essex his Friends, finding her, at present, incapable of Comfort, (even from them whom she Esteem'd highly, for their Love to the Earl ) took her from London ; in hopes, that Time might make her Susceptible of that Consolation, which the Violence of her present Sorrows render'd altogether vain. As for the Queen , She languish'd out the rest of Her Life: The only Comfort She had, was to think the Earl of Essex , had slighted Her to his Death, and never made Her any Submission. The Countess of Nottingham had small Joy of her Faithless Life. A violent Malady seiz'd her, and made her sensible of the Horrours of Death: Remorse of Conscience tormented her; the Ghost of the Earl of Essex (whose Death her Cruelty occasion'd) seem'd to Haunt her incessantly. And being at the point of Death, she could not Depart, without Acknowledging her Crime to the Queen . Having beg'd one Moment's Audience, she confest all that pass'd between the Earl of Essex and Her , the Love she had for him, the Implacable Hatred that succeeded it, and her Perfidiousness in keeping the Ring he had Trusted her with. With that, she presented the Ring to the Queen ; who was ready to dye at the Receiving it; and was within very little of making the dying Countess feel the violence of Her Resentment. Wretch , (cryes She, with Looks full of Indignation) What Remorse hast thou expos'd Me to! Where Heaven will Pardon thy Crimes, I know not; sure I am, I shall never forget them . Having thus said, the Queen went out, and the Countess in few Hours Dyed. This prov'd a Mortal Blow to the Queens Health; who not long after Dyed, uncomforted for the Death of the Earl of Essex . Cecil had lov'd the Countess of Nottingham too well, to be easily Comforted for hers. By the Death of Queen Elizabeth , the Crown of England pass'd into the Illustrious House of the Stuarts , whose Right it was. King James , after a Glorious Reign, left it to His Posterity, for the Repose of His Kingdoms.
