 Courteous Reader, Authors in Pieces of this Nature, of the Subtilties and Cheats that the Misses of this Town put upon Men, yet we still dayly see that they find Cullies enough to be imposed upon, to the decay and ruine-both of their Health, their Fortune and Reputation. Wherefore a Mirrour of their damned Wheadling Arts, and Cursed Devices, cannot be too often set before the Eyes of Mankind, that so the easy Fops themselves may take a warning, and be diverted from falling into their Destructive Snare. For thou hast here, Reader , the Jilt displayed in her true Colours, all her Wheadling and Treacherous Decoys laid open. And in short, thou hast not only the Bulcker but the fine London Misses Picture drawn to the Life. Shee is here set before thee as a Beacon to warn thee of the Shoales and Quick-sands, on which thou wilt of necessity Shipwrack thy All, if thou blindly and wilfully continuest and perseverest in steering that Course of Female Debauchery , which will inevitably prove at length thy utter Destruction. This perhaps will be allowed to be no small Piece of Service, if it may be a means of dissuading, but some few from that Roving, Libertine, Lascivious Course of Life, and contribute but to the making Men be upon their Guard against all Female Ambauscdoes . And indeed what greater Folly can there be than to venture one's All in such rotten Bottoms, and at length become the Horrour and Detestation of all the World, only for a Momentary Pleasure, and which in truth cannot well be termed Pleasure, considering what filthy, nasty, and stinking Carcasses, are the best and finest of our Common Whores? A Whore is but a Close-stool to Man, or a Common-shoar that receives all manner of Filth, shee's like a Barber's Chair, no sooner one's out, but t'others in, or as an other has likened 'em to Sampson's Foxes, who carry fire in their Tails to burn the standing Corn. And though the danger does so vastly surpass the Delight that can be had in the Conversation and Enjoyment of the most Charming of 'em all, yet we see foolish silly Men such easy Fops, as to be lured by their False Attractions into that bitter Trap of theirs, which is ever followed or attended with all manner of Diseases, both of Mind and Body. Thus sure the Publick cannot blame or Condemn a Man, for drawing his Pen in so necessary an occasion, especially at this time, when the Trade of Jilting is grown so ripe, that Warnings of this kind cannot be too often repeated, nor instances of their Devilish Pranks and Practices too frequently proclaim'd, that so Men may be as it were teiz'd into good sence and their own security. Not that this Piece had the Dulness and Gravity of a Sermon. It shows you the Missrevelling in her Culleys Arms, it shows her displaying all her Arts to entice, seduce and ensnare Mankind, and what thou thoughtest fondness of thy Person, thou wilt find only a damn'd unbounded self-interest, and an insatiable Avidity of Money; thou wilt discover her giving every one Entertainment suitable to the largeness of their Purses, and the Extravagances of their Expences. But when the weak and Credulous Fop has spent his All upon her, thou wilt see him shee so much before Cherish'd and Indulg'd shut out of Door, scorn'd and despis'd by her, and treated with all manner of Infamy and Contempt. Thus all her Carriage that was so tender and endearing while that thou lavished thy Stock and Fortune upon her when this once begins to fail, thou wilt find her Favours and Affection decay and languish at the same time. Wherefore Reader , take this seasonable Advice, leave off in time that leud Course of Life, and be not bubled by Detestable Creatures, that are so little worthy of thy Amusement and Application. Avoid all their Cursed Allurement, and be mindful that a Snake lies concealed under such bewitching Appearances, and how beautiful and attractive soever the outside of the Apple may be, that it is Rotten and Pestilent at Core. But it is time, Reader , that thou seest our Jilt exposed naked in all her Deformities, that it may so create a horrour in thee for what thou before so eagerly pursuedst, and so fondly adoredst. Not but that this Narrative of her Stratagems and Artifices will afford thee a peculiar delight and satisfaction, being agreeably interwoven with Pleasant Stories of her Wiles and Juggles, and in short, a perfect account of her Performances in the Art of winning others and her self. If this undertaking prove but as beneficial in curbing the bad and unlawful Inclinations of Men, as the Author design'd it, the Pains, will be sufficiently rewarded, that have been taken for thy Good, thy Diversion and Service. Farewel. OR, THE POLITICK WHORE. who have made it their business to expose, as far as they were capable, the Frailties of the Female Sex. Some have been provoked thereunto, by their unfortunate Addresses, and by the disappointments they have met with in Love; others have undertaken that Province, without any other reason, than to show their Wit. But my Business now in Writing, is to warn Men of the danger they may run in the persuit of their Amours; for which purpose, I thought Narrative of my Life might be of extraordinary use, since it has been a continual Series of Stratagems and Artifices for the ensnaring of Men. London is the place of my Birth, where my Father, or at least the Man my Mother was pleased to honour with that Title, had been a Merchant until the Age of thirty two Years; but his fortune taking an other biass about that time, the good Man found himself obliged, that he might not be oppress'd with Poverty, after he had been for a while in the Fryars , and had Compounded with his Creditors, to set up a Tipling House. Of these two Persons so full of Probity, was I the only Daughter, and for that reason, I was brought up in some sort of Libertinism; for to be an only Child, and to be rendred wanton, are two things which cannot be well separated. I was about five years old, when my Father was transformed from a Merchant into a Victualler, and I was sent to School to write and learn French , as also to Dance; and for that purpose, I can assure you, that my Parents strain'd their Purse, but were nevertheless well enough satisfied, since it flattered their Ambition. But it is not my Intention to stay my too Curious Reader over long, upon the childish behaviours of my Infancie, I shall onely say this, that like most young Girles I was very fond of Puppeys, tho rather of Male then Female, and my greatest pleasure consisted in dressing and kissing them. I had also a Gallant at the School, and I was mightily concerned, that I was not of Age enough to marry him, for I began to imagine, that there was nothing in the World more pleasant, than to sleep in the Arms of a Man. I am apt to believe that I am not the only Person, who in so tender an age has harboured such like sentiments; for if all Damsells would deal as freely and as openly as I, and tell the truth, I do not doubt but that they would all with me confess, or, at least the greatest number would own as I do, that they have no sooner discovered the difference there is between the two Sexes, than they immediately are desiring to be caressed and flattered by Men, and though they often show themselves somewhat coy and disdainful, you may however firmly believe, that this is for no other reason than to try and to nourish the Lovers Passion, and augment the ardour of a young Man, by all those silly Repulses and Grimaces. But Hypocrisy, which is an inseparable property of the Female Sex, forbids them by a Fundamental Law to comport themselves in such Cases after any other manner. When I had thus spent three years, with a Servant of the same Age as my self, my Parents took a House at Islington , hoping there to have a better Trade than they had in the City: But to our misfortune it happened, one certain Sunday Morning, that my Mother accompanied by the Maid, went to Church. That day a young Man very handsome, and spruce, came to our House to drink a Pot of Purle. My Father, who for the promoting of Trade, did commonly entertain himself by talking with Passengers, began immediately to fall into Discourse with this Sparke, and ask'd him which way he was bent, since he had a Port- mantle with him, and several such like Questions, which in truth, were indifferent to him; but Hosts and Barbers must furnish Discourse, though it be of themselves. This Gentleman, who at least by his Apparel seem'd to be so, told him, as he was smoaking a Pipe of Tobacco, that he came from London , that he was going into Essex , that he was a Rope-dancer, and that his Companions were all gone to Romford , that he intended to go thither to exercise his Art, by reason that the Fair was suddainly to be there; added that he had been for a while sick at Brandford , and therefore could not set forth jointly with his Company. This Discourse was pat to my Fathers Humour; for he was the most curious Man I ever saw in all my Life: Thus he fell immediately to talk of that Art with this Professour, saying, he could not sufficiently admire their boldness in their Tricks and Jumps, and especially their Dexterity in the plain and double Strapado, and several other such like things, which my Father had, perhaps, heard the names of from one or other. As for what concerns leaping, my Dear Landlord, said the Rope-dancer, it is a thing not over easy to learn, and which requires a long time and a great deal of boldness, without reckoning the danger there is in breaking an Arm or a Leg, which is daily to be expected, but to Vault upon the High Rope is easy to learn, for there is not so much art in that, as People do imagine; provided only, continued he, that I had some body who has reasonably strong Arms, I would learn him the Strapado as well in half an hour, as if he had exercised himself in our Art for thirty years together. My Father listned to this Discourse more attentively, then he had ever done to any Sermon, though I have always known him to be a good Christian. He also desired this Hop Merchant (as if by this means he could have got his Livelyhood) that he would teach him to Vault a little. The other seem'd to refuse him downright at first; but it was only (as I easily perceived afterwards) to enflame the poor Man the more upon this matter, and my Father won on him so far, at length by the promising a Free Scot, that he undertook to learn him the Strapado. For that purpose they went into the Stable, which being behind our Garden, and having shut our Fore-door, that no Body might come in in the mean while, they fastned a Rope a-cross the Stable, twelve or thirteen foot high from the ground, for the Rope Dancer gave him to understand, that it must be at least so high for the better performing their business. I stood there hardby, and I was very much pleased that my Father would learn to Vault, but I knew not that his leaping would be followed with such mischiefs, as happened thereupon. Thus when all was ready, and that the Ladder was placed upon the Rope, this brave young Man put off his upper Cloaths, and then went to the Rope, where having done some Tryals of Skill, he showed my Father how he must do the Strapado. This being performed, the Rope- dancer put on his Cloaths again; and having helped his Apprentice to mount upon the Rope, he made him put his two Leggs between his Arms; after which he pull'd him by the Feet in such a manner, that my Father whose Leggs were descended somewhat too low, to turn afterwards his Bum between his Arms, as the other Rope dancers do: but the Spark began to laugh at him, took away the Ladder, and the Keys out of his Pocket, and (for after the Example of his Master, he had put off his upper Cloaths that so he might be the more active and light) then went into the house, where having opened the Chests and Drawers, and Trunks, he took all that he had, a mind to without making any great haste: for he knew very well, that my Father, by reason the Rope was so high from the Ground, durst not let himself fall. In the mean while the poor man cried out most lamentably, being extreamly tired with hanging in that manner; and fancying, that his Goods and Moneys were packeting up, that he became very hoarse; but because this Stable was far distant from the High-way no body could hear him. I began also to cry, and I would willingly have helped my Father, but I had not Strength sufficient to put the Ladder again in its right place: wherefore, tho I was very young, I ran out towards the Street, to call out for help from some of the Neighbours and Passengers; but I had no sooner lifted up the Latch of the Door, then that the Rope-dancer struck me, and threatned me with a naked Knife to cut my Throat, if I did not return immediately into the Stable. These Menaces were accompanied with a dozen Boxes of the Ear, which made me return back to the place swifter than I came from thence; where I was no sooner arrived, than that I saw the lamentable End of this impertinent Curiosity: For my Father being almost become mad to be robbed in this manner of all his Goods, and his Arms being no longer able to support his Body, he let go his Hold, and by a great Fall broke his left Legg, the Pain whereof made him cry out so hideously, that his Master, who quickly imagined what the matter was, came thither again, Landlord, said he to him, as soon as he saw him lying in that lamentable Condition, It is the common Fate of most of those who exercise our calling: However, I do not doubt but that you will become an expert Master; but comfort your self for having so well learnt this hard Trick. When I return, added he, bursting out alaughing, I'll teach you the double Strapado , and the Balance , and so you'll have an occasion to break your Neck after a delicate manner. Thereupon he went again into the House, and presently after away with all he could carry, pulling the Door after him. In the mean while my Father lamented, and cried out so piteously, that he forgot to order me to open the Door, and bawl out Thieves; by which means we might have recovered our Goods, whereof we have never re-got the least again, tho as you will see in the Sequell of this Narrative, if you take but the pains to read so far, I made him pay dearly for his Robbery. It was about half a quarter of an hour afterwards that my Mother returned from Church with her Maid, and were much amazed to see the Door so close shut: they knocked: Whereupon I went forward, siezed with fear, by reason I imagined that the Hop-merchant was come again. As soon as I opened the Door, I leap'd upon my Mothers Neck, who seeing me in so deplorable an Estate, knew not what to think on't. She asked me what the matter was, and why I lamented so much? But for a long while I was not able to make her an Answer, by reason Sighs and Sobs hindered me from speaking. At length I related to her, that my Father had had a mind to learn to Vault, and that his Master had robbed us so piteously. Thereupon they ran to the Cupboards and Truncks, found them open, and that the best Booty was carried away: Then my Mother went to the Stable, where she saw her Husband lying upon the Ground, groaning so hideously out of Pain, that he would have moved to Compassion the hardest Heart in the World. She lamented as much as he, tho' not for his Misfortunes, but for the loss of our Goods. Whereupon she fell into such a Fury, that she swore she would let him die there, without any Help; for that by the sillyest and maddest Action in the World, he had rendred himself unworthy of Life. I do not doubt but that she would have effected her Word, by contributing towards his Death, for very far from comforting him, or at least sending for a Chirurgeon, she seized on a Fork she found in the Stable, and would have knocked out his Brains, if the Maid by good luck had not been there to prevent the Blow. I was so amazed at this terrible Enterprize, that I ran out of our House, and beseeched two or three of our Neighbours, that they would in all haste go to our House, because that my Mother would Massacre my Father. They went thither immediately, and found my Father in that lamentable Condition, and my Mother in such a Posture as the Infernal Furies are commonly seen painted: She foamed at the Mouth, and her Eyes rolled in her Head after such a ghastly dreadful manner, that I began to imagine, that she was grown distracted; and certainly this was not without reason: For I do not believe that the Devil can have a more hideous Face, than a Woman, who is extreamly in Anger. In the mean while our Maid related the Business to our Neighbours, after the same manner she had heard it from me; and tho' they had before their Eyes this Tragical Spectacle, they burst out alaughing to that degree at my Father's Folly, that they were constrained to hold their Sides; which so enflamed my Mothers Anger, that she was every Minute ready to leap into the Poor Man's Face; but those good People took her aside, and sent immediately for a Chirurgeon, who having set his Leg, went to a Constable, to tell him the State of the Affair, as the Custom is, and by this means, this ridiculous and lamentable Vaulting made such a Noise that same day, that there was hardly Wine and Ale enough in the House to entertain the Guests who came thither out of Curiosity. As soon as my Father was cured of this Fall, he began to look better after his business, and applyed himself thereto, with as much diligence and zeal, as if he had been a Ghostly Comforter, or a Preacher in a Ship; but all this did him but little good; for my Mother since the loss of her Goods, had conceived so mortal a hatred against him, that she could hardly bear the sight of him: On the otherside, my Father conjecturing at length, that with all his goodness he could not repair the fault he had committed, and that it had caused him the loss of all his Authority, began to take an other course, endeavouring to make his Wife be mindful of her Duty by sensible Reasons, insomuch, that sometimes the Pots and Glasses flew like Hail about the Room. They came also at length to such an extremity, that she would neither lye nor eat with him. In the mean while our Trade began to lessen by degrees, which proceeded principally from these continual disputes and perpetual Debates, for my Mother, (as Women are not so good at dissembling and curbing their Passions as Men are) did not fear to give her Husband all manner of Affronts before their Guests, and she ratled him with so many injurious provoking words, that most commonly he was constrained to get him out of the Chamber, and to wait for a better occasion to punish her for this Affront with Interest. This Irregular Life lasted, until I had attained the Age of eleven years old, when my Father fell into a Fit of Sickness, which I fancy, was only occasioned by his Melancholly. For since we dwelt out of the City, he was become so lean, that nothing was to be seen in all his Body, but Skin and Bone. And indeed, I had as much Commiseration for the poor Man, as a Child can have for a Father, and though I was still young, I cursed the Unnatural Cruelty of my Mother, who would hardly suffer me to speak to him, and threatned me very severely when she saw that I pittyed him, so much had hatred bastardized all Love and Humanity. The poor Man had lain about three Weeks in this condition, when upon my instant desires, we so ordered the business, that we prevailed with my Mother to see him once more, by reason he found Death approaching, and that he had still something to say to her, which imported her very much. At first she would not listen to him at all; but at length, our Maid and I prevailed with her so far by our Importunities and Groans, that she came to his Bed side. I am at present, said he, with a very feeble and languishing Voice, (as soon as she had placed her self on his Bed side) upon the brink of Death, and therefore I desire you for that I would not dye willingly with a troubled Conscience, that you would pardon me the faults that I have committed towards you. True it is that I am the cause of all our unfortunate Condition, but when you shall be pleased to consider, that I am the innocent cause thereof, and that I have been pretty severely punish'd for my impertinent Curiosity, I hope you will strip your self of all your anger, and that before my Death you will give me a proof of your Affection by embracing and pardoning me all the Troubles I may have given you. God knows, continued he, with tears in his eyes, that I have always loved you as tenderly as my heart, but your insuperable malice has often times brought upon you mischiefs, which I should never have thought of. However, these things are now passt and gone, and there is no way to help them. I have only one Request to make you, which is thus, You would bring up our little Daughter honourably, and give her good instructions, and encouragement to Piety, for Riches unjustly acquired do seldom profit much; and --- the good Man was come so far, when a fainting fit hindred him from continuing. The pitteous condition my Mother saw him in, and his words full of Humility, had moved her something to Compassion; insomuch, that she began to melt into tears. She embraced him very affectionately, and at that time show'd him more kindness, than she had done for the space of three years. However I cannot certainly affirm that she was real in her Carriage, or whether it was only to observe the Custom, and not to refuse a dying man his Request, and indeed, methinks I have reason enough to doubt thereof, for my Father was no sooner dead, than that we could remark nothing else in all her sadness, than a gloomy look, which was put on only to deceive the World, by making it believe that she was sad for the Death of her Husband; but this the Judicious Reader will not blame the Woman for, for at present, there are so many Widdows who bewail their Husbands with one eye, and lure new Lovers with the other, that it is almost universally the Mode, and it has always been a fine thing to follow the Fashion. My Father being thus dead, as I have said, and having been buried, my Mother remained absolute Mistress, though but of a mean stock to subsist on, and maintained the House with all that was necessary for it; though that I was still very young, I knew how to Converse with and entertain our Guests, and by telling one pleasant Story or other, I made them drink a pint or two the more, for every one took as much delight in seeing my Carriage as in hearing my reasons; thus our Trade would have undoubtedly encreased, if I had been of a riper Age, and if the Guests could have conceived the least hopes of obtaining any favour from me; but the flesh was yet too young, and wholly uncapable of being put upon the Spit. When we had dwelt a Year and a half longer at Islington , my Mother thought convenient to return to the Town, for our House was situated so far from all Conveniences, that hardly any Body came thither, unless they were necessarily obliged thereunto; especially in the Winter, for the Summer Trade indeed was pretty good: And I remember that from time to time there was some man or other lay all Night at our House, and that upon such occasions I was forced to roost with the Maid, whereas at other times I lay in my Mothers Arms, from whence I then concluded, that she must needs be a very Commiserating Woman, since to free people out of pain, she imported to them the half of her Bed, but she made them dearly pay for this pitty; and I could easily perceive, that the Chimney smoak'd more, and better by the half, when we had a night-Guest with us than otherwise. But as I deal plainly and frankly in all things, no Body must imagine that my Mother was a Woman to be made use of by all sorts of People, nothing less than that such things only happened with those who had found the art to ingratiate themselves into her favour, and who provided our Kitchin and our Bodies with all things we stood in need of. For to others, she shewed her self so inaccessible, that she would have flown in their Faces if they had but taken the boldness to kiss her. And though she had attained the Age of thirty four years when my Father dyed, yet I could not observe that there was any Body that was the less earnest to cajole her: for not being naturally ugly, and decking her self with all that is proper to please the World, there were but few, if she could in the least perceive that she might draw advantage by them, who knew how to avoid the Snares she laid them. Besides, there are many Men who have an inclination for superannuated flesh; and certainly, it is not inconvenient that there are such Fools in the World; for otherwise those poor Maidens who have lost the Flower and the best of their Youth, either for want of Gallants, or by having been too proud, would otherwise be at a terrible plunge, and they must in spite of their teeths, keep eternally their Maidenheads, whereas they still couple sometimes with the one or other Widdower, who is constrained to seek out a Mother for three or four Worms. I speak too of those who have already laid forty years aside, and who begin anew to make Love: For Men imagine that these are good Houswifes; but I assure quite the contrary often happens, and I know such of that Tribe, who without taking any notice of the Children of the first Bed, gave sufficiently to understand by their lascivious glances and impudent Caresses, that they had not kept their Maidenhead so long, but that there was no Body that Courted them in Marriage: Wretched then are those Widdowers, who are not able enough to give those old toothless Creatures their belly full, for those old Holes must be satisfyed, or else they must accustom their heads to Brow-Antlets, that their being of the Fraternity of Acteon , may make the less noise in the World. But by these sort of extravagant Discourses I might wander too far from my Design, that I should almost forget what I have to say: Wherefore I think it more reasonable to lay aside these old wrinckled Wenches; But let us go gently, I am mistaken, as long as they have no Husbands, no Wrinckles are discovered, because the Fore-top is so strongly fastened, that the Forehead in spite of Teeth must seem smooth; and tho' this causes a terrible pain in the Head, yet they will not complain of it: for it is much better to endure a little Pain, than to serve for a Remedy to love, by suffering a wrinckled Forehead to appear. I told you, to return to our Subject, that my Mother, to get a Trade, and subsist with Honour (for a great deal must be endured for that) she suffered her self to be often Courted; and that after the death of my Father, having dwelt about a year and a half at Islington , she found it more advantageous to return to Town, for to be the nearer her Customers; and not to make poor young men run so far with their troublesome Weapons. For that purpose she took a House near Smithfield . This was a large and stately House, insomuch that we should not have been able to have furnished it in the two or three last years of my Father's Life, since that from time to time we were forced to sell some or other of our Goods to furnish the rest of the House, and the other Necessities: For then our Profit still grew less and less; but since my Mother was become a Widow, and that upon Occasion she had sometimes satisfied her Acquaintance, our Money and Goods were so visibly augmented, that we then could receive honourably a Man of Quality and Merit. However this could not in any manner be compared with what we had possessed before that this abominable Hop-merchant had learnt my Father the Strapado ; and if we could but have kept that, we might have buried the Old Man with more Honour than we did: For to speak the Truth, we had hardly then as much left as would maintain us alive for a week or two, unless we would have sold our Furniture; and if my Mother had not played with her Buttocks at that time we should have been in a poor Condition; and tho' several Men of a nice and disdainful Humor, make it a Trade to criticize upon persons, who make their profit on that part of the Body; yet I do not think that herein they have any great reason: For the Fist and the Tail are made of one and the same Flesh, and Sweating is as easily got by that, as by the most laborious Trade that is exercised. Thus as soon as we had brought our Moveables into our new House, we began to set all things in Order, so that in a little time we might get a good Sum of Money, and certainly something would have come of this, for our Traffick grew daily better and better, if my Mother had not happened to fall ill at the beginning of the Winter. This made me extreamly sad, tho' in the beginning I did not think that there was any Danger. But my Grief augmented in the twinckling of an Eye: when I heard our Maid say, that it was the Small Pox which began here and there to break out: For I had observed in other persons, that it is a Disease which renders People ugly, as well the young as the old; and tho' I was still young, I nevertheless observed, that one amorous Bout brought us more Profit than ten times running to the Tap. My Mother, who was void of all Comfort upon this Accident, and who was pretty well on towards her Fortieth year, wished a thousand times rather to have had the Covent-Garden Gout : For she fancied she should be sooner freed from it than these villainous Swellings. Nevertheless they began to break out in such abundance upon her Face, that one could have hardly placed a Pins Head without touching those Devilish things, which cast the poor Woman into such a Despair, that Night and Day she did nothing else than groan and complain. However, after nine Days the Pox began to aposthumate, which render'd her Face so dreadful and hideous, that she, who before resembled a Venus in Beauty, had then the Figure of a Medusa . I trembled for fear every time I looked upon her: For her Nose, which in the time of her Blossom was none of the longest nor thickest, was now of a prodigious Length and Breadth, by reason of the Scabs wherewith it was so covered all over, that one would have rather taken it for a Steeple than a Nose. However, all would yet have gone well enough, if that while no body was in the Chamber, the good Woman had not leapt out of Bed, and taken a Looking Glass, which we had refused her for a long time before: She saw her Face, and observing that it was so thick, and so ugly, she gave so terrible a Shriek, that all the House rang with it. The Maid and I who were seated and chattering together, ran thither immediately; but we came not time enough to hinder a thing which has drawn Tears from her Eyes a thousand times: For she was in so desperate a Condition, that with both her Hands she scratched all her Face, insomuch that the Blood ran down her Cheeks. In the mean while we prevailed with her so far, that we brought her a gain somewhat to her right Sences, and put her to Bed; but she was so troubled and distracted for the Loss of her Beauty, that we had all the pains imaginable to bear with her. Two or three Weeks being passed, she recovered her Health, and made use of all manner of Artifices, for to seem still what she had formerly been; but all in vain: For her Cheeks, when as I have said already she scratched with so much violence the Aposthumate Pox, had received such deep Wounds, that every Pit resembled a Cautery. Besides, the Winter by its violent Cold, had rendred the new Skin with which her face was covered so blew that she might justly pass for a Remedy to love. Those who before valued her so highly, did now droll upon her as much and laugh at her for that having spent so many years, she had not yet had the Small Pox and the Meazles. And certainly this seems somewhat ridiculous, but what remedy against an unfortunate Destiny; But however wee should have been happy in all these adversities; if they had contented themselves with Jestings; but the most part of our giving Customers forsook the House; and if there was any one now who still frequented it, it was not for the Love of my Mother, but to caress me: For I began to become ripe, which made me have an Abomination for the Cursed Passions of certain Men, who seem to think there is no Sin in Violation and Brutality. However, I shall never be obliged to answer for so horrible a Crime: For I was so vexed to see my self Courted by those same Men, who long before had to do with my Mother, that provoked with Spite, I drove them all out of the House. In the mean while the Rumor ran abroad amongst the Lovers of Gallantry, that I was already for the Sport; which made several of them come to our House, to see if they could attain a Leap with me: amongst whom there were a great Number of young Sparks, Merchants Servants, and Cash-Keepers: For that Race is commonly full of Curiosity; and tho' I was tall of stature, yet I was not over discreet, and perhaps I might have been caught and tempted by those Beardless Youths, had not my Mother been watchful over my Conduct; and had she not continually preached to me, that those old Rusty blades who did it only once in four and twenty hours, were the best, and gave most Money. However, we plum'd some of these young Droles of their Feathers, for there was to be at least two or three dishes of Sweetmeats, before they could have the honour to kiss me but once, and this difficulty rendred them so hot and eager, (because I made every one believe that it was he who enjoyed the favour of my Affection) that no means could have made them abstain from our House. Thus while we fed every one with hopes, but granted not one any peculiar favour (for to speak the truth, I was yet something too young to do my own concern) there came to our House a certain Surrey Gentleman, who had no sooner seen me, then that he used all manner of means to please me, which he did with much better success than he could have imagined; for he was the most beautiful man I think I ever saw in all my life; besides, his Tongue was so admirably well hung, that he had, the greatest Capacity in the World to excite Love in the most insensible heart. My Mother quickly conjectured how Affairs went, and therefore never set foot out of the Room as long as this Spark was in our Company, Insomuch, that I had never any occasion to show him by my courtesie that I had given him my Inclinations. The good Gentleman who quickly observed that he could never bring about his Designs, as long as my Mother watch'd me so narrowly, slipt a Letter one Evening into my hand, without any one's taking notice of it, and therein he told me, That if I would go away with him to St. Alban's, or into some other Place, he would keep me as his Wife; that it was not possible for him to live any longer without me, and that he would not have offered me that means if he had not seen that my Mother opposed my Fortune . With several other such like things, which pleased me to such a degree, that I resolved, by reason that from my Infancy I had had a peculiar inclination for handsom men, to grant him his Request, and take my own Passport under my heels; and methought that this was no so indecent a business, for we find so many amongst those of the highest Quality, whose insurmountable Lasciviousness has made them take this Course that our Neighbours could not be much amazed at it. But while I was preparing all things for my flight, by reason that within two days we intended to be on the Wing, there came one time four Gentlemen to our House, whom Heaven had sent thither undoubtedly on purpose to hinder me from committing a fault which I should have so long time repented of. The Countenance of my pretty Spark, who had been seated by the side of me, for two or three hours together, became as red as Blood as soon as he saw these four Men come in, and without so much as paying the Reckoning, he went away out of our House. One of the four who had the looks of a brisk and facetious Gallant, began immediately to laugh so loud, that he was forc'd to hold his Sides. Would you believe, said he to his Company, as soon as his immoderate Laughter was something moderated, that the honest Gentleman who was seated by this Maiden was such a Man? We must own (continued he) that looks are extreamly deceitful, and that what he has done did well deserve an Exemplary Punishment. How! (said the others) is this a Robber who has merited the Gallows or some other Death? He merited much more than one Death alone (replyed he who spoke first of all) for he has suborned a young Lady, whom he was not worthy of by the thousandth part! Did he then, Sir, promise to Marry her, (asked I him, not being able to forbear blushing at the same time) for methought I was sufficiently concerned in the business; and that he had either broke his word, or got the person with Child? You do him too much honour, pretty Creature, said he to me who know him so well, and he might wish with all his Heart that that were true; but (continued he) not to leave you any longer in suspence, I will tell you the whole Affair just as it happen'd. This pleasant Drole was one Squire --- is descended from one of the richest and most Considerable Families of the County of Surrey , and had always been esteemed for a brave and civil young Gentleman. For he had the Art to do all things with that Neatness and with so good a Grace, even before that he had yet attained to a Competent Age, that in his Countrey he pass'd for a perfect Gallant. He very rarely frequented the Company of young Men, and there was never any report of his having committed any disorder with them, insomuch, that so many fine Qualities being joyned to a vast Estate, all the young Ladies of the Countrey wish'd him for their Husband, and all Mothers for their Son in Law. As he had not thitherto given his heart to any Body, and as he seemed to love all Women equally, every Damosel flattered her self with the hopes that she should be the person who should find her felicity in possessing him. While Affairs stood in this posture a Suit at Law brought him to London , where he often visited a certain Widdow whom we will call Lucinda , who was of the same County; and his Neighbour. Lucinda had great famillarity with an other Lady, and her Daughter who came frequently to see her. Now our Squire was so highly extolled by Lucinda , and some others who had seen him, that Celiana the Lady and Mother of the Daughter I mentioned, conceived such an esteem for him, before she had seen him once, that from that very moment she was wishing to have him for her Son in Law, so foolish and rash are most part of Women. These Ladies going one day to the Play together, the Squire happening to be there at the same time, had no sooner seen Lucinda , whom he was particularly acquainted with, surrounded with these Strangers, than that he endeavoured to Court the occasion of ushering her to her Coach, which having accomplish'd, he took that opportunity to strike up a Match to play with her and the Ladies Daughter at Ombre the next day, not expecting that this first encounter would prove so unfortunate to him. As he had not the least design of acting the part of Lucinda's Lover, tho she was not much in Years, he accosted Clara , (this is the name of the young Lady) discourst Her, and found her Conversation so charming, that he fell in Love with Her, being the first time in all his Life that e're he was enamoured. By these means growing familiarly acquainted, he quickly found the means to visit his new Mistress, and still observing more and more Charms in her Wit and Person, he made no difficulty to declare his Love to that young Widow, who immediately communicated this Piece of News to Celiana, Clara's Mother, not believing it would be unwelcome to her, and indeed Celiana was overjoyed at it and desired her Couzen to lend a helping Hand to this Business, after she had enquired after the Quality and Estate of our Gallant. Lucinda who was as cunning as is necessary to be in such like Affairs, to attain to a good end, carried Clara into all Companies which she knew the Squire used commonly to frequent; but however to enflame him so much the more, she managed the Intrigue after such a manner, that he could not always speak to her according to his desire, even when that he once had opened his Heart to her, she represented to him the Matter something difficult, without making it seem impossible to him: She told him that Clara had been courted in Marriage, by many Persons of Quality, but that thitherto her Father having made choice of none, in that respect she would endeavour all she could to have him preferred before all others. This answer rendred him so much the more greedy, and made him still and still more passionately desirous to have Clara for a Wife, which possibly he would not have been, if he had known that he himself was courted. Yet the Truth is, that Clara and her Father knew nothing of all this in the beginning, and this Commerce was a long time managed by Lucinda and Celiana , but as soon as they saw that Affairs were in a good Posture, they gave an account of those secret Amours to Cleon that young Ladies Father who being very particularly pleased with the Person of our young Squire, and being informed of his Estate and his Riches, was very well satisfied. At the same time, the Squire for his part declared to his own Father the Love he had for this young Lady, and he desired him to approve of this Choice: The Father, who by the report of other Persons, found that Cleon was able to give a Portion with his Daughter suitable to his Sons Fortune, gave his consent thereto very willingly; in case, said he to his Son, that you be assured of the Maidens Affection, and her Parents Approbation. Thereupon the Squire went immediately to Lucinda , related to her the Discourse he had had with his Father, and desired her to do her best endeavours that were possible in his behalf; whereupon she made him answer with a smiling Countenance, that the Affair was half done that there was not much trouble when one had to speak for a Person so well made, and endued with so many fine Qualities as himself, and assured him that if her Father asked Clara for him in Marriage, she would not be refused him: However you have some small Obligation to me, added she smiling, for I have spoke so many good things of you, as I believe have contributed very much towards the producing and entertaining the favourable Sentiments that her Relations have of you. The Squire gave her humble Thanks, and made her the finest Protestations imaginable, that he would never let so great a Service escape his Memory. As soon as our Lover, (whose Heart was so deeply smitten, that he could hardly take a moments repose) had taken his leave, Lucinda went to discover to Celiana all the Discourse she had had with him touching this Marriage. Celiana who received an incredible Joy from this News, made known to her Husband how far Affairs were advanced, and commanded her Daughter to receive the Squire thenceforward as a Lover, who was quickly to be her Husband. Clara who had already had some inkling of this Commerce, was very much astonished to see that Affairs were already come so far, that it was almost impossible to hinder her Marriage any longer, had a secret Grief for that she had an other Lover, for whom her Heart had some Kindness. However, as she had Wit enough, and as she had always been obedient to her Parents, she endeavoured to surmount her Sadness, and not to make it appear either to her Relations or her Servant. In the mean while our Gallant went to visit her the day after, and made her a Declaration of Love, full of acuteness and Beauty of Wit. He protested also to her at the same time that he did not desire she should force her Inclinations, and he made these Complements with so many Charms of Homage and Affection, that almost in a moment he made her forget her other Lover, who had made such deep Impressions in her Heart. She declared to him thereupon that the amazement she was in at the sudden Advancement of those Affairs, did not allow her to answer after such a manner as she was willing upon the Honour she received from him, and that she did not think to have merited it, but that though she was ready to follow blindly the choice of her Parents, she should obey them with the more Courage, when she was to fall into the Arms of a Man of his Merit. As Clara had been satisfied with the Squire's Complements, so he was no less with those she made him; for he found therein so much Prudence and Civility, that he took his leave of her more enamoured than he had ever been. However, before he went out of the House, he spoke of his Amours to Cleon and Celiana , and after having been received by them with all the Testimonies of Affection, he desired his Father again the same day to go ask Clara for him in Marriage, which was solemnized two days afterwards, the Damosel received him with a chearful Heart, and the Rumour of this Marriage was quickly spread about the Town. As this Intrigue had till then been managed secretly, there were many who were much amazed at it. Those Mothers who had thought to have catch him for their Daughters were very sad: the Ladies who had given him their Inclinations were in the deepest Dispair. And those Men whom he had thought worthy of his Friendship, though there were very few of that sort, for he very seldom haunted the Company of Men, were very sensibly afflicted, because they fancied that Clara being the only Daughter of her Parents, that match would make him abandon the Countrey. To make short, the whole Town was in Mourning, and every one could have wished to have put a Spoke in his Wheel. In the mean while, all the Relations of the Bridegroom went to congratulate the Bride, and every one by Treats and Banquets endeavouring to shew her the Joy they had for this Marriage. All the while that these Feastings and Treats lasted, and that Clara had her new Lover by her Side, she quite forgot Aleippe , that was the Name of the Votary she abandoned, but in a while she began to think of him again, and dreaded the fight of him, by reason she was afraid she should still find him amiable, and she knew very well that her Love could only bring her disquiet. But the News of this Wedding coming to Aleippe's Ears, and being a Friend of all the Family, he made them a Visit, that he might be perfectly assured of the Truth of the Report and as he loved this young Lady from the very bottom of his Heart, he was resolved to know what Measures he had to take. Cleon did not hold him long in Suspence, for after the first Complements were passed, he related to him all that had happened in the Squires Presence, who seeing that Aleippe was a particular Friend of the Family, begg'd he would honour him with his Friendship. In the mean while, Aleippe stood like a Statue, his Countenance changed every Moment, and he knew not what answer was best for him to make. However he did his best to recollect himself, for fear they should entertain some suspicions of the Truth: then the trouble of his Face began to lessen, and his Voice became bolder; when Clara entred the Room, the sight of her made his Face glow anew, and the Grief he had for this Marriage might easily have been taken notice of, if for the hiding of it he had not gone some Steps forward as it were to meet her, as pretending to congratulate her upon her Marriage. Clara for her part felt no less Emotion, and having perceived that he was informed thereof, as soon as she came into the Room, she cast her Eyes down to the Ground, for fear some Alteration should be observed in her. Countenance, which was also the Cause, that she quickly found a Pretext to go out of a Room where she could not stay without feeling new Emotions. Aleippe in like manner did no longer delay taking leave, and went immediately to his Lodging and so to Bed, that he might not be disturbed by any Body, and that he might curse all the Female Sex upon the account of his faithless Mistress. That Night he changed his Resolution a thousand times, sometimes he resolved to challenge his Rival, then again to make his open Complaints to his Mistress, or else some other such like Design; but at length after, having thought of all things, and passed all the Night without sleeping, he resolved to dissemble his resentment, seeing the Business was done, and that if he made any noise it would only tend to the banishing him the House, rather than be of any advantage to him; and as he still loved her as much as ever, he resolved to frequent her as a Friend, and not to discover any thing of all that had passed between him and her unknown to her Parents. For he imagined that Clara might still love him notwithstanding her Marriage, and that the Squire in so little a time could not have won her Heart, but that she had marry d him out of Obedience, and that perhaps he should not be so unhappy as he had represented to himself. With these Thoughts he returned as before to Clara's House, and the Discourses he sometimes had with his former Mistress, made him believe that he was not deceived in his Thoughts; for whether that she loved him still, or that she was willing to hinder him from telling that she had had some Kindness for him formerly, she was always saying to him the most tender and the most touching Things imaginable, she assured him she only marryed the Squire out of Obedience, and made him believe that his Happiness was much greater than that of his Rival. In the mean while Aleippe could not observe that Marriage had inspir'd the more Love into Clara for her Husband; for to say the Truth he had done nothing less than what Duty requires from a Man in such an Occasion. But however, he did not find her the less Chaste and Prudent, for though she assured him she had not banished him her Heart, and though he himself might easily read in her Eyes, that she loved him with a very violent Affection; nevertheless they endeavoured to avoid his Presence, insomuch that Vertue still more and more set at a greater Distance, what Love seem'd to be so fond of favouring. Affairs were for above a Year in this Posture, without the amorous Aleippe's being able to effect any thing to his Advantage, notwithstanding all the diligence he used for that Purpose. In the mean while the Relations and Goranymphs were almost dayly teazing the young Woman, if she was with Child, which Queries at length beginning to grow troublesome, she answered them after a tutchy manner, that she knew no reason she should be with Child, since she found nothing in Marriage that could render her so. Having uttered these Words she began to blush and cast down her Eyes upon the Ground, as if she would have made them believe, that it was not altogether designedly that she spoke in that manner; but only to free her self from the Importunity of those who asked her dayly the same things and such like Questions. However her Mother being present understood the thing after another manner, and having called her Daughter alone, after having ask'd her several such like Questions as are easy to be imagined, she was at length informed of the Truth, and had no longer any other Thought than to remedy the Fault she had committed in precipitating the Marriage with so much Rashness. In the mean while, the Rumour of his Insufficiency was quickly spread about the House, from the Family through all the Relations, from the Relations into the Neighbourhood, and so through all the Town. Aleippe was overjoyed to hear the News, and when he considered, that his Mistress having been already married for the space of a Year, was still a true Virgin, he could hardly conceal his Joy; for having pretty often observed that she loved him, and imagining that this Accident might bring about a Marriage between her and him, and that nothing was equal to her Vertue, since neither the Love she bore him, nor the Impotence of her Husband were able to move her, to suffer the least- thing that was capable of making a breach in her Honour, he received a hundred Motions of Joy, in that he had not accomplished his first Resolution; Namely, to challenge that Impotent Spark, nor to declare himself the Enemy of his Mistress, by acting against her with too much Choler. In the mean while, the Parents of this Virgins Wife, let Squire Limberham's Father and Friends know, that the Marriage was not accomplished, and that they who had brought him up from his Infancy, could not without doubt be ignorant of what he was; they added hereto, that, if his Son did not give and show better Signs and Testimonies of his Manhood, they would cause the Marriage to be made null: the Father, who had not seen, perhaps in twenty years, his Sons Instruments, set light by such Discourses, and would not write one word in answer to their Complaints. In the mean while, none was more eager than Squire Limberham to divulge these things about, by reason that he figured to himself, that by these means he would make every one believe that there was nothing of Truth in the Matter. He also invented a Trick which was capable of blinding a thousand Persons; his Wife's Chamber-Maid was turn'd out of the House big with Child, which was well enough known in the World, but thitherto no Body could divine who was the Author of that Business. Squire Limberham alone knew that his Man was the Father; but as he had a great Kindness for him, and that he must have been obliged to have turned him away, if it once came to be discovered that he had got it, he had always pretended to know nothing of the Matter. Now he went to the Maid who was every moment expecting to fall in Labour, and gave her fifty Guinnies to oblige her to lay the Child to him, and to tell all People that he was the Father of it. About a Week after the Chamber-Maid was brought to Bed, and she did as she was ordered, which caused such a Noise through all the Town that it became the whole Subject of Discourse, both of small and great. People began to gaze upon one another, and knew not what now to say of a Man who had so brave a Boy newly Born. Hereupon Squire Limberham was brought into the Spiritual Court, by some that knew there would be a great deal of Money to be got, and charg'd him with having violated the Honour of his Marriage. Squire Limberham for his part had his Lawyers to plead the contrary with great earnestness, though he would not have been very sorry though the Cause had gone against him; for by that means his Father and Mother-in-Law would have been found to have been in the wrong, and he would have been look'd upon as a Man very proper for the Multiplication of Human kind, which was the very Hinge of the whole Business. Now as these Affairs had been for above three Weeks or a Month in the same state, and that every one spoke diversly thereof, Aleippe , began to fancy that there might be some Mystery hidden in this Business, and therefore resolved to try all manner of Means to discover this Commerce. For that purpose he went to the Chamber- Maids Lodgings, whom he was very well acquainted with, believing that if Gain had oblged her to Lye, another of greater Importance would make her declare the Truth. At the very first he pretended to know the whole Affair, but the Chamber-Maid was too cunning to let her self be caught in such Snares. Afterwards, he promised much more than that vain Pretender to getting of Children, but she refused to receive his offer, fearing some Mischief might happen to her, after having too obstinately maintained such a Cheat. Aleippe assured her of the contrary, saying, he had Friends who were powerful enough to secure her from all Danger: These Reasons being seconded with a good Sum of Mony made her quickly yeild. However she comported her self runningly in this Affair: for instead of giving Evidence by Word of Mouth against Squire Limberham in this Affair, she gave Aleippe a Letter, but upon Condition he should say that he had found it by chance. In that Letter Squire Limberham writ to her, That she should stand firm to her Instructions and Depositions, that he had got the Child, assuring her, that during all her Life she should have wherewith to live plentifully upon, provided she could make the World believe this to be a Truth . And several other such like things. I know very well that it was a great Imprudence for a Man of Sence to confide such a thing in a Letter, and that there are many who would doubt of the Truth; but he is not the first amongst Men endued with Wit and Prudence, who has committed such a Fault. In the mean while Aleippe having this Letter in his Hands, went on the Morrow Morning early to the Court, and gave Information that he had found a Letter, by which it might be evidently made appear, that the Proceedings against Squire Limberham were set on foot out of Malice, since he was not Father of the Child, and having delivered thereupon the Letter to the Justice, it was read publickly, which caused so excessive a Laughter in the Court that the whole Chamber rung again. Squire Limberham's Council having collationed the Letter with those other Acts of his they had in their Hands, as if they could have justified him, found that the Writing was by the same Hand, insomuch that no Body did in the least doubt of the Truth of the Matter. However they would not wholly give up the Cause, but sent Sergeants to fetch both Squire Limberham and the Chamber-Maid. Limberham not in the least suspecting how Causes went, trooped thither immediately, and arrived almost at the same time that the Chamber-Maid did. The Letter was shown him by the Court, and he ask'd if he had not written it. Whereupon poor Squire Limberham became so ashamed and so amazed that he could not speak. Then they asked the Chamber-Maid for what reason she accused that Gentleman of a thing whereto he had not contributed in the least, as appears by the Letter. The Chamber-Maid seeing her self pressed, confessed the Truth, saying, that he had given her fifty Guinnies and made a promise to maintain her very splendidly all her Life long if she would stand fast to her Word, and would make him loose the Cause; that he had never had any Carnal Knowledg of her, but that his Man whom he had brought out of the Countrey with him, was the Father of the Child, and that never in her Life any other Person had had to do with her. Upon this Confession, and upon showing the Letter, the Indictment was cast out; but Squire Limberham was condemned for his Deceit to pay fifty Guinnies more to the Chamber-Maid, who was to be kept in the Constables Hand, until the Man who had debauched her, and who should be cited to marry her, had by that means repaired her Honour; and that thus they might afterwards by those hundred Guinnies undertake some such Employment as might help them to live honourably in the World. This Sentence was very much commended by all People, and Squire Limberham's Traffick was so laught at by all People, that for a while he durst hardly appear abroad, for the Affair was so publick that the whole Town pointed at him. In the mean while, this Adventure having more and more fortified in Cleon the Opinion, that his handsome Son-in-Law was Guelt, he presented a Request to Justice, by which he demanded the annullation of his Daughter's Marriage, or that his handsome Son-in-Law might be search'd by two Doctors, to know what might be the Cause of his Insufficiency, and if it was such, that according to Law the Marriage might be abolished. The last Point was granted him, two Doctors, and one of the eldest Chyrurgions received Orders to search this honest Gentleman, but he was wiser than that comes to, and confessed as soon as those three Men came to his House, that he had nothing at all to show them, and that since it so pleased Justice he would desist from his Wife, thought he had for her the greatest Affection imaginable. Upon this Confession the Marriage was made null within three days afterwards, and Squire Limberham retired into Surrey , for infallibly the Oyster Women would haue fallen upon him and scratched his Eyes out. It is now about two Months since this happened, and Aleippe who was the Principal Cause of this Affair, has already made Clara sensible of the difference there is between him and Squire Limberham . But what do you think, said that Gentleman who told us this Story, addressing himself to me, is not this a brave Spark to pretend to be thus in love with all the Women he meets with? Confess the Truth, added he, has not he made some love to you? for it is impossible for him when he is with any Woman, who has the least Beauty, to forbear Courting her. The Truth is, I was so much out of Countenance, and so full of Vexation to have been so miserably deceived by this Eunuch, that I could not utter the least Word: But my Mother who never could endure this Squire Limberham , for that he always sat and discourst with me, served for my Interpreter, and chattered so fast, that these Gentlemen had no small reason to laugh; for though she had hardly heard ten Words spoken by my Impotent Lover, during all the time he had haunted our House, she knew nevertheless how to relate a hundred Circumstances of our Amours so pertinenely, that though this Affair did not please me in the least, I could hardly forbear Laughing my self. In the mean while, my Thoughts were so full of this Adventure, that I could not shut my Eyes all the Night long, and when that I began to consider, that this poor Limberham , in case I had gone away with him, would have suffered my lower parts to have endured Hunger after a miserable manner: I concluded that though it might have cost me Dear, I would have revenged my self for such a trick; for though I had not as yet tryed if amorous Sports be diverting, or not, I could however easily judg that they could not be unpleasing; for otherwise Women would not be so silly as to suffer themselves to be dishonoured with all their Race for the pleasure of a Moment. As soon as Day was come, and that my Mother, with whom, as I said, I lay, was awake, I desired her that she would not let Squire Limberham know in the least that we were informed of his Insufficiency; for said I to her, I am resolved to play him a Trick, and which perhaps may be something to our Advantage. My mother ask'd me near a hundred times what my Intention was, but I would not discover it, for I knew very well that had I unfolded my Design, I should never afterwards have been able to have brought it about; and I began this Discourse in the Morning out of no other Consideration, than to hinder her from embroiling and ruining the whole Intrigue, by an unseasonable Railery. Thus after she had promised me that she would never say a Word more of it, I prepared that same Morning, what was necessary for the accomplishing and effecting my Design. In the Afternoon, that Favourite of Venus came to our House, and excused himself by a long Shoal of Complements which he made my Mother, for that he the Evening before went away without paying his Reckoning. Thereupon he came to me, and after we had talked a while together, he asked me a thousand Questions full of cunning, to know also of me if I had heard something of his Business; but I was so prudent that I made not the least discovery; on the contrary, I treated him after a much more endearing manner than I had ever done before; for though I was very young, however as most young Women can, I knew how to dissemble to Perfection, so that the most cunning Man in the World would have been sufficiently puzzled to observe it: when he had strongly conceived in his Imagination, that I was ignorant of all, towards the Evening he gave me five Guinnies, for to buy what I still stood in need of for our Retreat, desiring me to meet him the next day about four a Clock in the Afternoon alone, in the Royal Exchange, where he would expect me. My Mother knew nothing of all this Enterprize, and so was not more careful to watch me, than she was used to be at other times; insomuch that it was no hard matter for me the day following to get out of the House at the time appointed. I went immediately to the Change, where I found my Servant, who received me with open Arms, and put me immediately into a Coach: He put a Ring upon my Thumb, being resolved to have me pass for his Wife, that he might lye honourably with me in the Lodging he had taken for us, and which was as stately as most about Town: My Landlord and Landlady admired me strangely, Lord, Madam, said my Landlady, you were married very young, or else your Looks do make you seem younger than your Years speak you to be. I cast down my Eyes upon the Ground just as if I had been out of Countenance, but I can assure, that Shame had taken its last leave of me for above a Year before, for I had seen so much, and heard so many things in my Mothers House, that I was wholly a Stranger to growing Pale or blushing. Squire Limberham in the mean while was admirably well satisfied, and went the next day with me to the Change in the Strand , to rig me anew from Top to Toe, for though the Cloaths I had were New, and in the Mode, and that I resembled rather the Daughter of a Rich Merchant, than of an Hostess, yet they did not please him, by reason they did not suit with his Cloaths, which were as Costly and Rich as if he had been a Duke. The Truth is, I was not very much dissatisfied, and though he should have bought me Diamond Rings, Pendants, and such Rarities, I believe I should not have been very much displeased. When we had spent the Day much after this rate, he treated me with a stately Supper, and afterwards like Man and Wife we went to Bed, whereupon Limberham , though impotent caressed and embraced me so passionately, that he made my Mouth Water, insomuch that I would have given all I had in the World that his Gimcrack had been in better Condition; for to speak the Truth, his Posture, his Looks, his Actions, and all his brave Qualities pleased me so well, that I should have infallibly had for him the greatest Passion in the World, if he had been something better provided with you know what; but when I began to think of that, all my Love vanished, and a mortal hatred came in its place to seize on my Heart. The Truth is, that I had committed something a hard Action, when upon the Relation of a Story, which I knew not certainly the Truth of, I durst trust a Man with my Maiden-head, who did not look like one that was Guelt: But, Courteous Reader, what shall I say thereof? Nature began to work, and it is a burdensome thing that bears the Name of a Maiden-head, and which several Damosels are obliged to keep so long for want of Servants, became every day more importunate and troublesom, insomuch that I could hardly support it any longer. When we had thus spent an hour in Kisses and Caressing one another, and after I had made him a thousand amorous Strains in Postures the most petulant imaginable, for to raise his Lust, if he had any in the least; (for my Design was, if I had found a brisk vigorous Gallant, to have stayed with him, and have left my Mother where she was) he told me that he would take a House, not far distant in the Countrey, for to dwell there together, and by reason that I was still a Maid, and very young, and that perhaps I could not endure the Torment of the first shock, without making a Noise, he would wait so long until that we were in a Place where we our selves should have Authority, without being obliged to respect any Body. Thereupon he kissed me several times and went to sleep. I said not a Word, neither do I believe could I have spoken, for Spight had so seized my Heart, that the Tongue was become as Motionless. But as soon as this Disorder was something over, I resolved to know by Experience of he was really Guelt after the manner I had been informed. To that purpose, when his Hogs-Norton's Organs had sufficiently assured me that he was sound asleep; I began to grope with my Hand, but I was above a Quarter of an hour before I could find it, which certainly was no very great Wonder; for first of all I was an Ignoramus in such Matters, and moreover it was so little that I knew not when I had it in my Hand, whether it was what I wanted. I deplored the poor Man's having had so unhappy a Fate, but on the other side I could not forbear (by reason he was so weak and so helpless) to Curse his Passion for Women, since he could do nothing more than whet their Appetites, without being able to satiate them in the least, I turn'd my self near a hundred times, sometimes on the one side, sometimes on the other, and tryed all ways to sleep, but all in vain; for the naked Body of the beautiful Limberham did so possess my Thoughts, and were too strong to suffer sleep to get the Mastery over my Sences: For when Damosels endeavour to make Men believe that they are not Lascivious, and that when they are married they will never take their Heats, unless Duty forces them to render such an Obedience to their Husbands: this is the greatest Lye, I assure you, that ever could be invented; and if I had an absolute Liberty to say all that I know in this Case, I would demonstrate that there was never any Sentence pronounced with more Truth than this following, That a Woman in a good Humour would let a Boy, a Rogue, nay a Hang-man do the Feat . But let us lay aside these Discourses, for Justice obliges me to take the Womens part, far from treading, them inhumanly underfoot, and exciting a great Tumult amongst that tumultuous Sex. However, I do not speak of all, but only of those who, as I was used to say, slacken their Reins too far to their irregular Lusts. In the Morning when he awaked, I pretended to be asleep to see what he would do, and if at least he would not put his Hand, where he could do no good with his Gimcrack; but he was too Chaste, and could do nothing but kiss and embrace me very amorously: by reason of which I seemed to awake at length. He ask'd me how I had pass'd the Night, and if I had slept well, I told him that the Thoughts of my Mother, and of my Flight, were still so fresh and so full in my Memory, that I did not begin before Morning to sleep, and therefore I desired him that he would let me take my Rest a little longer. Squire Limberham did so, after having kissed me again a hundred times; and jump'd out of Bed, to go walk, as he said, in St. James's Park. When I had no longer this naked Statue by the side of me, and that I was thus no longer tormented by those insupportable Temptations, I fell asleep, and continued so so long, until that word was brought me that the Taylor who had my Gown and Petticoats to make, was below, and that he desired to try them on. Whereupon I got me up, and was busied in changing my old Rigging for new: When that my Vallant Lover returned home, he was so charmed with me in those Cloaths, that in the Presence of all the Company he could not forbear leaping upon my Neck. O Heauens! said the Landlady who was there, how sond are these young People of one another: But wait, wait, continued she, until ye have attained to my Years, and eat first seven Bushels of Salt together, and then you'l see a strange Alteration. I thought to my self she would be a true Prophetess in that Affair, for I was well assured that we should not have eaten half a handful together, before we had put a Period to our Amours, and that my pretended Husband would curse the Hour he the first time saw me. The rest of the Day following being past in our Chamber in playing at Cards, and the Night being come, I put so much Opium into the Meat I gave Squire Limberham to eat (for I had, got some for that Purpose, after I had heard, a Druggist who was used to frequent my Mother, relate the Vertue of it) that it is proper to make a Person sleep soundly for fifteen or sixteen hours: the poor Man had it no sooner in, his Body than it began to operate, insomuch that he was constrained to go to Bed, complaining that he had a great Inclination to Sleep. I went to Bed with him as the Night before, and was treated just after the same rate, only it lasted not so long this time, for in less than a quarter of an hour he was so deep a sleep, that the Roaring of a Canon could not have awaked him. When he had lain thus about two hours, and that I thought I was as safe as a Mouse, I got up softly, and taking the Candlewhich I had left burning for that purpose, I search'd his Pockets, where I found a Purse of Gold: I opened it with a great deal of Joy, and having counted two or three times the Money that was in it, I found about a hundred and ten broad Pieces and Guinnies. In his Pocket on the Right Hand there was about three Pound ten in Crown pieces; but a Watch which he had in his Fob did so charm my Eyes, that I found my self constrained, if I would have my Mind at rest, to carry it away with me. I found nothing more of any value, wherefore I began to share the Gold, neither more nor less than if it had fallen to us both by Inheritance, into equal Portions, without taking a Peny more than what I left him. This being done, I put the half with the Purse into the same place from whence I took it, and sat me down by a Table which was in our Room, where having found all that was necessary for Writing, I framed this Letter.  It is with Thanks that I have accepted the Honour which you have been pleased to do me during two or three Days, and therefore as it is the Duty of a Man and a Woman, in case of Separation, I have shared our Goods; for the Marriage I contracted with you is no longer pleasing to me, by reason there is something wanting, from which Joy is expected, and the Fruits of the Conjugal Estate. However, be assured, that if I had found you a better and more valiant Husband, than your former Clara did, or the Chamber-Maid you got with Child by the help of your Man, whose Reins are undoubtedly better provided than yours, I should not have withdrawn my self from you; But a Maiden of my Age had need of something else than Bread, and since you had once been so unhappy in your Marriage, you ought to have banish'd the Female Sex wholly from your Thoughts, and no longer have applyed your Sences unto such unlucky Objects, or at least you ought to seek out one who is more stricken in Years, that your Insufficiency might not make you lose the second time, what your brave Deportment and your excellent Qualities had acquired you. Do not take it ill that I have seized upon your Watch, for in recompence I have left you all the Money in Silver, whereof the half did with as much Justice belong to me as that of the Gold. In short, though at present we have made Separation of Goods, Board, and Bed, I beseech you not to pass by our House without calling to see us when you come that way, where you shall be very welcome and have a Lodging, which you know is better to take at a Friends House, than that of a Strangers: And as I have trusted you with my Virginity, and that you were the first who could prevail with me so far, you may easily believe, (for the first Amours are the strongest) that you will ever be look'd upon with a kind Eye by her, whose Heart is oppressed with Sadness, when she remembers her Disappointment, in not having found you as performing in Bed, as you were at Table.  When I had writ this Letter, I went and laid my self down by him again in Bed, but then neither could I sleep a Moment, no more than the Night before, by reason my Head was pestred with too many Thoughts, as also the fear of sleeping too long was a very great hindrance. As soon as I saw the dawn of Day, I leapt cut of Bed, and put on my new Rigging, leaving the other there upon a Chair. Then as Squire Limberham slept as soundly as in the Night, I tyed this Letter to his Neck, after having for a long time done all that was possible to tye it to another Member, where there was not String nor hold enough. All this being so accommodated, I went down Stairs, and so out of the House, desiring my Landlady my Husband might not be disturbed in his Rest. Then taking Coach, I got overjoyed to our House, where I durst never have set my Feet, if I had followed my first Resolution of taking all my Equippage along with me, and not giving my Mother notice beforehand, that I would play Squire Limberham a Trick; and yet I should not have come off very well, by reason I fled away without saying a word to any Body, if the good Woman had not immediately perceived by my Garments; that I had lost nothing by this Retreat; but she was yet more satisfied, when I shewed her near threescore Pound in Gold, with the Watch which I had also taken for Company. She asked me presently how I had obtained all these fine things, whereupon I related the whole Affair, after the same manner it passed, which she laughed at soundly, but lest she would not believe all came off so happily, which obliged me to let her try it with her Finger; But having found that all was in its first Estate, we were the best Friends in the World, and presently some burnt Wine was prepared, that we might drown in the Glass the Sadness and Sorrow, which she said she suffered by my Absence. While we were thus in Sadness, I began to ask her what would be the best course to take, in case Squire Limberham should Sue us upon this Business. My Dear Daughter, answered my Mother with a smiling Countenance, it will be much more prudent, than to shew to Justice for the loss of sixty or seventy Pounds, such a Letter as that thou wrotest to him at thy Departure, and wherein thou hast so shamefully reproached him with his Insufficiency; but if it should happen that he should be so mad I will immediately accuse him of having stoln thee away without my knowing the least of the Matter, so that I do not doubt but that the one Knife will keep the other in the Sheath. And this proved the Truth of the Business, for Squire Limberham never came to seek out me, nor his Money, nor his Watch, which I was not very sorry for. About five Months after that I had played Squire Limberham this Pranck, my Maiden-head was sold the first time. Be not amazed, O Reader, that I say the first time, for I have lost it several times after the manner of Italy , to which purpose I made use of a certain Water, which rendred me always the same; and though after the first Attack I found no pain at all in the Amorous Combate, but on the contrary an extraordinary Pleasure, nevertheless I sighed and groaned as strongly, as if I was to have given up the Ghost at the very instant, which moved so much Compassion in the poor Hunters after Maiden- heads, that they endeavoured to make me forget this feigned Grief, by the Unguent of several Guinnies; but at length I was broach'd so often, that the Orifice became too large, and the Artifices were no longer of any use, so that I was constrained to let the Business take its Course, and to recreate my Gallants for a reasonable Price: I might say something thereof in this place, but because it is of no great Importance, and that we daily see such like things happen, and particularly here at London , I will retrench upon this Point, and proceed to relate other Things of more Consideration. Now as by these Means we saw our Goods dayly augment, & that we should in a short time have got considerable Gains, for my Flesh was reasonably well sought after, there came a Bully to our House in very sorry Apparel, and who however would have willingly show'd me some Inclination, if I had only received him with the least favourable Eye: but I had already learnt that Money must be had to buy Butter, and therefore not a Man received the least Testimony of Affection from me, unless I was assured I should be paid for it with ready Money, my Mother opposed it with all her might, and gave not this professed Bully ever any occasion to say one word in private to me, wherewith I was very much satisfied, for his Presence importuned me, since he had hardly the Means sufficient to spend the value of half a Pint of Wine a Day; but I knew not in the least that it was her own Interest that made her act in that manner, and I should never have thought that she could have fallen into so extravagant a Folly. To speak more clearly, Reader, know that one certain Day, about Noon, as I was going to look some things in the Chamber where we lay, I found her couch'd upon the Bed with this young Gallant, hugging one another so closely, that I was constrained to believe that they had a reciprocal Soul, or at least my Mother bore him more Affection than she ought to have done, for to see this Joseph thus drawn into Lasciviousness, I believe that it rather happened to remedy his Poverty, and to introduce himself into some good Kitchin, than by a Passion of Love; for as I said before, since my Mother had had the Small Pox, she was become so ugly, that a Man must have been extreamly sharp set that could have drawn his Knife for such a Piece of Flesh. I went out of the Chamber again, without saying so much as a Word, for my Heart was so full of vexation that the Tears gush'd out at my Eyes, but if I had that day reason to be vexed, one day after I had a hundred times more reason to be so; for my Mother went with this Adonis to Long-lane , where she bought him a new Suit, a Hat, Stockings, Shoes, and all other things necessary, that she might not be scoffed and pointed at for a Worm, whom she was resolved to make her Husband. But what shall I say more, it seems this Woman could not live without that Instrument, and therefore she judged it more proper to accept a poor Devil, than to remain untill'd any longer, from whence it appears sufficiently that the Common Proverb is true,  If Lasciviousness renders Maidens mad, it makes Widdows Devils. For there are never so silly Marriages, as those that are made by Widows. It seems their Flesh being too Lustful, through the remembrance of past Delights, and their Countenance too old and too ugly to charm a Man of any Fashion, obliges them to abandon themselves to those Extravagancies. When I saw that my Mother went thus seriously to work, and that she began to spend so fast the Money for which my Buttocks had laboured so vigorously, I began to be something unruly, and swore that if she accomplish'd this so unequal Match, I would abandon her, and that she would perhaps find too late, that my Buttocks had not been hatching of Eggs full of Wind. She made me answer thereupon, that I might do what I pleased, and that she was not over fond of having me stay any longer in her House: And my future Father was still less courteous; for being already Master of the House, he threatned me that he would put me in mind of my Duty, by sensible Means, if I did not pay due respect to his well-beloved. In the mean while this fine Couple's Banes were published, which rendred me so void of Comfort, that I resolved to pocket up all my things, and to vanish away without making any one acquainted whither I went. While that I was possessed with these Thoughts, there came to our House a certain Merchant, who was one of those, whom my last Virginities had been sold to, and who for that reason had some Kindness for me, having the Fancy that he had been the first who had had to do with me. He seeing me in so doleful an Humour, and melting in Tears, asked me from whence that proceeded? I told him, that my Mother had made choice of a young and poor Bully, and that she was resolved to marry him; and that this brave Spark did already play the Master through all the House, which had obliged me to resolve to take my flight, and that I desired him, since I unbosomed all things to him with so open an Heart, that he would help me with his Counsel in this Occasion. This honest Man plainly perceiving by all my Reasons, that I should not easily be diverted from this Design, told me, after having considered with himself for a while, that if I would be faithful to him, and not abandon my self to any other Man, he would take me a Chamber, and provide me with all things I had occasion for; this Offer was very pleasing to me in such a Conjuncture of Affairs, and as Promises cost neither Money nor Expence, his obliged me to make him such in return, as I had not any Intention to keep. Valere , so was this honest Man's Name, took his leave, with a purpose to provide me with all speed with a covenient Habitation, and two days afterwards came to give me notice that he had taken a Chamber with a Dining-Room for me in Hatton-Garden , and that therefore I was to pacquet up all my Baggage, and go take Possession of it with all Diligence. I assure you that this was not spoken to one that was Deaf, for he had no sooner given me the Key and Direction, than that I gathered up all things that I could gripe and catch and on the Morrow Morning, when Mars and Venus were still in Conjunction at our House, I fled to my new Lodging, where that day I was forc'd to content my self with somewhat a sober Life, by reason there was not yet any menial Provision. Valere came to see me the day following, for I had sent a Porter to let him know that I had broke up my Camp with Bag and Baggage, and seeing this abode resembled in some manner a poor Bethlem , he gave me ten Pounds to buy me Furniture and Moveables, which I did with so much Care and Diligence, that within two or three Days after I could have lodged a Man of Honour, though I had reserved to my self about four Pounds out of the Bargain; for he had caused the principal Necessaries to be brought thither the very first Day, namely a Bed with all its Appurtenances; however I gave him to understand that the Money had been every Farthing laid out, which the poor Man did easily believe; by reason he imagined that I had bought all New in the Shops; whereas on the contrary I had ferreted and laid out most of my Money in Long-lane , the backside of St. Clements , and the Pawn-Brokers, for I knew how to shew him all the Items and Articles with more Dexterity than all the Taylors in the Town, though that Race of People understand making a Bill to Perfection. When I had lodged here about a Fortnight, I told Valere that I stood in great need of a Maid, by reason that I was not used to wash the House and clean it my self, nor to run to the Cooks and Shops for my Victuals. The Truth is, that it was partly for this reason, but I had another reason, which I was far from acquainting him with, and which the Reader shall be presently informed of. The good Man who really loved me from the bottom of his Heart, gave me for answer, that I might take any one I pleased. Whereupon having provided my self with as good a Maid as I could have wish'd for my Purpose, and who was necessary to me for the Messages I particularly designed to employ her in. Now when I was sufficiently acquainted with her Fidelity to me in small Matters, I sent her to the Lodgings of two or three of those Sparks, with whom I had had some small Conversation in my Mothers House, for to let them know the place of my abode, and if in such and such a time they would be pleased to honour me with their Visits; for though Valere allowed me sufficient, and even more than my Necessities required, yet I was not satisfied, by reason I had made a Resolution to scrape up on all sides, and by all manner of means; insomuch, that in case Valere came one day to abandon me, I might not have reason to bewail his loss. In the mean while, there was not any of those Sparks, who knew in the least of one another, unless it was only Valere , and it was I my self who told them that he kept me; now as for the others I knew so well how to lure them, that every one imagined that he alone enjoyed my Favour and Affection, and I shared so well the times which I appointed them, that never did one meet or surprize the other, which was no hard Matter for me, by reason my Lord and Master, or at least he who made himself believe he was so, driving a great Trade in Italy, Spain , and France , and by Consequence being taken up on Post-days, left me Occasions enough to drive on my Trade as well as he, of which however he had not the least Suspicion; for I knew how to caress him so dexterously, and when he told me could only stay to such an hour, that the most cunning Gallant of all the City would thereby have been deceived. I fell a Weeping when he began to tell me of going away, and I swore that it was almost impossible for me to live one Moment without him; which the good easy credulous Man, was almost bound to believe, for my Maid, as if she had no concern therein, confirmed it by all that was Sacred, telling him, that he never left me, without my Weeping for at least an hour, whereas on the contrary I should have been much more ready to Cry, if he had staid with me but a quarter of an hour beyond the time he had appointed, for then I feared I might have lost the Money of one Gallant or other, to whom I had given a Rendezvouse at that time. My Maid lived after this manner with my four other Lovers, for she had no sooner perceived that she had the Conveniency of speaking privately with those Sparks, to which purpose as I had two Rooms, I pretty often gave her an Opportunity, seeming to have something else to do in the other Room, when she swore worse than ever any Renegado in the World did, that Love would hardly allow me to sleep, and that I loved him, (namely him she spoke to) a thousand times more than my self; and that Valere would be happy if for all his Costs and Charges, I bore him but the tenth part of such an Affection, and that there was hardly a Moment in the Day but I had his Name in my Mouth. These Artifices brought a great Advantage to us both; for first of all my Maid, who as she had and did contribute so much to the maintaining in me a great Opinion of their brave Qualities, was to be greased in the Fist, and besides my Caresses were likewise to be recompenced, if not with Money, with a piece of Plate, or a Ring, or some such like matter, that might mount to the value of two or three hundred of a Lady of Pleasures Kisses, which I purchased them with. Now as by these Artifices I heap'd up a considerable Sum of Money, and that I plum'd each of my Lovers as bravely as was possible for me, to which the Dexterity of my Maid was a seasonable help; there happened an Adventure which would quickly have reduced all my Affairs to Ashes, if I had not made use of Cunning to free my self out of it. Valere was sitting and discoursing with me, and he was necessarily at six a Clock to be at Ratcliff , by reason there was a Sale to be there of some Merchandize which imported him very much. I knew of this three Days before, wherefore I had appointed one of my Lovers at seven a Clock, with design to dispatch him about eight, that I might divert my self with another about half an hour after that, as my custom was two catch to Fies in one Evening: for if I had granted them a longer time than an hour, or an hour and a half, I could hardly have served them all four, unless it had been every other fifth or sixth day, which would have rendred my Gains much smaller by the half. But while we were thus sitting together caressing one another the Clock struck six without his hearing it, for he was too busy, or at least the time seem'd to him too short to imagine that it was already so late. However, he continued sitting until about half an hour after six, and would not perhaps have considered how the time went away, seeing he did nothing but hug and kiss me continually: I was in the greatest disquiet Imaginable, by reason that contrary to my custom, I had appointed my Gallants so shortly after his Departure, for otherwise I practised what follows. When I knew that Valere would leave me at four a Clock, I appointed no other before seven, that I might have at least half an hour or an hours time to counterfeit the fond Lover. I besought him a hundred times that he would be so kind as to keep me Company for one quarter of an hour longer. Yet as I did all that was possible for me to entertain him in this Opinion, that I loved him so passionately I durst not make mention of the Clock, but he thought my self of another Expedient which was much more proper for that Purpose. I had, as I said before, took a Watch from Squire Limberham, I always carryed it in my Pocket, and it went so exactly that it rarely failed a Moment; insomuch, that I was very well assured, that if Valere came to see it, he would immediately be gone. But it was a difficult matter to find out the Means of shewing him it, without my seeming to have had any such Design. But I bethought my self, to run my Hand into my Pocket and break the Chrystal, after which taking it out, with the Pieces: Here, Sarah , said I to my Maid, carry this to Morrow when you go to Market, to a Watch-maker, and let him put in another Chrystal. Prethee, my Dear, give it me, said Valere, I know, one that will do it well. No, my sweet Angel, said I , you'll perhaps put it to another use. But why so, replyed he: You perhaps would look on't, said I , and that must not be. Whereupon, Valere beginning to conjecture that it was later than perhaps he imagined, ask'd Sarah for the Watch, who as if she durst not disobey him, gave it him into his Hands. He look'd upon it immediately, and seeing it was six a Clock and a half; Ha, Ha, said he, was this the reason that I might not see it: S'Death it is above half an hour too late for me to have been at the Place appointed; and thereupon taking his Cloak he pretended to go away: But I hung about his Neck, and in the mean while chid the Maid severely, calling her by all the filthy Names, and Cursing her for that she had given him the Watch: However I could not hold him so fast but that he broke out of my Arms, and ran in all haste to the Place appointed. You young Sprouts, who will undoubtedly read my Life with more diligence than you have for a Godly Book, and which causes so much Grief and Charges to your Parents, and who are often the occasion of exhausting their Coffers, you may judg by these Samples what you are to expect from the Female Sex, for I am neither the only one, nor the first, who has made use of these Artifices; I can assure you on the contrary, that there are many who put them in practice daily, and that it is as impossible dive into the Heart of a Woman, as it is to run your Head, Body and all into her Fundament. Tho that my Territory was so frequently cultivated by five Men; and that by this Reason it seem'd there could not arise any Fruit, by reason that I figured to my self, that the too great abundance of Humidity would be capable of stifling it in its Birth. Nevertheless, after having led this Life six Months, I began to perceive I was with Child. It is certain that I was not over-joyed; for I imagined, that this would not come out so commodiously, nor so easily as it went in; and that my Beauty, which I was provided with after a reasonable passable manner, would receive great Injury thereby: But since such was the State of Affairs, and that I could not hinder the Progress but by wicked and unlawful means, I resolved to make use of it to my best Advantage; and as soon as Valere came to my Lodging, I let him know how things stood with me. This poor Man, really imagining that he had got the Child, was so transported with Joy, that he hardly knew what he did: He hung about my Neck, and having given me at least a thousand Kisses, he opened his Purse of Gold, and gave me Fifteen Guinneys, for me to begin with preparing Clouts and Necessaries for my Child; and 'tis certain this was only a Beginning: for this Appanage cost him afterwards thrice that Sum, by reason there was not a Clout but was of the finest Cloth, and besides garnished with Laces. Besides this Sum, I did what I could to get twice as much from my other Lovers: For as the one knew nothing of the other, I found it no difficult matter to make each of them believe, that he had got at least half the Child, and by Consequence was obliged to buy something towards the Appanage of the Child. I endeavoured also to make them believe, that Valere could not contribute much thereto; and though they seemed not to believe me in this; yet I could easily perceive by their Looks, that they were not displeased at this Discourse. Thus are these young men so easie and credulous in point of getting Children; and it is very convenient that they can have no perfect Knowledge thereof: For otherwise several Men, who are none of the best Performers in matters of Gallantry, and whose Wives do sometimes take their Heats with the one or other Spark several, I say, would suspect their Wives of Adultery when they come to be with Child, and especially if the Children did not resemble them. But the Women have found good Remedies to this Inconveniency: For they can so easily perswade these credulous men, that commonly the Children have some Conformity with the Objects on which the Woman with Child does fix her Eyes; that they would be thought the most incredulous Hereticks, if they did not add Faith to such Suppositions; and moreover, if there be only a Neighbour-Gossip at the Labour or Christening, who swears upon the truth of a Woman, that this Child resembles the man who bears the Name of it's Father, as perfectly as if he had been spit out of his Mouth: Then it is the Husband, tho' he sees the contrary plain enough, is obliged to believe it, according to the ancient Custom, and must seem to be over-joyed at the matter. In the mean while my Belly began daily to swell so big, that it became neither more nor less than what is related of Vitelle the Spanish Colonel; so that like him, I was almost constrained to have a Band fastened to my Neck, that I might with the less difficulty bear with the weight of my Belly. Now Valere took as much care of me as if I had been his own wife, and was absolutely against my putting my hands into cold Water, by reason he feared it might be prejudicial to my Fruit. At length the Term of Lying in being come, I fell into Labour one Wednesday Noon with such dreadful Pains, as if I had had my Entrails torn out of my Body, which made me curse the Hours and Day that I suffer'd that unruly Member to rummage my Body, just as a Number of silly women do in such like Occasions. I was in this lamentable Condition crying and groaning untill the Saturday following, at which time I was delivered of a dead Child; which by reason of the Compressions and Contorsions of my Body, seem'd so blew and deformed, that one could hardly perceive it had the Form of a humane Figure. I lay aside its resembling Valere , who fancied himself the Father of it; but it very much resembled me so well in one part, except the difference there was in the Bigness and Length; but without doubt, with Time and frequent use of it, there would have been wrought great Alterations. Valere was very sad upon the Death of his little imaginary Girle; so that he was hardly to be comforted: For my part, I pretended likewise to be very much afflicted, that I might please him, tho' indeed I was over-joyed: For I easily foresaw, that it was not very convenient for a Maiden of my Circumstances to have Children; and besides, I do not believe that there is a Miss in all this City, who will say, that I am mistaken in this Matter, by reason that this young Baggage gives so much trouble, and is attended with so many Inconveniencies, that most of our time is lost upon it; and we must abandon our own Affairs. It were to be wished that no Children could be gotten but in Marriage: For then the young and Gentile Damosels would not be so disdainful, and would not so obstinately refuse to mingle familiarly what they have with their Lovers, whereas they are often hinder'd by the fear they have such Misfortunes may happen to them, tho indeed they do but too often happen; and especially since the Artifice has been found out to prevent a womans being with Child; but there is in this also a great Inconveniency: for we lose half the Pleasure, by reason that in such Encounters we may support the Agitation, but not the Shower. I had lain in about three weeks, when that Valere imagining that things were in their former Estate, gave me to understand, by his Caresses, that he wisht with all his Heart, that we might begin to sport anew; but I opposed this so powerfully, that he could not in any wise compass his Design. He made use of Prayers, Promises and Threatnings; but this was all in vain: I had besides, according to all Appearance, such an Aversion upon my having conceived and brought forth, that I would not so much as allow him to feel the place from whence that Lump of Flesh came, that had put me to so much pain. How Sir, said I to him, what will become of me at length? the truth is, pursued I, that at present I receive so many Benefits from you, that I can live very honourably on them; but if this Child had remained alive, and that it should one day have come to pass, as all men are changeable, that you should have an Aversion for, and a Contempt of my Person; or that Death had taken you out of the World, what could I have expected with this poor Lamb but Misery and Poverty? It will be much better, added I, at last for me to abandon this disorderly and criminal Life, and to labour with my Hands to gain my Livelyhood with Honour, rather than one day to be perplex'd with two or three little Children, and be reduced to Begging, or some worse thing: Thereupon I began to weep so pitiously, as Women cry for the most part when they please, I had also Tears at my Disposal, neither more nor less than if I was immediately to have gone a begging in the Streets. Honest Valere was so moved with Compassion by my Tears, that he embraced me with the greatest Passion imaginable, and swore that he would never abandon me, provided that I would always remain as faithful to him, as I had thitherto been; but I assure you, that if he had known that there were four more besides himself, who sometimes made use of occasion to come and cultivate my Garden of Love, he would have had other thoughts. In the mean while, notwithstanding all his fine Promises, I let him not win me from my design, which having at length rendred him impatient, he asked me what it was I desired of him? Nothing more (said I) than that you would settle an Annuity upon me for all my Life of about thirty pounds a year, insomuch, that if I should fall under that terrible misfortune to lose you, I might have something to secure me from Poverty, and if you refuse to do this (pursued I immediately) be assured, that as long as you live, you shall never touch my Naked Body. This Gentleman would in no wise grant me my Request in the beginning, and endeavoured for a long time to satisfy me with a less Sum, but at length he begin to be staggered, which as soon as I perceived, I who thitherto had showed my self so presumptuous, changed my tone immediately, took him about the Neck, kissed him, caressed him so bewitchingly, (adding Tears to all this) that at length he granted me my Request; and certainly I was very happy in having so nicked my time for that Affair. For this poor Valere , whose Memory will ever be dear to me, happened to dye suddainly, within ten or twelve days after he had delivered to me the Deed for the Annuity, of a Pleutisy, to which he was very subject. I had hardly been four days on foot since my Lying in, when I was acquainted with these sad news, for I followed the example of Persons of Condition and kept State for six Weeks. You may easily imagine that I was very much grieved at his Death, since that in losing him, I lost a Man from whom I received so many Benefits, that I could not have expected the like from any other Man in the World, but I comforted my self with my Annuity, and that very moment took the Resolution of leaving my Abode, and go take a larger House, for the having the conveniency of accommodating Gentlemen according to their Condition; and in pursuit of this Resolve, did I take that very Week a House near Moorfields , and for the furnishing it with all things necessary, the money I had from time to time squeez'd from my Gallants, was a very seasonable importance. As soon as we had taken possession of the House, I began to contrive how to second Nature; for by the bringing forth of this Child, what I had, and not without very great cause, very much feared, which was that it had not embolished my Face with one good feature, on the contrary, I appeared so bleak and so mortified, that I could hardly endure my Image in the Looking-glass; and as of all necessity, Provision was to be made against this unlucky business, if I intended not to lose the Inclinations of my Lovers, I made use for the rendring my Cheeks red, of the following Remedy, for want of knowing a better. I took some Spanish Wool, which I macerated some hours in Brandy, by the force whereof, the Tincture of the Spanish Wool began to lose it self, and if one wet or rubbed any place therewith, it communicated a colour, which seem'd to be altogether natural; but I perceived in a few days that this Colour did not remain firm enough to pass for really true and natural; for when I suffered my self to be kissed a little, or when the amorous exercise had occasioned my sweating, a Person who should have narrowly taken notice of it, would have easily perceived the Deceit; but because I never gave my Cheeks a higher colour than that they had before my Lying-in, by good luck my Gallants never suspected it in the least: However Prudence required that I should take some other Counsel in that business. Whereupon, I went to a Person who had the reputation of knowing wonderful Secrets in such like Matters, and who for that purpose was made use of by several sorts of Damosels as well honest as other, for now Maidens how Holy and Reserved soever they may seem, make use of such like means, and if their Servants should happen to see them at the very instant they rise from their Beds, they most commonly could not do it without tuning their Stomach; and it is for that reason that Ladies, and Maids, when they have been marryed but a Week or two, are subject to such great Changes, and become as ugly as Medusae's , for as they have no longer any Body for whom they are obliged to deck themselves, they abandon that Care, and expose themselves to view so careless and nasty, that we should find the Churches all full if it was the custom that People could be unmarried; for I beseech you who would not conceive an Aversion for the Female Sex, when he should see appears before his eyes a young Woman with a dirty Coife upon her head, whereas but a few days before she wore none but what was clean and Gentile, and that her Principal part, namely her Face, was as fair and beautiful as Lillies, whereas now it is as dirty and nasty as the hands? But my Passion already transports me out of the Road, and if I had suffered my Pen to take its course, I should have made you strange discoveries of the Female Sex's Artifices and Imperfections. But to return to our Subject, the Person who was so good at furnishing Women with Remedies to mend Faces, sold me some Roots of---, and at the same time acquainted me after what manner I was to make use thereof, which is as follows. You must take on your Thumb and second Fingers end, a little Butter, and afterwards you draw the Root with the other hand, through the Fingers that are anointed with Butter, and by that means the Root renders of it self a very fine red, which by means of the Butter, is much firmer than the red which is drawn from the---then you rub that upon the Cheeks with your Finger, and at length you make it dissipate so Artificially, that no Body can observe how the White divides from the Red; for if you did not diminish this Colour, which is very high, by little and little, with a Finger wet in Spittle or Water, you might easily perceive the Deceit, whereas, on the contrary, people can make no other Judgment, but that it is a Tincture which Nature has produced. Though I found this prov'd very much to my advantage, however, I afterwards made use of an other means, which I shall add here as wholly appertaining to these Drolleries. They call it Spanish Paper, which is now much in use both with Ladies of Pleasure and others: These Papers are not all of the same bigness, nor all of the same value, whereof you must be careful when you buy them. If they are of a Gorcer, upon which there seems some Gold to sparkle, you will be very seldom deceived therein: Others are good, and of a firm and durable Colour; but on the contrary, if they are red and of a pearl or blew Colour, they are neither good, nor firm of Colour, and by too much sweating it might be easily made appear what you endeavour to keep concealed with so much Care and Precaution. It is made use of in the following manner. The Green which conceals under it a very agreeable Red, must be somewhat wet and moisted with the Tongue or Finger. Afterwards you take the Paper, and with the place that is wet, you rub two or three times upon the Cheeks, and they become almost as red as Blood, insomuch that afterwards you by little and little dissipate it with a wet Finger, after the same manner that was prescribed in the Root of--- and that Colour is so firm, that if you have good Paper, it will hold two whole days in case of need, without renewing it. Now I made use of it a long time for this reason: As for that one need not greaze ones self so much as with the above mentioned pieces of Root. My Breasts, which before my lying in had been always reasonably hard, tho' they had been a long time pressed, had also some need of help. For they were so soft, that when I was not laced they could not continue in their place. However because that with these glandulous Globes we cannot live after the same manner as we do with the Cheeks; I could not make use of any other means, but by lacing my Body as streight underneath as I could bear it, and by doing so my Breasts rose up so high, and swell'd in such a manner, that I could rest upon 'em with my Chin; and were so hard to feel to, that I should still have been taken for a real Maid. Being thus accommodated and adorned, I received my Servants in my new Abode, without using any longer the Caution I had before of never appointing more than one at a time: For if I took that course it was only because I was afraid of babling and tatling; and that I would not willingly have given occasion to Valere to abandon me, being the person who furnished me with all Provisions. On the contrary. I was then engaged to no Body, as neither did I wish so to be, because I had observed several times, that for that Consideration, I had lost and let slip several fine Occasions. Amongst all those who came to pay me Visits from time to time, there was one, whom I will for some reasons call Philander , as being still alive: He was about Fifty years Old: Here I made no reckoning of a young Colt, by reason I knew very well that they could not keep Silence, and that they have no sooner obtained any favour from a Nymph, than that incontinently they go, and boast thereof, and proclaim it every where; by which means a woman in a short time is much better known in the world than she would desire to be, and often to be put to Shame and scandalized by such like Parrots, a Maid is obliged to grant the same Favour to their Companions. These on the contrary, whose years have given more Modesty, are careful of preserving their Honour; and they set the more value upon a Nymph whom they find knows how to be silent. They are also much more free to part from their Money; so that there are several reasons why we ought to prefer Aged men before young Colts. This Philander had no sooner seen me, than that he conceived immediately an Inclination for my Person, which he made me acquainted with in so many several manners, that I must have been the most incredulous person in the world if I had doubted of it in the least. However I would not grant him the least Favour, and I made him find in me as much Honour and Reservedness as if there had never a Finger come therein, by which Resistance his amorous Passion was so provoked, that he hardly knew when he was seated by my side how to behave himself. Nevertheless he saw several others besides himself come to our House, and by Consequence might easily judge, considering they were all persons of Condition and Means; that they came not there to make Love to me; and this with so much the more reason, that there were some amongst 'em who had Wives living: But I knew so well how to counterfeit a person sage and discreet when he was there present, that at length he lost the Courage and Hopes of being able to obtain from me what made him visit me, and what had obliged him to make me so many Presents. When I began to perceive this (for I had only thus counterfeited the haughty, the proud and severe, that I might catch him the more cunningly; because the means which I put in practice, are infallibly the most proper for that purpose) I shewed him by little and little, more and more Kindness, and swore to him, that he was the only Man who could be pleasing to me; that I had no Esteem for all the others whom he saw daily come to my House; and that their Presence was very uneasie and troublesome to me; but that as for him, I would in time do what so many others had in vain solicited of me. Poor Philander hearing all those fair Discourses, was so satisfied in his mind, that the day after he sent me a Silver Dish and Ewer, that were so artificially wrought, that I should have done great Injustice to the Master, if I had not received them with all possible Acknowledgment: Yet I feigned to be in some manner sorry and displeased, saying, that I did not use to receive such Gifts or Presents, but only for his Gracefulness; courteous Humour, and extraordinary Quality that was seen in his Person and Actions. However, Sir, added I, since by these means you have been pleased to give me Assurance of your Inclination towards me, I will keep them for your Sake; and upon Occasion will shew you I am neither ungrateful, nor void of Acknowledgment: And really he had quickly Instances of my Acknowledgment: For within a Week I suffered this Spark to gather those Flowers for which he had so often wander'd about my House; and tho there were several others, who obtained from me the same Favor for their Money; yet this Cully took the Pleasure he received from me as a mark of the greatest Passion I could show him. After that Bout I allowed him from time to time to spend a whole Night with me; and in so doing I had no ill Reason: for my pains were admirably well paid. As I was one Night lying in his Arms, amongst other things, he told me, that he had a great Desire to have a Child by me; and that then he would make me sensible how ardent the amorous Passion was that he bore me. My dear Angel, answered I him, all that Heaven pleases; but pursued I, do only your best for that purpose, and then we shall see what will come of it. Altho I knew very well that I should not so easily be with Child as the first time (for now instead of having to do only with five, I had full three times as many daily Gallants, who lay with me in their Turns) however I took the Resolution of being once more with Child, were it only for the pleasure to see what Advantage I might get thereby. For that purpose I told him about three weeks afterwards (for I was not willing to do it immediately, for fear he should find out the Cheat) that undoubtedly I was with Child: For, added I to that, this was just the week I was to have had my Courses; and yet I had them not, which however never failed me one day in my Life. Philander was so over-joyed to hear this News, that there was easily to be seen in his Face the Signs of Satisfaction and Delight; and he promised me Mountains of Gold, if I was so happy as to bring a Boy into the World. When I had entertained him for about three Months in this good Opinion, my Belly began to swell by little and little, and to appear of such a roundness, as it is seen to be of the first Months that Women are with Child. As I was only with Child for my pleasure, certainly my Reader cannot well imagine, what was the Progress and Event of this Affair, and perhaps if he be still a Man without experience, he will fancy that I fastned a Cushion or some other such like thing upon my Belly, as many silly Women do who can tell Wonders of such businesses. Not at all, for those Artifices are something too innocent, and we should receive a great deal of shame and scandal thereby, if the imaginary Father should unluckily think of feeling when the Child began to live, for it is a hard matter to deny one to feel what belongs to him. Wherefore I proceeded in this manner. When I knew Philander was to come, I half unlaced my self, I found my Body hard under my Bosom, which made my Belly swell bravely, and rendred it so hard, by reason it was loose and free, that I could have deceived the cunningest Midwife in all the Town, that is to say, if she only felt the outside of my Belly. By this means the more straitly I joyned the Body above, the more full and stiff I made it below; insomuch, that Philander with all his Ingenuity knew no better, but that I went with a Child of his getting, and that he might the less suspect the Cheat, I would no longer suffer him co sport with me upon the Bed, for then he might have easily felt that my Belly was by much too limber to be capable of serving for the abode of an Infant of so many Months; I did this little by little, augmenting it according to the course of time, and the Approach of the time of my feigned and imaginary bringing forth; but as soon as honest Philander was gone, all my big Belly vanished, and I put my Body again into it's former Posture, for I thought not fit to play in that condition at Push-pin with my other Cullies. In the mean while Philander came almost every Morning to my House, for to fortify my Body, by drinking Canary and Possets; but Philander did cunningly discover the Child to stir in my Belly (namely) when I had been big in this manner about five Months, and besides, he fancied he felt a stronger motion on the right side than the left, so that he did not in the least doubt but that it would be a little Boy. Certainly when I heard him reason in this manner, I could hardly forbear laughing, because I had so certain a knowledge that there was neither Boy nor Girl in my Belly, and that I so plainly observed that this fancy made a fool of a Man of so much sence as Philander . Perhaps some one would now ask me, how at length I could come off with honour from this business, sioce I could not continue ten years with Child, as Elephants go so long with their young, and I will then tell the Reader to satisfy herein his curiosity, my design was, that when it was come to about the seventh Month, to feign some inconvenience that might have made me Miscarry, and to make up a lump of Callous Blood, in the figure of a Child newly Born, and to expose it to Philander's sight, which would have been no difficult matter to do; for Children newly born, seem always strange, and besides Philander was not so well skilled in such like Affairs; for without doubt he had never been with Child, nor had helpt to hold his Neighbours Wifes leggs when they were in Labour; but this was not necessary since that four days after all the mystery was discovered, of which I had notice to my great regret by the following Letter.  Henceforward, Jilting Cornelia , you need not take so much pains to lace your self so hard on the upper part of your Body, to make People believe by the swelling of your Execrable Belly, that you are with Child. I have discovered your Tricks, and if I had found them out something sooner, assure your self that my Money should not have rusted in your Coffer. Nevertheless, I hope it will not remain long there, and that at length you will be reduced to such an Extremity, that you must spend in the deepest misery, what you have got from me by most abominable Cheats. I cannot sufficiently thank Heaven that it has so timely opened my eyes, for certainly that my too great and too silly passion would have made me commit things, which I should but too late have repented of. Henceforward seek out another whom you may put upon, and never think on him who has bor'n you too much Affection, to be rewarded in this manner.  The truth is, that when I received this Letter, I became so sad and so afflicted, that tears run down from my eyes, for though that I had not any Affection for Philander , yet I had a very great loss in losing him, since that during the time of my counterfeited big Belly, I had got from him near a hundred pound, and I do not doubt but that I should have obtained as much more when I had been delivered; for he was one of the best Gallants I ever had. I could easily imagine at the very first who it was that had reavealed to him this mystery, since no Body in the World knew the least of this Enterprize, except a Maid, who certainly had plaid me this Prank, by reason that a day or two before, I had school'd her severely upon some matters which did not please me. However I resolved not to make any noise, and to take only the first occasion that was offered to discharge her, which I did within a week after. By all this discourse you may easily observe, that the Female Sex being once crossed, will hardly ever let slip opportunities of revenge, for I had been as kind to this Sarah as if she had been my own Sister. Besides that, I let her receive half the profits that arose from the sale of wine, which was four times as much to her advantage, as if she had only been Kitchin-Maid in a House of any of the richest Merchants of London , for I never drunk Rhenish Wine, but that we made our Customers pay half a Crown the bottle, tho' in the mean while we gave but Twelve Pence, and each bottle cost us no more than ninepence, by reason that instead of a Quart, we never gave more than a pint and half, so that in each Bottle we got about eighteen pence profit. Now while I wanted a Maid, and that I made use of a poor day labourer, until that I could find one in whom I might put some confidence, I happened to meet my Mother one day in Newgate-Market ; she was so poorly clad, so dirty and thin, that I should hardly have known her again, if she had not leapt about my Neck. My dear Daughter, said she to me, by what happyness do I come to meet thee to day? I have sought thee for above this year and half without ever having been able to get the least Tydings of thee, and I thought thee dead, poor Girl, but Heavens be prais'd that I see thee still alive and in good health. I ask'd her immediately what was become of that Bully of a Fellow, whom she had abandoned her self to, for I could never be brought to call him Father. She made me answer, that he at length turn'd Souldier to go to the East- Indies , after having squandered away what she had, and had a hundred times broken her Bones with beating her. That's no wonder, said I to her, these are the fruits of those extravagant Marriages; but (persued I) how do you live now at present? for, if I be not mistaken, Poverty will quickly force you to leave the Town of your Birth, unless you be a stranger to all shame, and that you do not care after what manner you are dressed. I have for these six Months, said she, took a Cellar in Cheap-side, and by which means I make a poor shift to get my bread. The truth is, when I heard this, my heart was moved with Compassion towards her, wherefore I told her that as her Herbs and all her Moveables, were certainly of no very great importance, she needed but to leave them all for her Rent, and that she should come along with me to my house, where I would provide her with Cloaths immediately. The good Woman was so diligent in executing what I told her, that one could not at all perceive that she was in the least troubled or afflicted for her Goods, or for her Merchandize. It was no wonderful thing that she had sought for me so long in vain, for as I had desired all my Gallants, who came formerly to her House, never to speak a word of me, I had always avoided meeting her with so much care, that I never came within six Streets near her House, and besides, I went muffled up in my Hoods, so that I knew not if she was still in the World. Besides, it is easy to remain concealed two or three years in such a City as London , and especially provided you appear not too often in publick, which was not at all my Custom, by reason I had sufficient to do in my own house. Then I observed in my Mother the wretched condition of those Women who being Old and Ugly, abandon themselves to some young miserable Bully; for they are no sooner engaged together by the Bond of Marriage, than that these Sparks who only took this rank flesh for the conveniencies wherewith it is attended, being to play the Master, and with the Money, which others it seems have rak'd up for them, they seek out Wenches who are less in years and have more Charms than their old soothless Spouses. And truly though I am my self a Woman, I cannot blame them much, for when one is to reaccommodate an old Clift, I fancy one ought to pay twice as much but enough for that! Men would imagine by my talking at this rate, that I am of their side, whereas on the contrary, I have always done what was possible to deceive them. Immediately I discharged my Monkey of a Maid, and began to make use of my Mother in that Quality; after having neatly rigg'd her from top to toe, which certainly was a great change, for when we lived before together, she was the Mistress, but now the Tables were turned, since that she had not a word more to say than if she had been my Chambermaid. And indeed I had trouble enough to learn her how to behave her self, insomuch that Forsooth had been no longer suitable to her, for by selling of Herbs she had got so much of the Billings- gate breeding, that I could hardly reform her so far as to make her take the manners of a Rational Person, she was also become a Soul, that is, she had learnt to tope off Brandy , which seems to be an indespensable Propriety that accompanies Poverty, and is absolutely inseparable from it, though there are those found who are considerably Rich, who can Quaff off Brandy, Anniseed, and other distilled Waters, as if they had their Education at Ratcliff , or had been Retainers to a Strong-water-Shop; but these do it with more Address, and if their Carbunkle Noses and Fiery Faces did not manifest it, it would seldom be discovered, and I assure you that Anniseed and Caraway are not always employed for Ventosities or Cholick, though that use is attributed to them. However I compassed in a short time all these Difficulties, though that it was not without great trouble. For when that the poor Woman began afterwards to frequent Persons of Honour, she got rid of these ill-becoming Customs, as also of drinking of Brandy, which I had ever nauseated and had in abomination. We had not lived above five weeks together, when there happened to me a ridiculous thing, and which I cannot forbear communicating to the Reader. As I was going one Saturday with my Mother to the Market, Sarah my former Maid met me in the Street, and began immediately to ring us a Peal of injurious Languages, bawling out for a long while Whores , which without doubt proceeded from my having discharged her too soon; and that, as it is the Nature of Women, she could not disgust this without a great deal of Vexation. I was pretty sumptuously dress'd, as my Custom was; and for that Reason I thought not fit to engage or take Notice of her; but hastened on my way, neither more nor less than if I had not been at all concerned; but I could not save my self by my Silence: For the Bitch seized me by my Manteau , and began to pull me so rudely, that she tore a great Hole in it, insomuch that you might have put your Head through. As I was not easie to suffer, nor none of the weakest, I could not in any manner endure this Shame and Affront; and not seeing any other Arms more ready to revenge my self, than a kind of a Brass Peel my Mother had upon her Arm: I took it by the Rim, and gave her two or three Blows upon the Head with so much Violence, that she had like to have fallen upon the Ground. However, she let not go her Hold, but tore my Gown to pieces. This made me almost mad, and with so much the more Reason, as that immediately we were surrounded with a great Number of People; and I lifted up the Peel with a Resolution to break her Head with it; but she passed the Blow stooping, and so avoided this Misfortune, but with such Imprudence that the Rim got about her Neck without doing her any Damage; which I no sooner perceived, than that I let go my Hand, and gave her so many Boxes on the Ear, while I held the Rim firm with my left Hand, that she could hardly turn her Head; and you might have seen of a suddain the Blood gush from her Nose and Mouth as from a Funnel. The Spectators seeing this so violent and bloody Combat, laughed in such a manner, that they furnished me with a fair Occasion to satisfie my Resentment at the Expence of Sarah's Groin; who, as strong as she was, could not rid her self of the Rim; and undoubtedly by such great Blows I gave her, I should have so mawled her, that even her Parents could not have known her again, if a Bitch of an Apple Woman, and such like People as commonly haunt the Markets, had not taken their time to free her out of my Hands; but then I also should have been paid off in my Turn: For the excessive Blood which gushed in great Lumps from Sarah's Nose and Mouth, moving this Scum of Women all at a time, both to Choler and Compassion, they came upon me like Devils, and seem'd as if they would have torn me in pieces; and according to all Appearances I should have been swing'd of, if in that extream Necessity I had not invented a piece of Cunning, which was to promise a Guinney to a Party of Butchers Men, who were in Troops amongst that Multitude, in case they would secure me from all Danger, and my Mother also. Then it was I observed the Power of this Mettal; for in the twinckling of an Eye those Heroes had cleared the Field of Battel, and afterwards conducted us into a Tavern, where I gave them with Joy the Money I had promised them, adding to the Bargain two or three Quarts of Wine, which they drank to my Health; tho to speak the Truth, I could much rather have wish'd they would have swallowed it to the happy re-establishment of my Gown: if so it be, that drinking to the Health of any one can bring him Advantage and Prosperity: For when I look'd upon it, I saw it was in a very deplorable Condition. Thus this Battel cost me very dear, tho I had the Victory on my Side, seeing my Manteau was torn to pieces, my Brass Peel was lost in the Combat, my Gold was employed in Jesting and Laughing to them Fellows; and it was six Months before I durst set my Foot in the Market again. Between this last Inconvenience and Christmas there happened to me nothing else that merits the trouble of being described; for during that time I had never the occasion to do ought soever, unless it were to continue my usual way of living, that is to say, to scrape up as much, and to strip my Gallants of as much of their Money as was possible for me; and by these means I got together such a Lump, as that I purchas'd another Annuity of almost threescore pounds a year. So that now I need not be under any great fear of Poverty; for this Sum being joyned to that which poor Valere had given me was, pretty sufficient to live handsomly enough upon, tho not with the same Pomp and Lustre that I do at present. Certainly I cannot forbear from laughing, when I consider the Lives of those Damosels, who now have their Recourse for Livelihood to this Commerce which I was used to exercise in my Youth: For those poor Creatures have hardly what's sufficient to satisfie their Hunger; and if there be any one among them who has one Change of Cloaths, she plays the Lady; and if there was in that sort of Life certain degrees of Dignity, such an one would undoubtedly have the Command over a Regiment of Fleetstreet Night-walkers or Bulkers. In the mean while, Bawds and Hostesses dispose of their Money as they please, and live with these poor innocent Females just as the Turks do with their Slaves; there is only this difference, that they have not over them the Right of Life and Death: For they truck, sell, and pawn 'em too for any Price they pretend, to poor innocent Creatures, who for a Gown, a Crape Manteau, or some such like thing, abandon thus their Honour and their Liberty after a most pitious manner; and must expect all that can arise from Venus's Occupation, in regard of Diseases and Villany. The truth is, so much the more I laugh at you, the more are you to be pitied by some other who has more Compassion; and perhaps that I should likewise fall into that silly Commiseration, if I knew not that you joyfully support the Yoke of your Servitude, were it only to have the Contentment of going dressed something more sumptuously; or at least, with something more Lustre than your Rise can contribute thereunto, without considering that the Aparrel of a Gentlewoman requires other Manners than those of the Daughter of a sordid Orange Woman, or Kitchin-Stuff Wench, or of the Billingsgate Tribe, which is really the only cause of your Poverty: For if their Manners were such as are seen in them, whose Bodies are born to wear such like Vestments, and if your Mind knew how to make the difference between those to whom you give the Quality of being your Lovers, for only having had one time to do with you, I am sure your Hostesses would not stand in need of Love Mercuries to put you in pawn, or sell you in other places; but we will cease speaking of that untill some other Occasion: For if I begin to work upon that point, I should wholly divert my self from my Designs, and perhaps I should not think at all upon my own Affairs; and that the Printer would bring me word, that there was already more Paper spoiled than we intended to make use of: For my prudent or silly Reader, be you which you please, tho I love rather to believe the later; People now must be very careful that Books be not above Nine or Ten Sheets in Bulk, that the Haunters of Taverns and Bawdy House, may by absenting themselves from such places for an Evening or two employ their Money to the Profit of the Bookseller. To return to my Subject, Christmas being come, a Bill was put upon my Door for the House to be let, not that I had any Design to go take any other; but only by reason that I endeavoured to obtain some Abatement from the Landlord. A Bill of considerable Bigness had served four or five days for a Trade to the House, when that I was one day standing at the Door, I saw passing by a Spark, who by the Sumptuousness of his Cloaths, attracted upon him the Eyes of all the Neighbourhood. Perhaps that my Face was not disagreeable to him; for he cooled me at a distance; and indeed I did not forbear looking on him, untill that he had turned the Corner of the Street; for methought that his Face was not unknown to me; and I strongly imagined that I had formerly seen him somewhere else, that I was above three hours tormenting my Memory to know whom that could have been. In the morning of the day following some body knocked at my Door: I went to open it, by reason my Mother was gone out, who had otherwise that Office. It was the same Spark who had eyed me so much the day before; and who now asked me with a peculiar Courtesie, if his seeing my House would be no trouble to me? I told him it was open for every one, and for him with so much the more reason, in that I was not used to be treated with so much Civility. Whereupon he went in, visited below, above, and all places of the House, neither more nor less than if he had designed to make his Abode there for half a dozen years. I followed him still Step by Step; or to say rather, I walked before him and shew'd him the way, without hardly ever turning for a Moment my Eyes off him: For I had the greatest Curiosity in the world to know where it was that I could have seen him. Thus when he had seen it all, he began to discourse upon one point or other; and did it with so much Ingenuity, with so charming an Air, and such smooth and rational Talk, that he was almost an hour before he took his leave of me, after having first of all beseeched me, that he might be so happy as to return to see me; which could not have been civil in me to have refused to a Gentleman of his Stamp, since that I was in hopes to receive from him in time some considerable Profit. Three or four days afterwards, he came again to my House, and spent an whole Afternoon in my Company, without the time's proving in any manner tedious to me, for his Tongue was admirably well hung. I considered him anew with still more attention, and the more I looked upon him, the more methoughts his Physiognomy and his Meen were not unknown to me, however I would not ask him downright, though I employed my mind all manner of ways to learn by some trick, from whence this knowledge could have been imprinted in my Memory; but all my Artifices were of no use to me, and perhaps to this day I should have known nothing of the matter, if by an admirable Accident he had not given me to understand it in the following manner. He had now for a Month visited me from time to time, without my having granted him the least favour, for it was not my custom to be kind to any one upon running Post, I must first of all have sounded their Breasts, and penetrated their Hearts. Thus it happened, that one certain Evening as we were together, and that we were employed in discoursing upon the Artifice of a certain Picture that hung in my Chamber, he told me that he had something about him, which though small, ought not to be less esteem'd than the rarest and the greatest Picture, and thereupon feeling in his Pocket, he took out a Box, wherein there were two Pourtaictures, whereof the one represented my Father and the other my Mother. The Poor Woman had a hundred and a hundred times bewailed the loss of this Box, though she had not had much Love for her Husband towards the end of his Life; for truly the two little Faces were drawn with so much Art, that I had seen very few that could come near their perfection. I was seized with a fright and astonishment as soon as I had it in hand, and from that moment I easily perceived who it was that was so hot to acquire the enjoyment of my Person, for those two Miniatures had been stole from us with the rest of our Goods, by that abominable Rope-Dancer, who learnt my Father the Strapado , as mention was made in the beginning of this Book, which perhaps proceeds from that the Box was of Silver, and that he was resolved not to leave us any thing of all that was made of that noble Mettal with which all things are brought to pass. I was for a pretty while contemplating those two Faces, that while I held my Eye firmly fixed upon them, I might remove all occasion of his perceiving the emotion and astonishment I was in, for if he had minded me in the least, he might easily have observed that there must needs have been some special and peculiar reason, which raised in me such an Emotion. Sir, (said I to him afterwards, when I returned the Box into his hand, and that I was somewhat recollected from my disorder, I must needs own that these Faces are wonderfully well drawn, but if it was you that the Painter meant to represent by this Figure of a Gentleman, he has not drawn you to the Life. Pretty Lady, (answered he to me) I can in no wise impute any fault to the Workman, for the Man never saw me, but once in my Life I have seen him whom it represents, and though it be several Years ago, yet if I saw him I could easily know him again, for at that time this Picture resembled him so admirably well, that years must have made an extraordinary change in him, if he was no longer to be known by him who having his Picture before his eyes, and himself too, should confront them together. I had an extream Passion to learn more, but because I feared that my too great Curiosity might betray me, I said not a word more, and afterwards as soon as this counterfeit Gentleman had taken his leave of me, I related to my Mother the adventure I had had, and that I had found out the Rope-Dancer, or rather the Thief (for with this Trade of breaking one's Neck it was not so easy a matter to get such great gains as to spend at that rate he did, who had so miserably bereaved us of what we had, when we dwelt at Islington , but this Discourse had like to have reduced my whole Affairs to Ashes, for she would immediately have run to a Justice of Peace, to have informed him of this matter, that he might grant a Warrant to a Constable to seize on this Gallant, but I withheld and opposed this design of hers, by reason that it would have been of no advantage to us, and I told her that she should leave me to manage this Affair my self, without showing that she had the least knowledge of him when he returned to make me his Visits. Though I had only set a Bill upon my Door, that I might have some abatement of my Rent (for I gave to understand to all those who came to see the House, that in Hell it self it could not smoak more miserably) yet I now changed my Resolution, and in the space of three days I so ordered my business, that I found out a House to my mind, I mean that it was inhabited, and that I could enter into it as soon as I pleased, I gave notice hereof immediately to my best Gallants, that in case I came to dislodge suddainly, they might not be troubled in seeking after my Lodgings, each of them ask'd me immediately for what reason I would so unseasonably change my Quarters; but I gave them no other answer, but that they should keep themselves in repose on that side, and that they should stifle their Curiosity, until that I was disloged, and that then I would tell them the reason. In the mean while, my Rope-Dancer came to visit me once in two days, as he formerly did, and I received him with a good Eye, and even with a more favourable Meen than formerly, until that I had prepared all things necessary for the execution of my Design, and one Evening I told him with a smiling Countenance, that I desired him to send me the next Morning about eleven of the Clock a Jole of Salmon , and that for the first time in his Life he would do me the honour to Dine with me, for he had long sollicited me to that purpose. The poor Culley was so overjoyed at this News, for that he was in hopes this favour would be accompanied with one much greater, that he hardly knew what he said or did, for in the beginning I had lived with him, just after the same manner as with those who came the first time to my House, I mean with just as many Testimonies of kindness as were requisite not to lose them. The next Morning I had my Fish and my Guest too before ten of the Clock, so that I sate down to Dinner with my fine Gallant on my side before Eleven. In the mean while I had given order to my Mother, that she would stand behind his back and serve him with drink, and that she should mingle in the Wine every time she gave him a certain Composition which had the Power to render a Man extraordinary Drunk, and to cast him into so deep a Sleep, that it was impossible for him to open his eyes, or to wake, what noise soever was made. My piece of Cunning succeeded very well, for the Rope-Dancer had not drank off half a Dozen Glasses, then that his Eyes began to twinckle, and became so excessively Drunk, that he was hardly able to sit upon his Chair. As soon as I perceived this, I made him quaff off three Glasses more upon one another, wherein abundance of this Composition was put, and in less than a Quarter of an hour, he began to act like a Beast and tumble out of the Chair. We left him there lying for about half an hour that we might be in perfect assurance, and for that purpose I pricked him four or five times in the Thighs with a Needle. But he neither shewed motion, nor sence. Then was the time to put our design in Execution, wherein my Mother was very necessary to me, insomuch that he was quickly undrest, unto his Drawers and Waistcoat, which we did not think fit to strip him of, but first of all we felt all over to see if there was not some precious thing still concealed. This being done, I cloathed him with an old Cimarra and a rotten Petticoat; and having cut off his Mustachoes, I put a Womans Cornet upon his head, with a white Coife, insomuch, that in that Equipage, his own Mother could not have known him again no more than if she had never seen him. After we had Apparrelled him in such manner, as best pleased my Fancy, we put him into a Coffer, in which I had caused three or four holes to be made, and having thrust into his right hand the following Letter, I made two Porters carry him to Queen-Hive , with directions for Thiselworth , for that he had endeavoured to make me believe that he was an Eminent Gentleman's Son of that Town, so that I had written the Superscription to his pretended Father. My Mother went along with the Porters, and desired the Waterman to take care of the Coffer, and not to shake it much, for that there were Porcelain Ware in it, and other Fragile Merchandize. The Contents of the Letter, which I put into his Hand, was as follows. Without doubt you still remember, that some years ago, you unhappily persuaded a certain Inkeeper to learn the Strapado , by which means he broke his Leg, and you afterwards robbed him of so many things, that you could hardly carry them away without perhaps expecting that they should be one day demanded of you again. And indeed this Robbery would have still remained concealed, if you had not shown me those two Pictures in Miniature, for your Figure remain'd still in some manner in my Idea, but yet I should never have known without so powerful a proof that you were the Man that at the same time had the civility to make me a Present of half-a-dozen Boxes of the ear. You may easily learn by these last words that I am the Daughter of that Man, and by Consequence you may easily judge that I found my self constrained to repair this loss as well as was possible for me. Neither ought you to be very sad and troubled, for you come off at a much cheaper rate at present, than if I had caused you to be taken into Custody. Wherefore be pleased to reward the Civility I use towards you, in never seeking after me; but if you are not so dispos'd you may act according to your Inclination, and assure your self that all your pains will be to no purpose, for before you can be returned from Thisselworth , I will be far enough from hence for you ever to find me out. In the mean while make use for some time of those Apparrel; and try if you can have as much happiness in it as I have had my self; which you ought not to despair of, since you are none of the ugliest in a white Coife, and a Womans Cornet: I would willingly make my Letter something longer, to give you some comfort in your Misfortune, but it being almost High-Water and my House as you know at a considerable distance, I have not time sufficient. Wherefore live well if you can, and know that if ever I hear you heartily pardon me this Prank, I shall then believe that you bear me as much good Will, as you have so often endeavoured to persuade me of. Tho the River was not frozen that Winter, yet it is no hard matter to imagine he did not sweat over much in his Coffer, and I would willingly have given the fourth part of my Booty, which mounted in all to the value of about forty pound, if I could have had the pleasure of seeing him awake. That same Evening, as soon as my Mother was returned back, I went to pay my Landlord with my Rope-dancers Money. And on the morrow Morning before my Neighbours were yet up (for I was not willing any of 'em should know whither I went to lodge) we decamped, being assisted by four Porters, and went to take possession of my new Quarters, which were several Streets distant from this House; so that the Rope-dancer would have had trouble enough to have found me out; But I do not believe that he made any great Enquiry after me; or at least it never came to my Ears: For I saw him not in any place till a long time after, when that to my Misfortune I fell into his Hands; whereof I will give the Reader an Account in the following part of this present Book. As soon as my Gallants came to visit me in my new House, and to impart to me their Money, I related to them the reason of my Dislodging, and each of them seem'd to take therein a peculiar Satisfaction; tho I am however willing to believe, that this Relation did not bring me much Profit; for by others Losses people learn to become better advised. I also presently remarked, that there were several amongst them who no longer trusted so well in me as they used to do before, wherefore I took a firm Resolution, never to make known to any one soever the least thing that concerns such Tricks and Cheats: and I also counsel all Women who trade in Flesh, never to amuse themselves, with relating to their Lovers any of those things that have happened with one or other of their Cullies; for you will rarely find that this proves to their Advantage. I was setting Pen again to Paper, to inform the Reader how I came to take a Husband, after I had remained a year or more in my new Lodging; but that I will refer to the Second Part, wherein I will add a long List of Stories, with edifying and good Novelties; and in the mean while I shall wish my good or malicious Reader as many Blessings or Mischiefs as he can do to me my self: for I am not of that sort of People who pray for their Enemies; but on the contrary I regulate my self by the Law of Talion , or Retribution , whereof you may also see Examples throughout the whole Course of my Life.
