 SIR, to your Patronage, I thought my self obliged (the Copy being left in my hands) at once to make good his Intentions, and gratifie my own Inclination. It being therefore a Posthumous Work (though the first Fruits of his Fancy) your favourable Protection will be the more generous. His Ingenuity might have made some proportionable Offer at your Character; and indeed where so many Accomplishments of Mind and Person are happily united, the most modest Account that could be given, would have made no small Panegyrick without any Assistance of Artifice or Rhetorical Colours. I dare not undertake to draw you to the Life, nor can pretend to touch those many shining Graces wherewith Art and Nature have made you admirable. Besides, Sir, your own Modesty (that inseparable Companion of ingenious Tempers) might think that too much, which all that know you will find too little, and short of the fair Original. The Charms of Behaviour, Civility and Courtesie, (especially when they are the Result of a good Nature) in a Person of Quality, are no small Inducements to attract the Love and Esteem of Mankind. But if, besides the Accomplishments of a Gentleman, the strongest Dispositions to Vertue and Knowledge, with an early and eminent Progress therein, be enough to create an Expectation in the World, your best Friends and nearest Relations have only this to wish on your behalf, that your ripe Manhood may make good the Promises of your Youth, and render you (as undoubtedly they will) an Ornament to the Nation. But, Sir, my present Design being not to present you with an Encomium , but only to beg your Favour to an Orphan-Piece of Ingenuity, if it have the good Fortune to divert your leisure Hours (as it was the Author's Ambition) it will be no small Satisfaction to, Sir, Your devoted Humble Servant, CLITIE, A NOVEL. PART I. of the greatest Ladies of the Kingdom; but her Merits and her Beauty yet render her a thousand times more worthy the Respects and Adorations of all that ever knew her. If Heaven has given her a Desert above others, and a Beauty more adorable than ever was, it has not given her a heart less tender, or less passionate; her Soul has naturally all the softness that Love is capable to inspire; and none was ever made a fitter Object for the Seat of that soft Deity, than her self. She was but thirteen years of age when the whole Court looked on her with admiration, and all the greatest Persons of the Realm made her Pleasure their care and study. Her Father (had many great Employments near the Person of the King) who loved her extreamly, nor did a day pass wherein many did not importune him to gain a consent to marry her; but amongst the multitudes of those whom her Charms and Beauty had rendred her Captives, Darbelle and Amasis seem'd to be the greatest Trophies of her conquering Heart. Darbelle was a man of great quality and altho' he was very young, and of a Beauty not common to men, he was not less couragious, and extreamly brave[illeg.] his Father had spent much money in the Wars, and lived up to the height of those Employments that were given him, which left him not that Wealth that he deserved; however, he had a noble Command and no small Estate. Amasis was not inferiour to Darbelle in Birth, but was so rich and magnificent, that if Darbelle had some advantage of him by his Beauty and Behaviour, he had the advantage of Darbelle by his Retinue and Equipage, which were the most agreeable, and most gallant of all the Court; it cannot be deny'd but he had a natural Vanity, and never man was more puff'd up with an opinion of his own advantages, than himself. Celse (who was Clitie's Father) had a greater inclination for Amasis , than all the other Suitors of his Daughter, and earnestly desir'd a Marriage between them. But Clitie (young as she was) had a Wit and Judgment so discerning, that she cou'd not avoid having far more indifference for him than for Darbelle . But Amasis who was of a violent Temper, and whose Transports often carried him even to Brutallity, after having rendred all the endeavours he was capable of to overcome the Rigours of Clitie , saw there was no hope for him, and that he had no longer any pretensions of marrying her, (her Father having declar'd he wou'd never force his Daughter's Inclinations, but leave her the free choice of an Husband wholly in her own disposal) believ'd he cou'd not better disintangle himself from the Chains of this inhumane, but by applying himself to some other Lady of the Court. He had hardly thought of this design when the Eyes of the fair Julia help'd him to compleating of it; he found her pliable enough to listen to him, and so much the rather, because this Lady (who had no small esteem of her own Charms and Beauty) had a mortal Jealousie against Clitie , who young as she was, had already robb'd her of a thousand Adorers. Julia no sooner beheld the passionate Flame she had kindled in the Heart of Amasis , but she was overjoy'd, it being a matter of Importance, and of Glory to gain so eminent a Victory over Clitie which was no small Argument of the good Entertainment he received from her. Amasis (on the other side) who had no intentions but to beguile his time with Julia , and dissipate some of those Troubles the Cruelty of Clitie had given him, became really in love with her; and, as it is usual with Lovers to side with their Mistresses in their Opinions, he failed not in a little time to share with her the ill will she had for Clitie . In the beginning the matter was dress'd in a thousand little Raileries, which Amasis and Julia made on her, which at first she laugh'd at; but at length the Insolence of Amasis (to to please his new Mistress) came to be published in all places, that he had received Favours of Clitie , and that it was none of her fault that she did not marry him. Clitie cou'd not hear these things spoke of her, without resenting it with a mortal Affliction. She had not long the power to dissemble the Subject of her Grief, for Amasis with an unparallell'd boldness, adds daily more and more to his Detractions, and before so many Witnesses, that every thing came to Clitie's knowledge. Yet nevertheless ere she would resolve on any Revenge, she wou'd have better grounds for what she heard, than publick Rumour. Darbelle , who was seldom absent from her, had no small share in her Troubles; and she had also for him a great esteem, and some tenderness: He daily intreated her to discover to him the cause of her Inquietudes in so obliging a manner, that after having defended her self for two or three days from his Importunacy, she could no longer resist making him her Confident. 'I can receive no content' (says she one day to him with Tears in her Eyes, which her Grief drew from her) 'since I am so unhappy to be beloved of one the most disingenious of all men, that is to say, Amasis , who I hear every day publishes a thousand reproaches against my Honour.' Darbelle blush'd at this Discourse, through Anger and Vexation, and made known to Clitie how desirous he was to revenge the Injuries that Amasis had done her; but she wou'd by no means give way to it, but only intreated him, as a man that espoused her Interest, that he would search out the Truth, whereby she might take her measures for her Justification. Darbelle promis'd what she requir'd, and in pursuance thereof, the next day sought for a fit occasion to discourse with him, and by good fortune found one the most favourable that cou'd be; for meeting him about four of the Clock in the Afternoon walking in the Garden of Artulieries , he desir'd his Company to the Orange-Garden, with a pretension to buy some of the Fruit. They both went into Darbelle's Coach together, and arriving thither, they alighted and walk'd some time on foot viewing the Oranges. After some Discourse, Darbelle says to him, 'Amasis, you are the most happy man that ere I knew, who have gain'd the Affection of so beautiful a Lady; but I am ignorant how you shou'd so soon become weary of her Favours; for my part (added he) I have sighed for her a long time, and never was so happy as to obtain the least favourable Consent from her in my Amours.' Amasis at this Discourse, with his usual Imprudence, answered him surlily; 'I do not think the happiness so great as you imagine it, and shou'd be much troubled to continue any longer in her Fetters; Is it not enough (pursues he maliciously) that I have had Proof of her weakness, but I must needs marry her? And think you, 'tis not much better to cast off her Chains than continue in them as you do, who are but a Fool the while? 'Is it true ( answered Darbelle coldly ) that you have received such Treatment? It is most true ( replied Amasis) that she hates me not, and that she has omitted no Endeavours to oblige me to marry her, but by good fortune I have escap'd it. 'I cou'd not believe ( replies Darbelle) that you were so base a Person as I find you are; I have been told as much by many, but I thought it only your Enemies that had done you an Injustice, and not what you merited; tho now I am confirm'd that there is no vile Action of which you are not capable, since you have the Confidence to asperse one of such Quality and Vertue as Clitie .' Amasis was much surpriz'd at this Discourse, and he wou'd never have talk'd to him after such a manner, but to raise in him a contempt of her, that so he might have quitted her. Nevertheless he being resolute, and what he had told Darbelle cou'd not be recall'd, he believed himself obliged to make him some Answer, (assuming therefore the Discourse, he told him after a rallying manner: 'You do well not to believe what I have told you, for 'tis not much for the Credit of so gallant a young Man as you are, to consume your self in vain Addresses to a Beauty, who is prodigal of her Favours to other, but does not value you.' Darbelle could no longer endure this Insolence (but suffering himself to be carried away with those Emotions that a true Lover cannot but feel when he hears his Mistress wrong'd;) draws his Sword, which Amasis no sooner saw, but was as ready to defend himself; they being both men of great Courage, made the Combat more formidable: Darbelle receiv'd three Wounds ere he cou'd touch Amasis ; but seeing his Blood flow from him on all sides, and fearing to be overcome by the Efforts of so dangerous an Enemy. The Rage and Fury (wherewith Love did then inspire) took such strong Possession of his Heart, that rallying up all his Forces, he gave Amasis two such Wounds which laid him breathless at his Feet. This Combat was in place retired from all People, and whither Darbelle had drawn Amasis , with no other design (at first) but that they might discourse more freely, and that he might with the greater ease make a Discovery of what he came about: And altho this Quarrel was no premeditated thing, yet their being in such a place, with other Circumstances, and the love that all People knew they both had for the same Person, without much difficulty made every one believe it was a set Duel. The business was soon made publick, and every body that were concern'd, took their Friends part: That of dead Amasis (who was the Heir of a vast Estate, and a Person of great Quality) was the strongest. The King, who was willing to be inform'd of the truth of the matter, was over-perswaded that Darbelle was the Agressor, and openly declar'd against him, commanded a diligent search to be made, and that his Process should be drawn up with all the severity that cou'd be, as was usual against Crimes of that nature. In the mean time the unfortunate Darbelle foreseeing the Pr aemunire this business had brought him into (all wounded as he was) retir'd to a Friend's House of his, called Lycidas , none knowing where he was gone, or that he had been wounded. And after some few days had past, they made no doubt but he had made his Escape, and left the Kingdom; and his own Friends, to make the Report more credible, gave out, That they had receiv'd intelligence from him out of Spain , whither he was fled to secure himself. In the miserable estate our poor Lover found himself in: ('twas not the fear of Death, nor the Disgrace he suffer'd under by his Prince, that so much afflicted him; but the unavoidable necessity of leaving his dear Clitie , and that he had lost by it all hopes of ever possessing her;) he was almost distracted when he found he was forc'd to leave her in a Countrey where there was but little probability of his ever appearing there again. Thus were his Thoughts imploy'd, and his poor Heart almost broke with Grief. Clitie in the mean time came to the Knowledge of this News, amongst the rest of the Court, by the Rumour that presently spread it self every where. None suspected her concern'd, Amasis being dead, and having no evidence, they were all ignorant of the true Cause; she alone knew what had passed between the two Rivals; and looking upon herself as an (innocent) Cause of all Darbelle's misfortunes, the violence she imposed upon her self to hide the trouble she was in for it, cast her into a fit of Sickness. It is certain that her Heart (which till then was ignorant of what it felt) in the same moment found it self touch'd with a sense of his great Merits, and those important Obligations for which she was bound to Darbelle , add to this the Pity which his Misfortunes rais'd in her, notwithstanding all the opposition she cou'd make, created in her something so tender, that she found she was no longer Mistress of her own Heart, and which wou'd have rendred Darbelle (did he but know it) in the midst of all his Miseries, the most happy and contented man in the whole World. She resolv'd in her self no longer to hide her Sentiments for him, and to confess to him, that she had some Tenders of Love for him; nor could either her Virtue or Reputation make the least Objection against this Resolution; for Darbelle was one of the principal Men at Court, and there were not many that cou'd equal him in Quality. He had sought her in Marriage long before he had moved it to her Father, and withal had got his Consent; and to this add the Service he had done, wherein he had lost all for her; so perfectly finish'd the Work, that she had not the least Repugnance in determining her Choice, and resolving to make him her Husband; nor cou'd she do less without incurring Censure and blame when the Truth shou'd be known. But notwithstanding all these favourable Opinions (for Darbelle ) had seated themselves in the Breast of Clitie , he was nothing the more happy, he was ignorant that she had the least Interest in his Affairs; he wou'd fain have made her sensible of 'em, but for some time it was a thing impossible, for he was wounded in the Hand, and had not the use of it to write to her, nor durst he trust any person with the things he had to relate to her. Clitie , on the other side, was almost in despair, after not having heard from him in four whole days; then 'twas her Fansie made her apprehend he had receiv'd some mortal Wounds of which he since was dead; and that the Troubles and Affliction he received from this Misfortune, wou'd not permit to seek out any Friend to whom he might have declared the Truth of the matter. At length Darbelle , in spight of Chirurgeons who had him in cure, was so impatient to know his Destiny, that he was not to be hinder'd from writing a small Note to her, which was deliver'd into her own Hands by the means of one of her Women (called Mariana ) who was one she reposed much Confidence in, and one to whom she had most freely open'd the Secrets of her Heart. The Letter was thus exprest:  Rival his Life, but me a thousand times more, since by his death I am debarr'd from seeing you; and from that moment the fear of losing you, has almost depriv'd me of my Reason, so that I am resolv'd no longer to live, if you take not some pity on me; appoint me then (if you shall think good) some place and time where I may acquaint you more clearly with what you desire to know; but above all, abandon not the most amorous, and the most unfortunate of all men.  This Letter was no sooner delivered to Clitie , but she was amaz'd and surpriz'd by a thousand Disturbances, which till then her Heart had never felt, she open'd it, and read it with eagerness; but when she understood Darbelle still lov'd her most tenderly, and that he was not far from her, all those Disquietudes were converted to Transports of great Joy; and losing not one minutes time, writ to him an Answer in these words following.  have a sense of them; assure your self I have born my share in them ever since the first sad moment that I understood them: and if to make you satisfaction for all those Misfortunes I have drawn you into, be but the want of my Acknowledgments and Gratitude, you have reason to be content. I wou'd willingly grant you what you desire of me, but I am afraid of your life; expose not you self therefore imprudently, but if you are resolv'd to visit me, put on some disguise, and come this night to Mariana's Chamber.  This Answer was carried back to Darbelle by the same Messenger that brought her his Letter; it is impossible to express the Transports of Joy that this Note raised in his Heart; he read it over and over again, giving a thousand Kisses; and if ever any died with Impatience, he did little less in attending the blessed hour in which he was to be at Mariana's Chamber: But the fear he had rather of exposing his dear Clitie , than himself, staid him, and made him retard those pretious Minutes, he imploy'd all the rest of the Day in contriving a proper Disguise, but after a hundred Inventions, he found none so commodious to deceive the Eyes of all those that might meet him, as by putting on the Habit of a Woman. He was but about sixteen or seventeen years old, and as beautiful as the Morning; and having attir'd himself in the Cloathes of one of Lucida's Women, even those that help'd to make the Metamorphosis, cou'd hardly know him now. No sooner did the Night begin to spread its sable Mantle o're that part of the Earth, but Darbelle hastned to visit Clitie , and coming into Mariana's Chamber (who by her Lady's order waited there to receive him) but she locks the Door, and run to give her Lady notice, who after she had taken her leave as decently as she cou'd of those were come to visit her, she went to Mariana's Apartment. No sooner did Darbelle behold her, but he fell prostrate at her Feet, and transported by the Emotions of Fear and Love, durst hardly open his mouth to speak a word; but at length after having a while kept silent (looking on her with timorous Eyes, but so full of tenderness and passion, that Clitie seeing him cou'd not refrain bedewing her fair Cheeks with Tears; 'Lovely Clitie (says he to her) you here behold a Criminal against whom both Heaven and Earth have declar'd themselves, every body in this place have sworn my Death; but you alone, most charming Clitie , are the person from whom I must learn my Destiny; yes, dearest Madam, I value not all the rest who threaten me Death; and amongst all those Tempests and Dangers to which I am exposed, I fear none but your Hatred or your Anger; but (goes he on with Tears in his eyes) alas, my charming Clitie! what will become of wretched me, if you forsake me!' In speaking these words, a thousand Sighs stopt the passage of his Speech, which made him incapable of saying any more. And Clitie , during this Discourse, felt such a tender pity at the bottom of her Heart, that she cou'd no longer suffer this unfortunate Lover (to whom she was so much obliged) to continue in that deplorable Condition, told him (in so soft an Air, which was able to eleviate the most cruel Pains, and comfort even the most desperate) 'You do me wrong, Darbelle , to imagine I have so little Honour as to abandon my Friends because they are miserable, especially since I my self am the cause of it; I must confess, I am not yet thoroughly inform'd how yours have hapned to you, tho I cannot but believe I have contributed much to 'em against my Will; and my Heart (innocent tho it be) is already so touch'd with a sense of the Guilt, that you may easily imagine that I am impatient to know it, and have no small desire to assist you, and render you such Services as may (if possible) make you reparation for all those Evils I have brought upon you.' In finishing these words she obligingly press'd his Hand; and after Darbelle had return'd her Thanks (with an Air and Words the most amorous that ever were) he told her the Conference he had with Amasis , his insolent Behaviour, and the Combat which put an end to all; he made her sensible he was not yet cur'd of his Wounds, he told her both the name of the place, and his Friend to whom he had retir'd, and gave her an exact account of all that hapned since his parting from her; but in the Relation which he made of all his unfortunate Adventures, he inserted such tender Marks of a true Love, and deliver'd all his words (with I know not what of languishing) so feelingly, that it wou'd have moved the Hearts even of the most insensible. But Clitie , who was naturally of the most tender Disposition in the World, being then in the prime of Innocence, suck'd in the insinuating Poyson of his words; for some space after he had finish'd his Relation, she beheld Darbelle with dying Eyes, and in those languishing looks discovered but too much the Sentiment of her Heart; but no sooner did she perceive the small Command she had of her self, but a certain blushing covered all her Face, and dyed it of a Crimson Colour, which render'd her so charming, that Darbelle was ready to expire at her Feet. 'Ah! most adorable Clitie (cries he out) how shall I relate to you what I feel, when in the extremity of my Misfortunes, you raise me to the highest step of happiness? O, how much am I beholden to my Enemies, and to those Accidents which seem to cross my life, who banish me from Court, and from the Conversation of Mankind, that I may have no Disturbance in the Thoughts of you, and who have been the means of procuring me all those Transports of Love wherewith I am inspir'd. Once more, most charming Clitie , give me leave to consecrate my life to you, and to present you with a Heart, which tho no ways worthy of you, yet the most tender, and most passionate of all Hearts.' Clitie was about to answer when Mariana running to her, interrupted her, and told her that her Father was just come from the Louver , and ask'd to speak with her: the Grief and Trouble that this News put her in, was yet more obliging to Darbelle than all that she had said to him; she gave him an absolute Command that he shou'd think of nothing but his Safety, and his Departure from the Court. But because in this first Interview they had resolved of nothing of what might happen, he intreated leave to wait on her the next day about the same time, to which she consented. So they parted; Darbelle went to the outward Gate, accompanied by Mariana , without being known, or suspected by any, altho not a Servant in the House but wou'd have known at another time. Clitie went to her Father, who she found sad and out of humour, (and being desirous to be inform'd) ask'd him the reason why he seem'd so Melancholy? 'My Child (says he) I am just now return'd from receiving the King's Orders, which much trouble me: It is strongly reported, that Darbelle is yet in some place hereabouts, and that not taking notice of the Decree against him, he has not fled from the Court. 'The King thinks it a point of Injustice to let him escape unpunished, and looks upon the Combat as a Crime of State; and (to be short) if he can be taken, is possitively resolv'd he shall suffer Death; he has commanded me to secure his Person, a hundred Men of the Guards will be with me within an hour; and we have order to force open the House of Lycidas , in which it is supposed he is conceal'd. Judge then, my Child (continues he) if I have any cause of Joy, since I must be the Instrument of bringing so vertuous a Man as Darbelle is to his end; one who is so dear to me, and one for whom I have a greater respect than all the Court besides; however, his Majesties Orders must be obey'd, and 'tis not in my power to avoid it.' Clitie , who was not a little surpriz'd at this Discourse, wanted not Prudence enough to conceal it; but making an Effort upon her self, told her Father, that indeed he had reason enough for his grief, yet nevertheless he ought to obey his Majesties Commands; but withal, she told him, she cou'd no ways comprehend that a Person so criminal as Darbelle was, shou'd not ere this have made his Escape out of the Kingdom. Their Conversation lasted a little while, after which they parted; and Clitie , that she might have the greater liberty to be alone, feigned that she had the Head-ach. Lycidas she knew was the Man, at whose House Darbelle had conceal'd himself ever since the Combat, insomuch that this pressing Accident, which so much threatned him, and the Danger and Difficulty which appear'd to Clitie in saving him, did so extreamly surprize her, and made so deep an Impression of his Affairs in her Heart, that without any farther Consultation, she writ him this Billet.  knowledge of it, and in a very short time you will be apprehended; the few moments on which your life depends, are too too pretious to me to lose in saying any more: Use all diligence then to save your selfe, if you wou'd ever have me think you love me.  Darbelle received this Billet from Mariana's hands, whom her Lady had sent with it, he was much surpriz'd at it. But the Interest which Clitie took in the safety of his Person, was an incitement too powerful for him to slip the least moment, and by good fortune he had not yet shifted himself out of his Woman's Cloaths, not dreaming the least of what might fall out; he was till now ruminating on nothing but the various turns his Fortune had shewn him. 'Let us fly (dear Mariana ) says he, let us fly, since Clitie has so commanded, and the larger Interest she has in my Heart, the more will I make it my Endeavour to preserve it for her.' In finishing these words, they both went out together; but hardly had they gone a Furlong from the House, but they saw Clitie's Father at the head of a hundred arm'd men, who had already seized and guarded all the Avenues. Both Mariana and Darbelle knew him a good ways off, which made them pull both their Hoods over their Faces, and to step a little out of the way, the better to avoid the Danger. They passed them without any obstructions, but neither Darbelle nor Mariana knowing that Clitie's Father had orders to apprehend him, were much surpriz'd to find him in this Equipage, they consulted a while about what they should do, and to resolve to what place he should retire till the hour appointed to visit Clitie . In short, having well consider'd on the matter, Darbelle , not daring to trust any, consider'd that it wou'd be very difficult to go to any place in his Woman's Habit without Discovery, took up a Resolution to go directly to Clitie's , and shut himself up in Mariana's Chamber. He accomplish'd his desire most happily for they both got in without being perceiv'd by any; and Mariana immediately went to Clitie to give her an account of all that had pass'd. Clitie was extremely pleas'd at the News; for Clitie's Father with the Guard, departed to apprehend Darbelle almost at the same time that Mariana was sent to give him notice of it. In the midst of these Troubles, fearing what might happen to him, she endured strange Tortures; but no sooner did she understand that Darbelle was safe arrived, but she went to him to testifie the Joy she received for his Escape. ' Darbelle (says she, coming up to him) I have deceived both my Father and the King to save your life; and 'tis no small trouble to me that it is not in my power to do yet more, whereby I might testifie to you what interest I take in all that concerns you. My fairest Clitie (answered Darbelle) you have had only care of preserving a man who is wholly yours, but one who shall be imploy'd on no other account but your Service, and to adore you even to his Grave.' Falling on his Knees, and going to continue his Discourse, Clitie prevented him saying to him) ' Darbelle , our time is precious, and you have had a wonderful escape in this present avoiding your Ruine; it is a great Argument Heaven it self has no small interest in you, since it makes you so much its care, and works such Miracles in your behalf: abuse not therefore its goodness, but lay hold on the means it proffers you, and lose no time in making your escape out of Paris , where your Enemies are so well informed of all that you do. 'You cannot but be sensible, that you have been betray'd, since the King had information that you were retired to Lycida's House; by very good fortune he gave his Orders for apprehending you to my Father; and (not to hold you longer) it was from him I knew the Secret, by which means I gave you timely notice. Tho now you may imagine you are safe enough, who knows what may happen? How are you sure that none has dog'd you hither? Consider therefore how miserable shall we both be, shou'd you be taken in my Father's House! My Honour and your life must be the Victims which our Enemies will sacrifice with all pleasure imaginable; therefore both for my sake and your own, I intreat you would not think of staying any longer here, not only at Court, but in the Kingdom; and many times the Circumstances you lie under, become more calm and tranquil as they grow old; and 'tis not impossible but after some time, a means may be found out in your absence to pacifie the King's Anger, and to change the Face of Affairs by making the King understand the Truth of the matter, and that your Quarrel was not a set Duel, but a Rancounter; your Friends are many and powerful, and I am sure will not forsake you; and for my own part, I will use all the interest I can, that I may see you once again at Court, and re-establish'd in the King's Favour.' Darbelle having hearkned to this Discourse of Clitie's , without interrupting her being so overwhelm'd in Sorrow, that he was incapable of saying one word; and instead of returning her an Answer, stood almost drown'd in Tears. Clitie added a thousand other obliging things to comfort him; at length Darbelle recollecting himself, uttered these words but with so languishing a tone as he were just departing this Life: 'O my most lovely Clitie! does your Heart accord with you in what you say on my account Clitie , who already had resolv'd to discover to him the tender Sentiments she had for him, and to give him all the assurances of Love, that might become a Person of her Quality, Honour, and Vertue: But one who still was under her Father's disposal, paused a little ere she discover'd her self. In short, this was a lucky hour for Darbelle ; for Clitie thought it wou'd be very difficult to perswade him to leave her, without giving him some hopes of seeing her again, and being happy at his return; and she fear'd, that without some such hopes, he might yet be guilty of some extravagant thing, in endeavouring to obtain her Love, that might perhaps cost him his Life: Having considered these things, add to these the Passion she felt in Heart, which now she was no longer Mistress of, she return'd him this Answer, 'O, Darbelle! how cruel are you thus not to understand me, and apprehend I love? Alas, Darbelle! having given you such evident Proofs already, methinks you might have been kind to me, and spar'd my Blushes in telling you I love you; and perhaps (says she, with a deep sigh) more than you love me?' She blush'd in uttering these words and turn'd aside her Eyes from looking on Darbelle , who was so extasied with what he heard, and transported with the excess of Love and Joy, he was not capable of returning her thanks; nevertheless he threw himself at her Feet, embracing her Knees, and kissing a thousand times over her fair Hands, at last he burst out; 'O you great Gods! are you not envious of the happiness I have? Yes, my adorable Clitie , (goes he on) your love is dearer to me than the Empire of the World: But, oh! not all the Words nor Eloquence, or Wit, can e're express my Love; and nothing but your All-charming Beauty can come in Competition with it: And had I but the least though that any thing cou'd change my Heart here I swear to you (my divine Saint that I wou'd this moment pierce the perfidious thing a thousand times before your Eyes.' He made a Million of Protestations of an everlasting Love; and Clitie gave him an assurance that she wou'd never marry any one but him, and that she wou'd not only refuse all such who should make their amour to her, but withstand the very Will and Command of her Father shou'd he ever attempt to bestow her on my other. Many passionate Expressions pass'd on both sides for Confirmation of their Loves and Protestations; after which Clitie commanded him, but with the greatest regret imaginable, to depart the next day: they both of 'em seem'd to disolve in Tears, but the unseasonableness of the time, and the return of Clitie's Father constrain'd a Separation. Clitie promis'd she would not fail to visit him again as soon as she could get away from her Father; in the mean time she desired him to resolve whither he wou'd go, that so they might take measures of informing each other how matters went, and that she wou'd find some way or other for their easie and secret Correspondence by Letters. Darbelle sighing, return'd her this Answer; 'I am too much your Slave not to obey you in every thing, altho' I run the hazard of my life in the Performance; and here I implore Heaven's Aid to give me power to bear my Sufferings.' At these words both parted, Clitie to visit her Father, who she found in a more pleasant Humour than what she left him 'My dearest Child (says he, looking on her) the poor Darbelle by good fortune has evited Death, I have not found him at Lycidas's House; the King can blame none but those who have given him the Advice; I am so well satisfied that I met not with him, that I cannot put on a Disguise to the contrary, and seem troubled, especially since I am so well assured of my due performing all the Commands I receiv'd from his Majestie for searching that House where they suppos'd he had conceal'd himself.' Clitie put on such an indifference during her Father's Relation, that the most nice Observer cou'd have suspected her to have been a Party concern'd in the Business Soon after her Father took Coach, to go and acquaint the King of his Proceedings, and Clitie flew to visit her Darbelle , carrying with her a small Casket of Pearls and Diamonds for him. ' Darbelle (says she) our Affairs are now in an exceeding good Posture, and seeing you are resolv'd to follow my advice, I hope the Heavens will be pleased some time or other to compleat our Happiness, lose no moment, but quickly save your self; here I present you with all my richest Jewels, which are of value enough to assist you in whatsoever you shall stand in need of, and I make it my request you would not refuse them; for I know it is very inconvenient for you to seek for others of your own, and so great a Journey cannot but be expensive.' Darbelle was amaz'd at her Bounty, and after having return'd her a thousand thanks very obligingly; ' Clitie (says he) there is no need of any thing more than your Commands to make me leave this place, and to obey you; and nothing but the Assurance of your Love and Fidelity which can support my Life when I am absent from your fair Eyes; I love you (continues he) with too ardent a Passion to give you any longer these Apprehensions of fear, which (for your sake) make not so deep impressions on your Heart, as they do on mine. 'And since you are pleas'd so to order me, I will be gone by break of day; as for my Life it will be in no danger, the way that I intend to take; for I have a Gentleman that has been brought up from his Childhood with me, and one that has tied himself so to me, that he is resolv'd to share in all my Fortunes; he is endued with an infinite Wit and discreet Conduct, by whose means I shall be able to put on what Disguise I please till I shall arrive at some place where I shall have no longer cause to fear. 'It is some time since (says he) that I commanded him to be in a readiness to execute what orders I shou'd give him, and to be always prepar'd to follow me; I will give him Instructions to attend me at St. Anthony's Gate to morrow by the break of day; nor will I take any other with me, till I shall come to the next great City through which I am to pass, where I will furnish my self with other Servants to wait on me, who neither knowing my true Name, Quality, nor my Business, are not liable to betray me, as apparently I have been already by some of my People, tho' I know not whom to accuse. 'As for Money, (most generous Clitie , says he) I have sufficient to serve me in my Journey, I shall not put my self to unnecessary Expences; the Passion that possesses my Heart, will inspire me with nothing but your Idea, and force me to seek out a Solitude where I may live free from all the noise of Pleasure, or Disturbance of Delight. 'I intend for Italy , where I will never rest in any place, but such, whose Shades and melancholy Silence shall be agreeable to my Humour, and to whom alone I may make my Moans, and lament your dear Absence, sacrifice all to the Griefs and Sorrows I suffer for you. After this manner, my heavenly Mistress (says he) will I employ my Hour, and spend my Days while I am banish'd from your sight; in the interim I will sollicite all my Friends and Relations by my Letters, to acquaint his Majesty of my Innocency, and give him a true Account of all my Proceedings, and (if possible) oblige him once more to give me free liberty of serving him, and the inestimable Happiness of seeing you again: O Heavens! (added he, with Tears in his Eyes) behold, my incomparable Clitie , what Resolutions I have taken to obey you; yet I doubt whatever Endeavours I shall make, it will not be in my power to live after I have parted with you.' Clitie hearkned to all his Discourse, and dissolving in Tears, conjur'd him again to accept of her Jewels, but he still refus'd them, and only took an enamell'd Picture of hers, which was in a Box made of an intire Emerauld, and set about with Diamonds of an inestimable Price. They agreed together to give a reciprocal Account of all the very least Action of their lives; and that when Clitie writ to him, she shou'd direct her Letters as he wou'd appoint her in his; and that he would direct his to Mariana , who would deliver them to Clitie : he had sent a Note to his Gentleman (whose Name was La Rock ) to have Horses in readiness in such a place as he had appointed him, and had received an Answer, that he would not fail to be there; those who brought it, not knowing the Design, had orders to attend him at the Corner of a Street before the dawning of the day. All things being thus order'd, Clitie and Darbelle passed the rest of the Night in discoursing about what they had to do, both as to their Commerce by Letters, as well as the means to accommodate their Affairs, they made again a thousand Protestations of Love to each other, that it should last till Death, Sighs and Tears were their faithful Witnesses, and in them never did two Lovers give better Testimonies; nor did Darbelle fail in the least point of Respect to her. It is true, that at that moment wherein they were to part, having for some time look'd upon each other without speaking the least Syllable, but with Eyes the most eloquent in Love, and Tears and Sighs a thousand times more eloquent than Words; Clitie pressing the Hand of the disconsolate Darbelle , and rising to take her leave, all full of Grief and Sorrow, and not able to disguise her Troubles; Darbelle detaining her for a long time, did nothing but kiss her fair hand, which at length (as it were with a kind of Violence) he let go, pronouncing and repeating twice or thrice these words, 'You leave me, my adorable Clitie , and it is time that I should die.' Clitie flung out of the Chamber (her Handkerchief before her weeping Eyes) and Mariana waited on her to her own Apartment, where Clitie threw her self upon her Bed, pouring out a Torrent of Tears, and wanted little of pouring out her life at the same time. Mariana return'd immediately to Darbelle , who was no less afflicted, and told him that it was Clitie's Orders that he should forthwith be gone, and that he ought to do it, not only for the Preservation of his own life, but the Honour and Reputation of her Mistress. At last, being over-perswaded by what Mariana had said to him, and fearing to disobey Clitie , he put off his Woman's Apparel, and dress'd himself in a riding Habit, which had been privately brought to him by the unknown Porters at the Corner of the Street; being dress'd he went to La Rock who waited for him with his Horses; but his Grief had so changed him, that 'tis certain he cou'd hardly know him. The Day began to appear ere the poor afflicted Lover, accompanied only with La Rock , and guided by his Passion, took Horse to avoid the Displeasure of the King, and prevent the Fury and Anger of his Enemies, who had used all their Endeavours to take away his Life. He discours'd some time with La Rock , telling him how much he confided in him, and acquainting him, that he was the only Person that he made choice of amongst all his Servants, to partake of his good or bad Fortune; he told him in few words the Resolution he had taken to quit both the Court and Kingdom, to give time to his Friends to accommodate his Affairs; that he wou'd after a day or two take post to get to Marseilles as soon as he cou'd possible, from thence to pass into Florence , where he wou'd retire himself during his Exile. In short, he chang'd his Name, and took other Servants, from whom he hid his Adventures, and they only look'd on him as a Gentleman of Quality that was travelling. In the mean time the beautiful Clitie (ever since the Departure of her Lover) had so cruelly given her Heart up to all the Emotions of a tender and innocent Passion, that she was oblig'd to fain her self sick to avoid the Profers that all made her of diverting her self, and to hinder her answering all those who were daily importuning her to know the cause of her Grief. Mariana only knew the secrets of her Heart, and left no means unattempted to comfort her; but alass! how do poor Lovers deceive themselves, when they imagine the sound of their Beloved's Name will ease their Sorrows? Clitie , who had no experience in these matters, took delight in nothing but to talk of her dear Darbelle , but in doing so, she wounded her Heart with a thousand mortal Stabbs, which became incurable; and from that moment nothing was able to ease her of that cruel Passion which she had suffer'd so strongly to possess her. The second day of her Lover's Absence, she receiv'd a Letter from him, which made a little calm in her Soul which stood so much in need of it: The Letter is as follows.  you? Oh, it is certainly a Dream! for were it a Truth, I ought not to have supported the Grief, but have died. But oh, in the mean time I cannot see you! to my Horror I perceive (unhappy that I am) that every step I take bears me farther from your fair Eyes. But, my most charming Dear, you have commanded me to live and love you: Oh, how willingly wou'd I obey you! how dear is your Idea to me! and I ought to be content with it, if I have but rais'd the smallest Sense of what I feel, in your dear Breast.  He gave her notice also in his Letter, That she might write to him at Lyons , and direct her Letter to a Person who was a Relation of La Rock's . Clitie took no delight but in reading this Letter, and passed whole days in discoursing Mariana about it; but when she was a little eased of the Grief which his Absence had caused, she began to imploy her Friends to act in the behalf of the unfortunate Darbelle , to re-establish him at Court; every one was now assur'd by the Letters he writ, that he was out of the Kingdom, which made his Enemies less careful in looking after him. In the mean time his Enemies, by underhand-dealing, were so powerful, and the King so set against him, that he would by no means suffer any one to speak in his behalf. The Court of France was at this time in the greatest Splendor in the World, and altho' France had Wars with almost all Europe , her Arms had gain'd in two or three Battels such prodigious Conquests, that when Winter approach'd, it brought an universal Truce, and Sports and Delights assum'd again their place, with a greater magnificence than ever, and the victorious Lovers wou'd not give place to Mars himself. Clitie , who questionless was the most charming Beauty of all the Court, was now in the Bloom and Spring of her Beauty; there was not a person of any Note or Quality, who were not enamour'd of her; and those who dar'd not openly declare their Passion, or make their Complaints to her, made it, nevertheless, their business to please her with Masques and Balls; but those whose Births and Estates made them her Equals, used all their Endeavours to marry her. In all places whithersoever she went, a thousand Divertisements pursu'd her, and augmented wheresoe're she came, yet she took no delight in 'em, declaring these glittering Pleasures were no ways agreeable to her: But what less can a Lover do, when he is debarr'd telling his fair Mistress his Passion, but to make Declaration of it by his Gallantry, by Treats, Balls, Masques, and melodious Symphonies; and it is certain, how troublesome soe're they appear'd to Clitie , they afforded much pleasure to those that accompanied her. No Musick so much delighted her as the sweet Choiresters of the solitary Groves burden'd Heart sought out the unfrequentedst places she cou'd find, and preferr'd the Complaints and tender Songs of sweet Philomel to all other Harmony; yet do what she cou'd, she was forc'd to accept the melodious Consorts which Love had inspir'd her Adorers to present her with, and thereby sometimes diverted the Current of her melancholy Thoughts. Every one took notice, that this incomparable fair One, who was naturally of a jovial Temper, now became retir'd and serious; and I know not what of languishing and tender appear'd in her Eyes, and accompanied all her Actions after so agreeable a manner, that it was almost impossible to see her, and not to love. Thus she spent five or six Months, and none e're knew the Secrets of her Heart, or the Resolution she had taken to espouse none but Darbelle ; she was daily importun'd, and it is no easie matter to conceive the Trouble she was put to, in defending her self from the Solicitations of that number that ador'd her. There was not any, tho' never so perfect, in whom she found not some defect, which she still us'd for excuses to her Father; she had no sooner clear'd her self of all these Lovers, but Fortune resolving still to persecute her, rais'd up one whose Courtship and Love gave her much trouble. It was the Prince Lysidor , he was indeed but a Stranger, yet ally'd to the Court of France , and preferr'd to noblest and chiefest Employments of the Kingdom; he was handsome to a Miracle, and by all look'd upon, and the most gallant and accomplish'd Person of the Court: He lov'd her to that excess, that all fear'd it would have cost him no less than his Life; his Passion was made publick to all, and none that ever saw him, but had matter of Discourse, either concerning his Love or his Mistress, the violence of his Passion, and his assiduous Addresses to her, freed her from all other Pretenders; nor did he miss a day in which he saw her not. He made his Court to her, and had gain'd her Father's Consent, but by no means cou'd obtain the Daughter's; and all the Power of the Court and Kingdom strove in vain to bring it about, she withstood all, and it may be truly said, that never any was more constant and faithful than this fair One was, to what she had promis'd Darbelle . She was recompenc'd with the most endearing tender Letters that ever Love indited, which almost every day she received from him; nor did she omit to answer them, letting him know the very least thing that passed. And if the Absence of these two Lovers gave them unexpressible Sorrows, yet the daily Commerce by Letters did not a little ease their Sufferings. That which most tormented Clitie , was the extraordinary Passion that her Beauty had inspir'd the Heart of Prince Lysidor withal, which raged so in him, and became so violent, that some fear'd it might raise in him Thoughts of stealing her away. He was so extraordinary handsome, young, liberal, gallant, and magnificent in all things, that it may be said, nothing cou'd have rais'd him any Obstacle in the Heart of Clitie , but that Darbelle had got possession of the place, and without doubt had she been disinterested, none had sooner been preferr'd amongst her whole croud of Adorers than this Prince; but there needed no greater Bar to his happiness, than Darbelle's Love. He cou'd gain nothing on her Heart more than an Esteem for him, which made her much concern'd at his Sufferings; she told him often, and conjur'd him to think on her no more, and to give her Father no further Trouble about their Marriage, that it was utterly impossible for her to alter her Destiny, and that her Father was to her instead of the best Husband in the World. These Repulses highly afflicted the Prince, but they wrought not their design'd Effect, and were no hindrance to him to love her more tenderly; and he hoped in time her cruel Resolution might be chang'd. His Merit, and the Gold which he was even profusely lavish of, in every thing that might advance his Love, had gain'd the Heart and Friendship of Mariana , he oblig'd her by many Presents, and left no means unassay'd to gain her Favour; for he was not ignorant she was the only person in the World to whom her Mistress intrusted her Secrets, and made her Confident; he knew they were never asunder, whether walking abroad to take the Air, visiting, or at home; they were often discoursing together, and Clitie and Mariana seem'd never to be weary of each others Company. The particular kindness that Clitie had for her, was the reason which oblig'd the Prince to make her of his Friends, he imagin'd he should search into the Heart of her Mistress by gaining that of Mariana , he spared neither Cost nor Presents to engage her to his Interests: Mariana was insensibly won to it, she hearkned to his daily amorous Complaints, and promis'd to do him all the Service she was able, and (if possible) to render him one day happy with Clitie . Having gain'd Mariana , he doubted not the success of his Amours, and assumed new hopes of one day overcoming Clitie's Cruelty, he acosted her with more Courage, and better Assurance than ever. Mariana knew that Clitie had infinite Wit and that none in the World had a more apprehensive and piercing Judgment than she, took all possible care to conceal the Correspondence she held with the Prince, and gave him Instructions to that purpose, she would often before Clitie seem to be displeas'd at him, that she might not be suspected of his Party. In the mean time Clitie , who conceal'd nothing from Mariana , discover'd to her the Sentiments she had concerning the Prince, and often told her, That his Misfortunes made her pity him, and that she was much troubl'd he should still preserve a Love for one who cou'd never make him any return, nor have any more than an Esteem for him, so long as Darbelle prov'd constant. Mariana was not wanting to extol the Worth of the Prince, and put her in mind of all he had done for her; she recounted to her all his Languishings, and all the Sighs her Absence gave him, when he came to visit her, and found her not at home, and the Torrent of Tears that flow'd from his Eyes, when he was forc'd to complain of her Cruelty. One day as Clitie seem'd more than ordinary concern'd for the Affliction of Lysidor, Mariana made an Effort to batter her Constancy, saying seriously, 'Madam, I believe you have much a-do to preserve your Heart intirely for Darbelle , and to defend it against the daily Assaults of the love of the Prince. Oh! if you had but heard the Complaints he made two days since (thinking none had been near him) in a close Arbour in your Garden, and had you seen (as I did) the Transports that his Passion hurried him to, I am confident you could not but have pitied him. For my part (goes she on) who have less reason to love him than you, especially since I have promised Darbelle never to forsake his Interest, and daily to put you in mind of him; I swear to you, that being witness to the Despair of this poor Prince (tho' he saw me not) I had not the power to avoid shedding Tears as fast as he; for certainly (said she to Clitie ) it is impossible for him to live in the Tortures he indures for you, and that a Heart so strongly attack'd with so many Afflictions as his is, cannot any longer resist his Fate.' She spoke these things to the Advantage of the Prince, with such Artifice and Cunning, that Clitie , whose Heart (was not made of Adamant) was capable enough of the tender Impression of Love, and cou'd no longer defend it self from pitying this unfortunate, whom she had made so miserable. 'I am even in despair (answers Clitie ) since this is arrived to this pitch of Folly, that he must either marry me or die; for if I have seem'd more cruel to him than to many, whom I esteem'd less, it was only to endeavour to free him of the unhappy Passion he has for me: I am not altogether insensible, and I acknowledge I feel a certain Compassion for him, when I behold such tender and true Marks of his Love, as he daily gives me. But you know, Mariana (says she) that nothing can dispossess Darbelle of my Heart, my Duty and Inclination plead wholly for him; and it is impossible for me ever to alter; for which reasons I am resolv'd to forbid the Prince ever to see me again. 'Ah, Madam! (answers Mariana ) do not drive him to this cruel Extremity, all the World knows that he has endeavour'd unsuccessfully all means possible to cease loving you, but since 'tis not to be effected, envy him not the Consolation of dying in your sight.' As Clitie and Mariana were thus discoursing, the Prince (who had before been informed of the Conversation that shou'd be made) enter'd, he appear'd so dejected and sad, that (in short) Clitie was surpriz'd and Mariana seem'd to be so much concern'd at it, that she could not forbear pronouncing some words that made known her Astonishment. The Prince who seeing none present with Clitie but Mariana , told her (with Tears in his Eyes) 'Alas! thou cruel fair One, make an end at once both of my Grief and Life, that I may no longer importune you; and since it is my misfortune to persecute you thus to no purpose let me die to make an expiation for all the Torment I have given you. Alas (pursues he) your Eyes (most Divine Clitie ) are a thousand times more beautiful than the Morning, but I cannot render them either delightful or soft to me what then shou'd I do with life? It is much better for me to expire at your Feet, than daily to be the Object of your Anger.' He utter'd these words with a languishing sadness, which became him so well, they wou'd have mov'd compassion in the most obdurate Heart, when a Death-like paleness cover'd all his Face, his Strength began to fail him, and he cou'd no longer keep himself from falling on the Couch whereon Clitie sate, just like a man expiring; Mariana presently skreek'd out, 'O good Gods! he is gone, he is dead; dear Madam (says she) say some obliging thing to him to recover him, if possible.' Clitie , who is certainly the most excellent of her Sex, stood not now to consult either the Love she bore Darbelle , or the Cruelty she had design'd to shew the Prince, she regarded nothing at present, but the lamentable Condition in which he was, and believing that unfeignedly he wou'd die, if she gave him not some Relief; 'Prince (says she) if it yet lies in your Power, have more regard to a life so valuable as yours, and give not up your self, as you do, to an unparallel'd despair; for be assur'd I have not the least unkindness for you, and if I have not answer'd your Love in all Respects, it is because the Heavens have other ways decreed it: I am so far from seeking your Death, that I wish nothing more than that you may live, which by all the power you say I have over you, charge you to obey.' After these words which gave a little Comfort to him, he began to lift himself up. The Prince being come to himself again, wou'd have return'd her Thanks for what she had said to him, but. Clitie reflecting on what her Compassion had made her utter, fearing it would but augment his Passion, went out of the Room angry with her self, leaving the Prince with Mariana , who pretended to stay a while with him, to prevent any extravagant thing his Despair might cause him to do, which might be more troublesome to Clitie , tho her Design was only to discourse with him, and to make a favourable Construction of her last obliging words, to the Prince's Advantage. Mariana no sooner came into Clitie's presence, but she feign'd new Stories of the Ravings, Sighings, Lamentations, and Tears of the poor afflicted Prince, and the great pains and difficulty she had to recover him after Clitie had parted from him nor did she leave any thing unsaid that might touch her Heart in favour of the Prince. But Clitie's Constancy and Fidelity wou'd admit in her a love for none but her Darbelle , his Merit, the many Obligations that she had had from him, and those reciprocal Promises, and mutual Vows they had made eternally to love each other, still possess'd her Memory, and no less her Heart; besides she daily receiv'd from him such passionate and tender Letters, and so full of Wit and Judgment, that they one wou'd have been potent enough to have defended him against all his Rivals. At length by little and little, the Prince's Presents, his Solicitations, and the promises he daily made Mariana , that she wou'd share with him in all his good Fortune, quite corrupted her, and gained her wholly to his side; she now forgets all she had promised Darbelle , and all the Duty she ow'd to Clitie , and not considering the fatal Consequence this horrid Perfidy might cause, discover'd to the Prince all their Secrets, and assur'd the Prince, that Clitie lov'd Darbelle even to death; and that that was the occasion of the Quarrel between him and Amasis , and that he had not left her, but by her Command; and after she had given him a thousand Assurances to love him to her Grave, and to marry him as soon as their Affairs were in a Condition to admit it; that no Day scarcely passed wherein Clitie had not Letter from him; and that she as often sent him Answers, (and to be short) that Darbelle was the only hinderance of his happiness, and that she had cause to be confidently assur'd, that nothing but the Pre-ingagement cou'd hinder her from loving him, and that his Person and Addresses had nothing in 'em, but what was advantageous and agreeable, did not the consideration of the Love she had to Darbelle interpose. This Relation of Mariana's strangely surpriz'd the Prince, and sensibly afflicted him; he was so amaz'd at it, that it was some time ere he came to himself, and declar'd he had rather the Rigours and Cruelty of Clitie had sprung from a hatred of his own Person, than from the love she had for Darbelle ; he forgot not to return Mariana a thousand Thanks for the Favours and good Offices she had done him in discovering to him such important Secrets from which he hop'd to reap great Advantage: They swore a mutual Amity nor did they part before he had bountifully rewarded her for what she had done for him; he pull'd off his Finger a Diamond Ring of great Value, which he presented to her; and having embrac'd her, he conjur'd her never to forsake him, assuring her that should not be his last Present: she desir'd him to come to her the next day at an hour when she was confident Clitie wou'd not be at home, that they might farther consult what measures to take in order to the supplanting of Darbelle , and by some means or other to engage her to love the Prince. Thus then they parted, after having given each other a thousand Promises of fidelity and Amity; Mariana fail'd not to go immediately to her Mistress; and the better to disguise her Proceedings, she told her, That now she was indeed worthy to be belov'd; she prais'd the Grandeur of her Soul, and admir'd the Constancy of her heart, who had so resolutely and rigorously resisted the Efforts of the most powerful and sincere Lover in the World; she seem'd to put her in some way or other of repulsing the Prince, and to prevent his daily visits: In short, she so well played the hypocrite, that Clitie confided more in her now than ever she had done. She receiv'd not one Letter from Darbelle , that Mariana shew'd not to the prince, and indeed almost all those that Clitie had writ in answer to 'em: This perfidious Woman slipt not the least occasion of deceiving Clitie , and serving the Prince, and it would be difficult to distinguish between the Fidelity that Clitie had for Darbelle , and that which Mariana had for the Prince. The day following Lysidor fail'd not to visit Mariana at the hour appointed, nor did she forget to tell him all that she had learn'd from Clitie , she discover'd to him all that Darbelle had writ to her, and what she had writ to him by way of Answer and tho' the Entertainment was as a bitter Poison to the Prince, yet he made her repeat the same things over and over a hundred times. Their Conversation ended as the rest had done, in Presents and Protestation to be true and faithful. It is true, when the Prince had seriously considered every Transaction, he found his Affairs with his Mistress were but in a lamentable Condition, and he despair'd, do what he cou'd ever to gain her Heart; he took a Resolution of leaving her, and no more to trouble these two Lovers, in passion, which to him seem'd so just, and ought to be applauded by all vertuous People; no sooner did his Reason break through and dissipate those Clouds that did obscure his Glory but he was possess'd with a mortal Aversion for Mariana , and all her Treachery seem'd odious to him; (and no doubt but the Soul of this Prince was so great and glorious, that it was impossible to make greater Efforts than he made to reduce his Heart from so unfortunate a love) he intended no farther to engage her in his Business, and cou'd not have good thoughts of one who had so treacherously abus'd her Mistress: Now it was that his Eyes being open'd, he was sensible of the Deformity of Mariana's Actions, that he had not any room in his Heart, but what was possess'd with Rage and Anger against her, he purpos'd forthwith to discover to Clitie what a Snake she had harbour'd in her Bosome, and to tell her all that Mariana had made known to him. One day when Glory seem'd to have the only sway of his Heart, and to have got the Ascendancy o're Love by the Endeavours he had made, he went to find out Clitie , with a Resolution to ask her pardon for all the Troubles and Anxities he had given her, and to inform her of all that he knew of Mariana . Having that day found her alone, as she was gathering Jessimine-flowers in a Terrase-walke before the Windows of her Apartment, (he says to her with a cheerfulness more than usual) 'Fair Clitie wonder not (I pray you) that I presume this day to speak to you with more Assurance than formerly I have done since I am perswaded the business I now come to discourse to you of, will be more agreeable to you, than any I have yet spoke to you of since the first minute I had the happiness to see you. 'Know then, (pursues he) Madam, I am come to throw my self at your Feet, and implore a forgiveness of all that your fair Eyes and my Passion have forc'd me so often to say to you against your Approbation: In short, most beautiful Clitie , I am resolv'd to leave you wholly to your own Disposal, and desire no greater Favour than to be reckon'd amongst your Friends, since I see it is impossible for you to love me as I wou'd have you, or for you ever to make me happy; I am sensible of the Violence I shou'd offer you, shou'd I persecute you any longer; and all that my Ambition craves, that you wou'd suffer me to adore and honour you above all others, and from this time I promise you no more to entertain you with any discourse of my love.' Clitie was so surpriz'd to hear him say this, that at first she gave no credit to his words, but imagin'd it some amorous Stratagem; but at last he assur'd her of the Truth, and wiping away all Suspicion, she look'd upon him as a Person infinitely obliging and vertuous. 'Can it be (answer'd she) that what you tell me now is Truth? then have you made me happy, and I will ever allow you the same place in my Amity that you have already in my Esteem; for now I will no longer hide from you, that I was driven even to despair, that I have made you endure so much Inquietude, which I knew not how to redress; but (continued she) I never was more sensible of any thing than the Cruelty of your Destiny, which had ordain'd a Person of your Merits and Vertues, to sue to one so incapable of making you any Returns as I; but since you only desire I shou'd look on you as a Friend, be assur'd I esteem you as my best.' The Prince return'd her Thanks, adding a thousand other obliging things, and spent the rest of that Visit with an Air seemingly full of Content and Satisfaction; he thought it not convenient yet to discover the Intelligence between him and Mariana , fearing it might put her out of humour, therefore he left that to some more proper season. Thus he parted from her, with an intention of being only her Friend, and no more to trouble her with his Love; but in a short time after his Passion, which seem'd to be a Sleep, rouses it self again in his Heart, and made him apprehend that a Friendship only with Clitie , wou'd but make him more miserable; and being her Friend, he had now no more hopes for Love, but must for ever live tormented with Despair: 'What (says he) my Heart! wou'd you no longer love Clitie ? What then unhappy thing wilt thou do? Perhaps thou wilt shortly see her in anothers Arms, whilst thou hast no pretension but to Friendship, that's to say, thou must be pleas'd to see her with thy Rival, and rejoyce in the soft Tenders of their Loves, which none but they must injoy: O God! (cry'd he out) how cou'd I ever think, when this shall happen, that I can look on without resigning up my life! No, no, Clitie , it is impossible but I must still love you, love more than all my Rivals put together, and I will dispute with them, your heart, to the last gasp.' He walked hastily about his Chamber in pronouncing these last words, just as Mariana entred, who was so alarm'd at her Mistress's telling her the Prince no longer lov'd her, that she cou'd not rest till she came to learn the Truth of it from himself. The Prince, after having understood the Subject of her Visit, found he was no longer in a Condition of being her Friend only, but on the contrary, that he was a thousand times more enamour'd of her now than ever, thought it convenient not to let her know the weakness he had been guilty of, and disguis'd from her the Truth, fearing that Mariana wou'd no more make him her Confident, and that she wou'd not so freely disclose the Secrets of Clitie , as formerly she had done. 'Is it possible, my dear Mariana (says he, composing himself the best he cou'd) that you shou'd believe I cou'd live one moment without loving Clitie ? And do you not apprehend all that she has told you of my yesterdays Visit to be but a Love-mystery, whereby I flatter my self to make some advantage? Ah, Mariana! (goes he on) be confident that my Love and Life are too inseparable to be ever sundred, and there is nothing so dear to me I will not sacrifice to my Passion.' Mariana easily believed all he said, and was glad to hear him speak after this manner, she flatter'd him in his Attempts, and assur'd him she wou'd never forsake his Interest: They had many other Discourses in which they continued some time, concluding that before Clitie shou'd be undeceiv'd concerning what she believ'd of the Prince, and that it was necessary to keep her in the same opinion, the better to bring about their Designs. He the same day composes a Song, which he had so order'd, that it should be given to Clitie as a piece of new Gallantry, wherein none cou'd have guess'd either of them concerned, though at the same time he did not question but when Clitie saw it, she would find a perfect description of the last Conversation that she had with him, and cou'd not fail to guess both the Author and his Intentions. The Song is as follows.  Of a Beauty, whom all do admire, Is short of attaining the Lovers chief ends, And does but inflame his desire; Yet Phillis decrees me no better a State, And I must sit down content with my Fate. Ye behold the soft Object, created my Grief To suffer a wrack, under Friendships disguise, To endure all this smart, without hopes of Relief, And still to be stabb'd by her cruel fair eyes. Is Phillis the doom I'm sentenc'd to bear, And ever to love, yet ever despair? What Riddles are these, O you powers of love! That Tortures shou'd spring from a Fountain of Joy? And all that shou'd please me, my Torments do prove, And the sweetest delights my Bliss do destroy. Phillis! to live, and not to enjoy, [illeg.] surely the cruelest way to destroy. But the pleasures of seeing her, tho' as a Friend, Do cure the sad Wounds her Eyes do create, 'Twixt curing and killing my life has no end, And to love without hope is doom'd my sad Fate. Yet 'tis better to serve her in Torments and Pain, Than never to see my dear Phillis again. This Song was given to Clitie at a Ball the next day after the Conference she had with the Prince; she had no sooner read it, but reflecting on the last Stanza, she became exceeding troubled; it appear'd to her that all that the Prince had said to her, was so lively represented in the Song that she cou'd not imagine but 'twas he that made it; and what confirm'd her in this Opinion, was, That she surpriz'd him looking on her with great earnestness nor did he take his Eyes once off o[illeg.] her the time she was reading it, which made her often change Colour. The Prince was not a little pleas'd that Clitie had guess'd the matter right: And she found such Appearances and Informations in the Song, touching their last Discourse, that being of a genuine Wit, and quick Apprehension, that she doubted no longer who was the Author; nor indeed was it probable that a Love, so great as that of the Prince's, shou'd be so easily and suddenly chang'd into Friendship, without some further Design. But Clitie reflected no more on the matter, which now she had not the least doubt of, for she soon understood from whom it came; she was inform'd that a merry Lady, out of a frolick humour, wou'd have pick'd the Prince's Watch out of his Pocket, unknown to him, in drawing out the Watch, the Song fell to the ground, which when she had taken up and read, she gave it to the rest of the Company ere he perceiv'd it. But the business rested not here, for the Prince having taken out Clitie to dance, desir'd to know of her what Paper that was she was reading but now; 'It is (says she) only a little Forgery that some Man of Wit had made to oblige some of his Friends.' 'What you say, (replies the Prince to her) fair Clitie , raises a curiosity in me.' They had not opportunity of saying any more, considering the place, and what they were about, oblig'd them rather to dance, than to enter into a Conference: the truth is, they danc'd together, because they cou'd not now avoid it, but any one might have perceiv'd it was not with that exactness as it ought, it being the least thing they thought of. After Clitie had seated her self in her place, the Prince came to her, and told her she had raised a Curiosity in him of what she had told him concerning a Forgery she spoke of, that he had an earnest desire to see the Paper she had read, if it were not a Crime to desire it of her: she told him it was not a Secret, and that she was one of the last that had read it; and without further hesitation, gave him the Song; (which he had taken care before to be writ in a Hand different from his own) he read it, but seem'd then to take little notice of it: but a while after addressing himself to Clitie ; 'Madam (says he) how much I pity this unfortunate, and how lamentable is his Condition! I know not (says she) what you may do, but I shou'd not much pity him, were what he says, a Truth, since 'twas only what himself had consented to. In the humour you are of (answers the Prince, with sighing) I believe there is scarce any body in the World that cou'd oblige you to commiserate their Troubles: You take too much pleasure (goes he on) in the Sufferings of those that adore you, to seek out any Remedy for them, tho' it would cost you but a word's speaking: But pray, Madam, wherefore shou'd a poor Lover, who had made all the Efforts he was able, to become only a Friend to his Mistress, and made it his whole care and study to effect it, appear so criminal before you? It is because (replies she briskly) that no honest man promises any thing which he does not performe; and if it lies not in his power to do it, he ought to order the matter so, that his Misfortunes trouble none but himself.' Clitie blush'd in returning this Answer, and all the rest of the Evening she so order'd it, that the Prince cou'd have no particular Discourse with her. The Ball being done, each return'd to their respective homes; but Clitie and the Prince were extreamly troubled, since she no longer doubted but the Prince was still as amorous as ever, and that he would not desist importuning her, as he had already done. The Prince, for his part, cou'd draw no favourable Construction of Clitie's Discourse, and her manner of delivering it. He cou'd no longer defer the knowing the true Condition in which he stood with her; the next Morning writ to her Woman Mariana , and begged her to let him know (for he was impatient till he did) how the case stood with him and her Mistress. She return'd him in answer, That when Clitie was return'd from the Ball, she did nothing but weep and sigh, saying. No Misfortune ever cou'd compare with hers, and that she plainly perceiv'd the Prince was still as passionate as ever, and that he only rallied with her, when he only desir'd to become her Friend. Mariana advis'd him to be firm in his Resolution, and to lose no time in his Endeavours to mollifie her; and that he shou'd not fail to give her a Visit the same day; and that she for her part, wou'd with all her power be assistant to him, in rendring him again in her Favour. The Prince receiv'd this News with much trouble, and to encrease his Misery, he felt his love for Clitie renew after such a manner, that it was able to put him upon doing all the extravagant things imaginable, maugre the Grandeur of his Soul, which at any other time bounded it self in the limits of Glory: He went the same day to wait on her, whom he found all alone much troubled and melancholy. 'I come (says he, going up towards her) Madam, to learn of you, why you gave me that hard Treatment last Night, and wherefore I have so soon lost the happiness of being of the best of your Friends; if it is so that I am not of that number, I will no longer afflict my self with your cruel Indifference. You ought rather to wonder (answers she) that I should still admit your Visits, after you have abused all those kind Sentiments and good Opinions I had of you; but hereafter I shall be more cautious, and less reduable to you for 'em. It will be difficult to effect it, (replies the Prince) for a man so lost in love, as I am, can never do too much to defend himself against the Cruelties of his Mistress. What! (replies Clitie , interrupting him) do you so daringly tell me you love, and not believe you offend me? Happen what will (replies the Prince) I must confess I am a thousand times more amorous than ever; and since I have used all means possible to dissipate my Passion yet in vain, it is most likely I shall continue so to my latest Breath: As for what you threaten me with, I am already so loaden with Misfortunes and Miseries, that I cannot fear any new ones; and all the power you have over me can never render me more wretched than I am. It is true (continues he) that being quite wearied with suffering Woes incredible, I thought to have made exchange of Love for that of Friendship; and no sooner had I resolv'd it, but I told you of it; but if I have been deceiv'd, (cruel Clitie ) is it my fault or your own? for I have not the power to see you, but I must love you.' In finishing these words, a Flood of Tears fell from his Eyes, and Clitie (all enrag'd as she was) cou'd not avoid answering his Tears with her own, who were as so many Witnesses that her Heart was touch'd with Compassion. But what was most strange, (she having a thousand bitter things to reproach him with, and wou'd never have permitted him to come into her Chamber, but that she resolv'd to forbid him seeing her any more) when she heard him speak in that manner, with such a profound submission, and unparallel'd respect, and with so sincere and transcending Passion, she had not the power to execute what she intended: And (altring her tone) 'You wou'd, Prince (says she to him) wear out my life by importuning me daily, as you do, since all will be in vain; and I must ingeniously declare to you, my Heart can never be in a capacity to receive your Love. I hope not so (replies the Prince) yet, most adorable Clitie , I shall never leave serving you; and for all, ask no other Reward, but the liberty of seeing you, and paying my Adorations to your fair Eyes;' which he spoke with so profound, so true, and so ardent a Passion, that none cou'd have defended their Hearts, but such who had the Constancy of Clitie . He us'd all his Endeavours during the rest of their Conversation, to reduce her to Reason; at last she was perswaded that his Passion was rather an Inchantation than any thing else, and that it was an Evil that wou'd admit no Cure: and she laid down to him the Bounds and Limits that a disinterested Love ought to respect. As unfortunate as the Prince was, he was well satisfied with this Visit; he found a goodness in the Heart of Clitie that always afforded him some Consolation, if it cou'd not produce him any hopes. Mariana (on her part) seeing matters so well accommodated, was not a little pleas'd, she still resolv'd to make the Prince continue his Suit; she was not so much concern'd whether it succeeded or no, so that he still continued to court Clitie . Darbelle hitherto was not every way betray'd by Mariana , that is to say, his Letters were daily deliver'd to Clitie , and Clitie's as duly given to him; but seeing that whenever Clitie receiv'd News from her Lover, she became more inexorable to the Prince; she resolv'd to push her falsehood home, and to pretend hereafter she did not so often receive Letters from him, nor did she fail daily to instil the Poyson of her Malice into the Heart of Clitie , by complaining of Darbelle's silence; by which she gave her unspeakable Disquiets, and branded him every minute with a thousand Reproaches for his negligence: Clitie stood not in need of any help to aggrivate the Impatience she had to hear from him; a Love like hers furnish'd her with means sufficient to afflict her self withal. The Prince (on the other side) lived after his usual rate, shewing a thousand marks of Love and Respect to Clitie ; and since he saw she wou'd not become more mild to him, he had some satisfaction to think that his Rival was not less miserable. After a while Mariana kept up all the Letters that Darbelle sent to Clitie ; but as one Misery still follows the Heels of another, and that Lovers are always more ingenious than other persons in doing ill Offices to their Rivals, the Prince and Mariana resolve wholly to break off all Correspondence between Clitie and Darbelle , and hereafter to conceal all their Letters. This cou'd not but highly please the Prince, and it was as duly perform'd; and from that time Clitie receiv'd no more of Darbelle's Letters, nor he of hers; for Mariana , to whom they were directed, receiv'd them without so much as giving her one. This Treachery, was cruel enough of giving the Prince infinite Satisfaction, and the greatest Pleasure imaginable to see the sad Complaints wherewith each Letter was charg'd; and the unfortunate Darbelle being a long time without hearing any News from Clitie , was cast into a most lamentable Affliction. Darbelle knew not what Construction to make of her silence. Sometimes he wou'd suspect that she was chang'd, and false; sometimes that she was either dead, or extreamly sick; for he thought certainly were she not dead, or false, it cou'd not be but she wou'd have writ to him: again, he found that the last Letters she sent were in a stile most soft and kind, giving him an exact account of her Life, that he could not apprehend that she who made such a shew of Love to him, as Clitie did, cou'd so soon fall from one extream to another. All these things render'd him unspeakably uneasie, and left him in a perplexing Incertitude. But if Darbelle was so much troubled, Clitie , who they had so cruelly betray'd, was not less afflicted, and of the two, was the most unhappy, since Mariana who shou'd have been her sole Comforter, made her much worse, that she might better prepare the Poison she making her take; she daily pretended to have heard News from Darbelle , which extreamly tormented Clitie , and altho' till now she had never been the Messenger of ill News to her; yet with Tears in her Eyes, and Venom in her Heart, she told her 'twas the common Talk that he was married in Florence to a Lady of great Quality, with whom he had been extreamly in love ever since he arriv'd there, and that he was advanc'd to considerable Emploiments by the Duke of Tuscany , who was extreamly kind to him, and told her withal, That he had sent orders into France for selling his Estate, and that he never intended to return home again. These things being assur'd to Clitie by a person in whom she had plac'd all her confidence, together with the silence of the unfortunate Darbelle , wrought such effects in her Heart, as are not to be conceiv'd: and none but a Heart so hard as Mariana's cou'd be insensible of Pity to all her Complaints and Tears, which was all the miserable Remedy she had recourse to, but all in vain. One day when her Sorrows had made her almost expire in Mariana's Arms, having told her that now she doubted no longer but he had blotted her quite from his Memory, for another who he had planted in her stead; and that all that had been reported of him was Truth; she vow'd never to be reconcil'd to her self for loving so ungrateful a Person; she protested solemnly, she should have been less troubled at the news of his Death, than that of his Marriage and Inconstancy. These last words (which Mariana mark'd well, and which Clitie was always sounding) afforded her new matter, and means of promoting the Prince's Affairs, and utterly destroying Darbelle's ; she bethought her then, that to accomplish her undertaking, she had nothing to do but to establish Clitie in the Opinion of his Falshood, (which she already began to credit) and after to spread abroad a Rumour of his Death; and then when thing were brought to this point, Clitie imagining her self to be injur'd by him, wou'd take from him perhaps not only the Esteem she had for him, but her love: and then she doubted not to bring about the Marriage of the Prince, for she knew she had no aversion to him, and that he was the only person in all the Court who lov'd her with such respect and submission, that in gratitude she ought to make him some return. It is certain there was no hindrance but the Love she bore Darbelle , which Mariana promis'd to remove, that it might no longer impede the Prince's Happiness, when (on the other side) seeing the fortunate Success that this Maid, in all Appearance might work for him, having a fair Prospect of once enjoying Clitie , against his natural goodness and honesty, consented to the Cheat. He fail'd not to give her many thanks for her care, nor did he ever forget to make her large Recompences to oblige her to be mindful of all occasions for his Advantage. The poor Clitie thus betray'd and loaden with Grief and Sorrows, fell into a desperate fit of Sickness; for now she no longer doubted Darbelle's Infidelity, which was more strongly confirm'd by an unlucky accident, equally unfortunate to both Lovers: For Darbelle having been some time without receiving any Letters from Clitie , fell into so deep a Melancholy that his Troubles would not permit him to write either to any one at Court, or to his Friends about his Business; for he had abandoned himself wholly to his Griefs, that every body in France at the same time began to complain of his Silence, and all at once to accuse him of the same Crime. The Report (which went currant) of his new Amours and his Marriage (by the under-hand dealing of the Prince, and the management of Mariana ) gain'd belief in most people; but all this concern'd none, nor wrong'd any but Clitie , who with the thoughts of it almost dyed. It is true, that Mariana did her best to comfort her in her Sickness, in telling her she was too constant, and afflicted her self too much for so ungrateful a man; she intreated her to give truce to Sorrows and Tears, and not daily to add fresh ones to 'em, as she did, since Darbelle was rioting in the height of Joy and Pleasure, and no longer mindful of her or his Vowes, gave all those Tenders, and soft Embraces to another, which he had only promis'd shou'd be hers. These Reasons were but weak Consolation to Clitie , but above all, the Anguish that possess'd her Heart, to think she was deceiv'd by an Ingrate, for whose sake she had withstood so many Assaults, counsell'd her at the same time to abandon him, and fit him in his kind: But the Idea of this Lover (once so faithful) presented it self to her always, and disjointed all the Resolutions her Reason or her Anger cou'd propose. The Memory of her lovely Darbelle still haunted her, and she cou'd not think of those Tears he had so often showr'd down at her Feet, without taking his part, even against her self; nor cou'd all that was daily said to her of him, make her believe he was yet inconstant. The suspence in which she was, seem'd to aggravate her Miseries; cou'd she have really thought Darbelle no longer lov'd her, Grief wou'd put an end to her life; or were she certain of his Falshood, the Assistance and Helps she received from every body by their Cares and Consolations might in time ease her Sufferings; but in the plight in which she was now, ever felt such Grief and Afflictions as the unfortunate Clitie . In the mean time the Prince and Mariana made Advantages of all that happen'd, and ceas'd not day and night to confirm her in a belief of the only thing in the whole World that had the least truth in it, and was the most injurious for her. The End of the first Part. CLITIE, A NOVEL. PART II. Court, that Darbelle was married to a person of great Quality in Florence , whom he intirely lov'd ever since his arrival in that Country, that at last there was no more room left for Doubt, and every one talk'd of it as a thing most certain. Clitie cou'd no longer take the part of one whom she deem'd so unworthy her Affections, began to hate him now more than before she had lov'd him. It is certain she did it not without suffering inconceivable Perplexities; she cou'd no longer abide at Court: the constraint she lay under to appear as she us'd, viz. making and receiving Visits, and being obliged every day to the Company of such who made Pleasure their business, (who are inseparable from a Court) had reduced her to a very low Condition, she became so alter'd that it was difficult to know her; for which reason she resolv'd to pass away some time at her House in the Countrey, where she might have more liberty; she doubted not but there she shou'd soon blot Darbelle out of her Memory, or at least have more freedom to make her Complaints of his Falshood, and to take more pleasure in the Hatred she had conceiv'd against him. Mariana fail'd not to follow her; and the more to aggravate her Resentments for Darbelle , she never nam'd him without cursing his person, and forgot nothing that might make him appear more criminal, urging still the Obligations he had to Clitie , and the Punishment he merited. What, (wou'd she be continually saying to her Mistress) cou'd not this false man for a little time resist the Charms of one Woman, when you for him have contemn'd so many gallant men at Court, and scorn'd so many Lords? Is it possible (continues she) that his inhuman Heart cou'd be so false, so soon as he once was out of your sight, to forget your Beauty, Merit, and all that you have done for him? What Punishment can he think he deserves not? And wherefore shou'd you (for the Fault he has committed, and for her whom he has marry'd) never return to Court again, and use your utmost power to revenge your self? Sometimes she counsell'd her to employ all her Friends utterly to destroy him, and to declare a thousand injurious things against him, that he might go no where where he might not hear of it, and know that you have no longer an Esteem for him. These cruel Discourses of Mariana seem'd to indulge Clitie in her present Condition, and she cou'd not but hearken to the Railings and Revilings against a man who she imagin'd had so cruelly abus'd her. The Prince who wanted no information of all that pass'd in Clitie's Heart, seem'd far more concern'd and troubl'd for her than ever, and more to bewail her absence than any other; he sent to enquire after her health every day, and fain wou'd have gone himself to see her. But Clitie , who was now possess'd with a mortal Hatred against Mankind in general, wou'd not suffer any Visit, and whatever he endeavoured to that effect, was all in vain; she sent word she wou'd see no body, and that nothing cou'd be more offensive or injurious to her, than to press her any farther. This Resolution wou'd not have been very pleasing to Lysidor , had he not known the cause of it; and he thought it no difficult matter (since by Mariana's Care and Management she was brought about to hate Darbelle ) to make her in time change the Resolution she had taken to seclude her self from the World, and to perswade her to come again to Court. It is certain, that considering the great and violent Passion he had for her, he cou'd hardly endure being so long absent from seeing her. But Mariana (to deserve the Rewards he had made her hope) forgot nothing that might ease him; she promis'd to order things so that he himself, by her means, shou'd be a Witness of the obliging things which Clitie continually pronounced against Darbelle . The matter was not hard to compass, for Clitie had but few Attendance with her in the Countrey, so that Mariana with ease found out a way to get him in unseen, and hide him in her Chamber where Clitie commonly pass'd most part of the day in reproaching, and vowing an eternal Aversion against the Infidelity of Darbelle , and that she never wou'd forgive him. A while after it so fell out, that Clitie's Father fell sick of a dangerous Feaver, which oblig'd his Daughter to quit her Solitude, to come and attend him. This Conjuncture so far was favourable enough to her; for during the time of her Father's Sickness, none wondred to see her afflicted and sad; but all things have their change, and at length her Father recover'd his Health again, and Clitie maugre the Condition in which she was, was forc'd to open her Eyes, and look upon her old Acquaintance, and was oblig'd to live at Court after the same manner she formerly had done, but always with an Aire altogether melancholy, notwithstanding all the endeavours that were us'd to divert her, cou'd not perswade her to be less sad. The time that she had been in the Countrey seem'd to have given her new Charms, and to have made her more amiable; every one thought it a happiness but to talk with her, and divert her; and the Prince more in love now than ever, was not a little pleas'd to see his Affairs go so well forward. He doubled his Cares and Addresses to her, and appear'd yet more magnificent than before, he spar'd for no Charges, he made Treats and Feasts that surpass'd all that ever were made, which pleaded so advantagiously in his Favour to his Mistress, that he had no cause to repent it. Mariana (on the other side) apply'd the matter home, talking to Clitie of nothing but of him; nor was there one Servant in the house, who did not almost adore him; so great a Master was he in attracting the Love and Respect of all People, whom Gold and Presents had any Power over, every thing made to his Advantage in Clitie's Heart; she now saw him much more importunate than before, and altho' she gave him not the least hopes of marrying her, yet she appear'd not altogether so cruel and inexorable. It is certain, that seeing so advantagious an alteration, he began to make new Attempts, to the establishing himself wholly in her Favours; and her Father, who wish'd nothing more than his Alliance, daily seeing the great Qualification of the Prince, made new Proposals to his Daughter, with an earnest desire to effect it. Clitie seem'd now more consenting than before, making but faint Denials, and desir'd some time to consider of it. Now it was that the Prince saw the happy hour approaching (which so long time he had despaired of) left no means unassay'd to perfect it. But when the time was expir'd wherein Clitie was to return her Determination, and that she thought she had banish'd Darbelle's Image quite out of her Heart, she found her self deceiv'd; she perceiv'd she had not that Command o're her Heart as she imagin'd, and there were yet some Remains of Love that combated for the poor unfortunate, and tho' they produc'd not those lively Representations they had done formerly, yet they were powerful enough to keep her Heart still in balance (for some time) between a Lover whom she thought so false and criminal, and a Prince who every moment gave her new Proofs of his Passion. Mariana , who was privy to all her disturbances and doubts, endeavoured all she cou'd by her Addresses and Artifices to banish them. 'What remains there yet in your Heart (wou'd she often say to Clitie ) for the worst of men, and the most perfidious breathing, that can any longer hinder you from making happy the most constant and passionate Lover that ever was? in truth (continues she) you are now no more to be excus'd for being so little sensible of the most tender Passion of a vertuous Prince, and the Affronts of so vile and perjur'd a Wretch as Darbelle . What! (says she) when you should think of nothing but Revenge against this Traytor, and strive to blot him for ever from your Thoughts, do you put him in balance with so generous a Prince?' 'Alas! (replies Clitie with Tears in her Eyes) I cou'd say as much as you do, to any other person, and I cannot but disapprove the Sentiments of my Heart, as the most unjust in the World, but it is for that Traytor Darbelle , whom I can never hate enough; I have endeavour'd all I am able to bring it about, but I cannot effect it as I wou'd, there are still some moments wherein (ungrateful as he is) I know not what Devil, envious of my repose, represents him innocent, all night long my Heart is fill'd with his Idea, and he appears (all weeping) on his Knees before me, more passionate and amiable than ever; nor can my Reason all the day dissipate the Thoughts of my Dreams by night.' 'See there then (says she to her) Mariana , the source of my Misfortunes, and I can sooner die than think to marry any other, till I am better assur'd (if it be possible) that Darbelle is married, as is reported, and so ungrateful as we think him.' This was the last Resolution that Clitie took, nor was she to be alter'd from it: she spoke to Mariana to seek out for some body, in whom they might confide, whom she would send into Florence , and who at his return might make her a faithful account of all things. Mariana found her self in no small perplexity at this Discourse of Clitie . The Journey cou'd not be perform'd but in some considerable time, and it was not unlikely this delay might hinder the Prince's marrying her, fearing least Darbelle himself might come back to know the cause of her silence, and so discover the Cheat of the Prince and her self. These things then, with a thousand others, which the Prince presented to himself yet more cruel and dangerous, put him almost into despair: He consulted with Mariana about what was to be done, and she made him sensible, that after the manner that Clitie had so discours'd to her, it wou'd be absolutely impossible to compass his Designs, without deceiving her yet once more, in pretending to execute her Orders, and that if they did not, all the time and pains they had employ'd hitherto in making her change her Opinion, were to no purpose. He agreed then, that Mariana shou'd propose to Clitie the sending a Brother of hers into Florence , assuring her he was one in whom she might confide, both as to his Secrecy, and the executing her Commands. This Contrivance appear'd very seasonable, and they had now no more to do, than to put it in practise, which was no difficult thing to effect, since Clitie had not the least Suspicion that Mariana was not altogether for her Interest. The perfidious Mariana fail'd not to be very pressing in the business, telling Clitie what she had thought of in order to her satisfaction, she soon confirm'd her in a belief of her Brother's fidelity and good management. The poor credulous Clitie following her wonted custom, left all to her Care and Expedition; she only desir'd to speak with him, giving him this Caution, to believe nothing but what his own Eyes were Witnesses to, and charg'd him strictly to get a sight both of Darbelle and his Wife, and to inform himself the best he cou'd, after what manner he liv'd with her, and to neglect nothing that might satisfie her Curiosity, and to give her a faithful Account of all that he learn'd. Having given him this Charge, the Gentleman took his Journey (at least pretended so to do) he furnish'd himself with all Necessaries such a Journey requir'd. They told Clitie that he had taken Post, when all the while he lay conceal'd in the Prince's Apartment, knowing it was enough only to make him disappear: This Journey cou'd not be perform'd in less time than a Month, not reckoning the time it would take up in performing all those Orders Clitie had given him, in instructing himself in the Circumstances concerning the false Darbelle . During this time the Prince and Mariana had private Meetings where they consulted together, to make all to their Advantage at the pretended return of him whom Clitie supposed she had sent into Florence ; they cause a Picture in Minauture to be drawn of a most exquisite Beauty, who they design'd shou'd pass for Darbelle's Wife, and composed in order all the Discourses that was to be made to Clitie about this business. Nothing of Novelty happen'd during this supposed Journey; Clitie hover'd daily between Fear and Hope, Hate and Love; and since the time she had sent to inform her self of his Life, she imagin'd Darbelle less guilty. The time being come for the return of Mariana's Brother, they forgot nothing that they thought might be necessary to the deceiving Clitie ; but this Treachery seem'd to have so agreeable a success, that there needed not such extraordinary Care. The Prince talk'd with Mariana's Brother, he gave him rich Presents, and promis'd him much more considerable ones, if he perform'd his part well: On the other side, Mariana had so fully instructed him, during the time he lay conceal'd, that he was as perfect in the business as the Authors of the Cheat themselves; they inform'd him of all the Questions that Clitie might be suppos'd to ask, and the Answers he was to return. At length they arriv'd wherein they appointed to inform Clitie of the return of her Messenger; Mariana so order'd it, that she receiv'd a Letter before Clitie's face, which gave her an Account of this News, she presently shew'd it her Mistress, and seem'd as eager to know the Success of the Journey as Clitie ; she returned an Answer to her Brother, commanding him to come at such an hour as she appointed, and to take off all Suspicion; she would not have her Mistress believe that she had spoken to him ere she her self had seen him. The Prince, to shew as tho' he knew nothing of the matter, seem'd to know nothing of the return, and to keep Clitie in the belief that Mariana still kept all her Secrets, abstain'd from coming to Clitie's House at the time. When the hour appointed (by Mariana in her Letter to her Brother) was come, her Brother enters her Chamber, with an Air of a man who had been expos'd to the Fateigues of a long Journey; Clitie was with Mariana the same time that he appear'd, but was so surpriz'd, and so trembled, that she cou'd hardly speak to him. Mariana's Brother prevented her (saying) 'Madam, I have perform'd all that you commanded; I have been in Florence , where I have seen both Darbelle and his Wife; I was at their Palace, which is indeed the most magnificent of the whole City. 'He is look'd on there as the Prince's chief Favourite, and in all appearance is exceedingly well setled in that Countrey, he lives very happily, and well contentedly with his Fortune; his Wife, who I saw at my leisure, is one of the greatest Beauty's in the World, she is very fair, and exceedingly well shap'd, and as I am inform'd, of noble Extraction, and of no mean Quality. But, Madam, (continues he) the better to satisfie your Curiosity, I have brought from thence her Picture, I had no small trouble to get it, being one of the greatest Beauty's of that Court, but by the help of my Gold I had it exquisitely well painted by one of the most reputed Artists of that Place. 'Who indeed inform'd me of the whole Story, how that he fell in love with her as soon as he arriv'd in that Countrey, and was not long ere he was lov'd again: that which for some time deferr'd their Marriage, was the distance that he was from his Estate and Countrey, of which her Friends wou'd first inform themselves; and since the time of their being married, 'tis reported he adores her.' Clitie , who had attended this Relation with a mortal sadness, cou'd now no longer endure it, so. (saying to Mariana's Brother) Sir, you have too well executed my Orders; and at the same time desir'd him to leave her alone, which he perform'd. No sooner was he gone, but she cried but (in so lamentable a Voice, that it wou'd have mov'd a heart of Stone.) 'Perfidious Wretch! alas! then thou hast forgot me! ingrateful man! how have I deserv'd this usage? She repeated these words a hundred times, then dropping down on her Couch, she fell in a Trance, being a long time ere she cou'd be brought to her self again.' Mariana seem'd to be as much afflicted as her Mistress, and pursu'd her Injuries yet further; 'Barbarian (says she) O that I cou'd tear thy perfidious Heart in pieces, for the cruel Abuses thou hast made my dear Lady suffer! unhappy thee that ever thou camest hither to betray her with thy Falshood.' A little after (addressing her self to Clitie ) 'Ah, Madam! (says she) think no more of the Monster, who does not deserve to have his Name pronounced by you; and who (perhaps) is at this very instant laughing at your Credulity, and scorning your Complaints and Sighs.' Clitie continue many days in an unspeakable sadness never giving any truce to her Tears and Sorrows; but at length she forbore her Complaints, and her Hate got the upper hand of her Love, and she resolv'd never more to think on this ungrateful man, but use all possible means to be reveng'd on him. The Prince next day, without seeming to know any thing that had pass'd, was very desirous to know the good or bad Success of his Affairs, pays a visit to Clitie whom he was told was in Bed, and sent him word, that she desir'd to be excus'd that time, intreating him to stay some few days longer. For the poor Clitie no sooner had heard the Relation of Mariana's Brother, with the Circumstances of Darbelle's Amours and Marriage, but her Heart was e'en broke, and she was so disconsolate, that she had much ado to support her self in her sad Condition; she showr'd down Tears in abundance, and never ceas'd uttering over and over again, the most soft and tender things that Love cou'd e're invent. Mariana did all she cou'd to comfort her in this lamentable Estate, and it is most certain, had she had any person, whom at that time she cou'd have confided in, as she did in her, the Emotions of her Heart wou'd almost have made them expire in Grief. The Prince came as he was order'd, but with little Assurance, and as much Trouble: He enters her Chamber with so sad and mournful an Aire, but withal so amorous, that Clitie (maugre the motions of her Spirit) cou'd not forbear, (as she confess'd afterwards) some Sentiments of Joy to see such marks of Love and tender Passion in the Eyes of a man that she cou'd no longer look on, but as her Friend. 'Well then (most charming Clitie , says he to her, falling on his Knees by the Bed side) now the time is come in which your goodness has promis'd to pronounce' me happy, or for ever miserable; but (continues he) looking on her with Eyes more tender and passionate than before, 'If (as I believe by the sad Condition in which I find you) that Death must be my Doom; for surely the Troubles in which I see you, can proceed from nothing but a sense of Pity that has possess'd your Breast in the behalf of a most unfortunate Prince, who you are sending to his Tomb: However (most adorable Clitie ) say something whatsoe're it be, to put an end to the Torments I endure, which are so insupportable.' He stopp'd at these words (his Tears falling down his Cheeks) Clitie had yet no power to answer him, she only sent forth many Sighs to intimate the Affliction of her Heart from whence they came. The Prince interrupting them, implor'd her again to declare his Destiny a long time without her speaking one word, but at last she return'd him this Answer. 'Prince, I will never pronounce the Sentence of your Death, you merit too much my Esteem, and indeed my Love, by all those Cares and Addresses you have rendred me, and those Evils you have suffer'd for my sake, that I shou'd not confess that I believe you one of the most worthy men alive; but (says she) my Heart is so sad, and so fill'd with Inquietudes when I propose to my self to love any that I cannot without much difficulty make any Resolution, permit me, I intreat you, only eight days more, that I may reduce it to an intire consent to make you happy.' In finishing these words she dissolv'd in Tears, and whatever the Prince cou'd say or do to hinder her, was to no Effect. He departed thence the most satisfied and contented man in the World, seeing so happy a procedure of his Enterprize, while the poor unfortunate Darbelle wore way his tedious Hours with a Sorrow not to be parallel'd. The sweet and undisturb'd Content in which he had liv'd five or six Months, wherein he almost every day heard News from his lovely Clitie , or had Letters from her) cost him dear; for all those cruel Passions that are wont to attaque the Hearts of the most desperate in love, had took possession of his; his Fears and Jealousies were grown so strong, they hurry'd him even to despair; how often wou'd he think his Clitie dead? When (as oft as he wou'd) he read over her Letters, and found such marks of Love and Goodness in them, that he cou'd impute her silence to no other Cause: But these Thoughts reduc'd him to so lamentable a Condition, that it is not to be describ'd. All the Cares of La Rock (who only of all his Servants knew the true Reason) was to no purpose; he now resolv'd to run all hazards and return again to France , whatever danger might befall him: The Consideration only of Clitie and the Hopes he still had daily to hear from her, deterr'd him for some time but his Fears did not always predominate in his Heart, but sometimes gave way to his Jealousie; he wou'd imagine within himself, that it cou'd be possible any thing cou'd have happen'd to Clitie that cou'd have hinder'd her writing to him, and that Mariana in whom he put such Confidence, was now silent by her Mistress's Commands: tormented with these Thoughts, he cou'd impute it to nothing but her Inconstancy. Oh, unhappy that I am! (wou'd he often say in the depth of his Solitude ' Clitie for certain no longer loves me and I cou'd never lose her Heart but to the Happiness of some more fortunate Adorer, who, for ought I know, she loves a thousand times more, (while I am now speaking of it) than ever she did me; and nothing but this change cou'd have hinder'd her from writing to me; and the great Obligations by which Mariana is bound to her, has prevail'd with her to hide from me the Secret, and not to let me know the least thing of it, lest it shou'd give me an occasion to interrupt their Pleasures.' To one who was so passionate a Lover, these terrible Suspicions made him utter a thousand disobliging things against her; but pausing a while, and having well consider'd his Misfortunes, he fram'd to himself what might seem most likely to be true; he believ'd her Father (against her consent) had forc'd her to marry some other, and that the Tenders she had for him, and her Love being weakned by absence and length of time, were not furnish'd with Fortitude to withstand the Commands of her Father, who was now weary with the continual Disobedience of his Daughter. These Inquietudes wrought such Torments in his Soul, that it cast him into a violent fit of Sickness in the same time that he had made a Resolution to return again to France to be certify'd of his Fate. The Agitations of his mind caused so raging a Feaver in him, that he was reduced to the lowest ebb of life: But after he had pretty well recovered, and the greatest danger past, he was so weak and low for more than two Months, that he was not able to quit his Bed, so that he was constrain'd to do what he could, to be expos'd to the most cruel Violences that Love was capable to inflict. He had found out a Retreat the most sutable to his Condition of all the Seats in Tuscany ; it was near the City of Florence , on the Banks of the Arne , in the bottom of a Valley, where all things that an amorous Heart cou'd desire, were met together. He bought an House from a certain Florentine , which was handsome enough after his manner, it was ancient, and seem'd to have been some old deserted Castle, built all of Marble, the River Arne washing its Walls as it pass'd gliding by; its Issues were of long Walks planted on each side with green Lemmon and Orange Trees; at the ends of which was a Grove, in whose Shades and Silence this unfortunate and disconsolate Lover found incomparable Charms: In this sad Solitude had he made Arbours, in which he us'd to read his Clitie's Letters, and to return their Answers, where indeed he spent most of his time. This course of living was much more agreeable to him, being a man so extreamly amorous, who had never receiv'd any Favour from that blind Deity, tho' by him he had suffer'd much Disquiet. All his Actions were of Love, and one might truly say, Love was all his business; he was indued with an admirable Wit, and compos'd the finest Verses in the World; but the whole and continual Subject of 'em was his charming Clitie , there was scarce one Tree about his Mansion in which he had not carv'd his Clitie's Name after a thousand pretty ways; on some he drew it in Cyphers, on some her Name at large, on others her Anagram and Acrosticks in soft and pretty Verses; on some again he wou'd write the whole History of his Love, so that on which side soever one walk'd they might see something or other to content their Curiosity; it seem'd as tho' the very Spirit of Love govern'd the whole place, and with such power, that all who came there, and took pleasure in reading those amorous Devices, return'd thence either more loving, if their Heart had been touch'd before by that soft Deity, or else more fit to take the Impression, if yet their Hearts had never felt it. All the Nobility and Persons of Quality in Florence often came to visit him, but he took little notice of any who came to see him, nor wou'd he be troubled with them, resolving to imploy the Remainder of his Life in thoughts of his dear Clitie , and studying means to see her again; so that most of those who came to his House, contented themselves only in injoying the Pleasures of that agreeable Solitude, and return'd without speaking to him. Nothing was more talk'd of in Florence than this delightful Solitude; there was something in it which at the same time gave content, and rais'd a Curiosity in the most great and piercing Wits of that City; they cou'd not comprehend why such a Person as he, so young and handsome, whose Air and Mean spoke him not of common Birth, shou'd take delight in so solitary a place, as tho' he had resolv'd to separate himself from the rest of Mankind, never imagining that Love and the Estate in which he was, oblig'd him to it. He always went by the Name of Conrade ever since he left Paris , and not one of his Domesticks ( La Rock excepted) knew but it was his right Name; and it was no difficult matter for him to deceive every body by perswading them to believe what he pleas'd himself of his Adventures. His pretence for living in that lonely House, was the agreeableness of the place (which he told them) was so conformable to his solitary Humour, and he promis'd them it shou'd not be long ere he wou'd satisfie the Curiosity of so many thousands, who endeavour'd so earnestly to know the Secrets of his Life. This is the Estate in which Darbelle had put his Affairs while he was absent from Clitie . A most solitary dwelling, the River Arne , one of the finest Rivers in all Italy , and the green Woods and Groves which incompass'd it, made it altogether delightful, and a most admirable Landschape. He had apply'd himself to play on the Lute, he had chosen the most skilful Artist in Florence to instruct him, and having a Soul all amorous and tender, was the more taken with this melancholy Exercise (which is usually the Delight of the sorrowful, and those whom Love has wounded) and soon became a Master of it. In a word, all those agreeable Ingredients that can be found out to delight Lovers, were to be had at Darbelle's House. Cou'd the unfortunate Darbelle have made a speedy return into France , and have left this pleasing solitary Exile, before the Prince and Mariana had perfected their Design, he might have found his Fate more kind; but Heaven, who had otherwise order'd it, wou'd needs give Clitie a Proof of his Constancy, by such Misfortunes as never any Lover but himself had undergone. It was now nine Months since he parted from Clitie to retire himself about Florence in that solatary Castle, which we have but now describ'd; six Months whereof he passed away as happily as one in his Condition cou'd have wish'd (that is) he daily receiv'd Letters from his Mistress, by which he understood all that hapned to her, he return'd her Answers, and cou'd easily perceive the Pleasures Clitie took in his Amours, by the Assurances she gave him of her Faith. It was after these six Months that the Prince and Mariana had contriv'd the cruel Design to cheat them both, and set them at variance, beginning to suppress the Letters of both parties, to open them, and make use of the Contents to their own Advantage, and by little and little, seeing the happy Success of their Enterprise, they insensibly perswaded Clitie , that he was false to her, and was married. And this was it this unfortunate Lover perhaps might have prevented, if the cruel Sickness which his Inquietudes and Troubles (not to hear from her Mistress) had cast him into, had not oblig'd him to keep his Bed more than two Months, having almost lost his life, and given over by his Doctors. If these Conjunctures were so troublesome to him, they were as favourable to the Prince; for after a great many puts off, and infinite delays, which Clitie made ere she cou'd resolve to marry him, she was solicited with such pressing and urgent Importunities by her Father and the Prince, that at length she gave her consent. I must needs say, (as she her self has since confess'd) that she had never taken this Resolution, but thereby to free her self wholly from Darbelle , who she cou'd never banish from her Thought, how unconstant soever she believ'd him. The Prince and Mariana now saw 'twas necessary to spread abroad the Rumour of his Death, which was so effectually perform'd, that Clitie had not the least hopes left of seeing him again; it wou'd be a hard matter to express the Joy the Prince receiv'd when he saw himself establish'd in Clitie's Favour, and that he doubted not the Possession of her Heart. The Visits which he made her were so full of the Transports of Love, and tender Respect, that none cou'd see him with his Mistress without perceiving at the same time some sparks of the Fire that burnt within him; his looks were lively and piercing, and sometimes for languishing, that Clitie her self cou'd not avoid saying to Mariana , That she believ'd it impossible for any to love better or more than he did. On the other side, Clitie having at length banished from her Heart all that had so long been Enemies to her Tranquility and Repose, hardly ever thinking of Darbelle , became so beautiful and charming, that none in the Kingdom cou'd compare with her: And the day before they were married she began to treat him in so soft and tender a manner, which gave him a taste of those Pleasures that he was to have ere long the sole fruition. These Nuptials being so extraordinary both by the Quality and Merits of these new Lovers, the Prince cou'd but allow some day for their Preparation, during which time all sorts of magnificent Diversions were seen every where; at the end of which this happy Prince enjoy'd an intire Victory over the Heart and Person of Clitie , who no longer conceal'd the Sentiments she had for him, who was one of the most amiable and accomplish'd men in France ; she believing her self obliged to make him some Retalliation for the sufferings she had caus'd him to endure, gave her self up wholly to those Tenders and Devoirs that she ow'd him. On both sides Love had made them suffer such Torments, that now they began to taste the Pleasures that had so long time been deny'd them; the whole Court were Partakers of their Joy, and this Match was matter of Discourse for all Paris ; for as the Passion of the Prince was known to every body, so likewise was the Cruelty of Clitie , and every one discanted on the business as they fansied. Never did two Lovers seem more contented, they were swallow'd up in Delights, and felt a reciprocal kindness; they gave mutual Caresses even in publick, the Names whereby they call'd each other, and the Expressions wherewith their Discourse was fill'd, were the most agreeable and tender in the World. Notwithstanding all this, there were some certain moments wherein the Prince's Conscience accus'd him, and he consider'd that it was with the greatest Treachery imaginable to which he ow'd the Conquest of his fair Clitie , nor cou'd he quite banish the Troubles and Disquiets these Thoughts wou'd give him; yet when they tyranniz'd most, they gave occasion for her to sooth him out of his Melancholy, and to say a thousand obliging things to comfort him. Mariana had no small share in the happy Fortunes of the Prince, which all along she tasted by those infinite Presents that he made her, which swell'd to such a mass of Wealth, that she purchas'd a considerable Estate: But when Clitie was once married, she made that a pretence to quit her Service, and in a little time after was married her self to a Gentleman of very good Quality. When the Prince had a little liberty, from his Amours, (that is) after he had reap'd the Fruit of all his former Trouble and Pains, he betook himself more than ever to the Court; he purchas'd great Employments near the person of the King, his Princess was likewise admitted amongst the Ladies of Honour to the Queen. Thus they liv'd in peace and tranquility, enjoying such Pleasures as made all the World envy 'em. When the King of France declared Wars with the Hollander , the Preparations for it were prodigious, and there were no less than 20000 Men in Arms; the Effects were sudden and wonderful: And the King who went in person to command his Army, did such surprizing Actions that Posterity will hardly believe: In two Campaigns he over-run almost all Holland , notwithstanding the Spaniard and the Emperour, with almost all Europe , were joyn'd against him to stop the Course of his Victories. The Sieges of Cities, which were at another time almost impregnable, lasted not above ten or twelve days; and you might have seen in one Campaign a large Province taken and retaken. 'Tis certain, such great Enterprizes were bought with the Life of many a gallant Man; and it might be said, the Example the King gave to his Subjects, by being himself present upon all Occasions, even in the hottest of the Battel, encourag'd them so well, inspiring them with so much Valour, that there was scarce a person of any Quality in his whole Kingdom who had not put himself in the Service, imitating the Actions of so valiant and hardy a Prince. These Occasions, however agreeable to gallant Souls, cou'd not but cost the Lovers many a Tear when they were forc'd to quit the soft Embraces of their languishing Loves, to put on the more rugged Fury of Arms, and no longer to think of any thing but Blood and Death; but above all, these things were insupportable to the Ladies; and as it separated then from their Lovers, they imploy'd all the time of their Absence in Mourning and Complaints, and appear'd greatly afflicted for their Departure. But their Lovers who were forc'd to leave them, had a thousand other things to think on, they were employ'd in making up their Equipages, and their Regiments, and many other things which diverted them from thinking so much on their Mistresses. Our new married couple, who as yet were but as Lovers to each other, felt more than any the sad separation this War did make; they complain'd in secret of their sad Fate, they wept, and spoke all the soft and most passionate things they cou'd invent: But at last the time was come in which they must part. The Prince who commanded two Regiments, one of Horse, the other of Foot, cou'd no ways avoid being of the number, and following that Royal Army to the War. Clitie was inconsolable, yet she was forc'd to give way to her cruel Fortune that thus ravish'd from her her dear Lord. She was no sooner left alone, but all the Adventures of her Life represented themselves afresh in her memory one after another, they were so extraordinary, and so surprizing, that she wanted no Imployment (amongst the Confusion of her Thoughts) which furnish'd her with an infinite number of odd Phansies. The History of the unfortunate Darbelle , do what she cou'd, was not the least thing that fill'd her Thoughts, she us'd a thousand Endeavours to banish them her Memory, but all in vain; having a long time withstood the Assaults, and made her greatest Efforts against this cruel Idea, she wou'd suffer her self to be overcome, and this unfortunate Man wou'd present himself to her Fancy a thousand ways; she sometimes wou'd imagine she saw him dying for love of her, and banish'd the Kingdom upon her Quarrel; and sometimes she wou'd look at his Port and brave Aspect, which were enough to fetch Tears from the most insensible; and as guilty as she thought him, the soft Impressions of her first Passion, cou'd not but make her feel some Sparkles of the same Fire which she stifled as soon as they appear'd. These Thoughts never seiz'd her heart, but they left her much disconsolate and sad, she not being able to guess the cause; for nothing is more certain than that all this while she had so mortal a Hatred to him, that it cou'd admit no Augmentation; and never did his Name, his Person, or any thing belonging to him, present it self to her Eyes, or come into her Thoughts, but she branded him with Falshood and Treachery, and wish'd him a thousand Punishments in the other World in which she thought he was; for the Prince and Mariana , to bring about their Design of making Clitie consent to the Marriage, cou'd think of no way more infallible (after having perswaded her to a belief of his Inconstancy and Falshood) than to publish a Rumour of his Death, which passed for an unquestionable Truth. The Campaigne in which the King went himself to make the more Expedition, carrying with him the chiefest Lords and Nobles of his Kingdom, lasted not long, but was ended in a Month, in which he made himself Master of three or four considerable strong Cities, and won a great Battel, which so weakned his Enemies, and so disper's their Forces, they were no longer in a Condition to attempt any thing against him; he thought it necessary to give ease to his Troops, and let them refresh themselves in their Enemies Countrey, while himself and the Court return'd to St. Germains . As the Prince was most afflicted of any in parting from Clitie , he was also the most joyful when he was returning to a place where he shou'd meet her again: This return gave them mutual satisfaction, and this second meeting gave them all the Pleasures of a new Amour, so that none cou'd be more happy than they were. But Heaven had not bestow'd this happy day on Clitie to let her long continue in peace, for she was born to endure all the Perplexities of a Heart, whom Love had subjected to his Laws, and the end of her Misfortunes was not yet arriv'd. Darbelle at length, after having been a thousand times ready to die in his Solitude, by the Violence of those Troubles the silence of his Mistress gave him; by the careful attendance of La Rock , and the strength of his Youth and Constitution, recovered: The danger was no sooner past, but he propos'd returning into France to ease his Troubles; La Rock , with all the Respect he cou'd, oppos'd his Designs, representing to him the Dangers he wou'd run in such a Journey, especially if it shou'd so happen that Clitie had chang'd her Sentiments of him; he put him in mind that he had been once betray'd already, and that now perhaps he wou'd betray himself by some inconsiderate Action; and that since Love was the only cause of his return, he might (in all appearance) do something or other that might discover him, and lay him open to the malice of his Enemies. Again he represented to him, that as soon as he shou'd be gon, Clitie might perhaps write to him, and give him orders which he could not then follow, and that without all doubt the silence of Clitie was occasion'd by some sickness which for the present hindred her from writing to him. These Reasons had been convincing enough to any, whose Heart was not so far carried away by the power of Love, who thought he had no other Imployment for life, but what might put him in a way of seeing his Mistress again: He answer'd him, That, in short, he was resolv'd to be satisfied in his Destiny, and if Clitie were dead, he had nothing to do but to follow her; and if she were false to him, that he shou'd not do himself Justice if he reveng'd it not, or at least, trouble their Repose and Pleasures. This Resolution put an end to all their Contestations, and so soon as he was able to undergo the fateigue of the Journey, he parted, taking only with him La Rock , leaving all the rest of his People at his solatary Mansion, with orders to remain there till his return. He cou'd not make such speed in his Journey as he intended, his Body being yet very weak; and were he not encourag'd by the Assistance of powerful Love, it wou'd not have been possible for him to have done it: however at length he compass'd it, and arrived safe in Paris . He took up his Lodging in a retir'd and private place, and he had hardly alighted off his Horse, but he told La Rock he wou'd go immediately to Clitie , and know his Doom. La Rock throwing himself at his Feet, conjur'd him not to expose himself so to his Death, assuring him that he wou'd undertake by his Care and Management to do all things to his Satisfaction: He told him he wou'd soon inform him of all things, and that it was far more proper for him to execute such a Design, than Darbelle , being unknown to every body, and might with more ease be instructed in the Truth of all things, which wou'd be more difficult for Darbelle to perform. The Consideration that La Rock might easier inform himself of what he sought to know, made him consent to his going to Clitie. La Rock , after having disguis'd himself, went out of his Lodgings, but it is impossible to describe the impatience of the amorous Darbelle , every minute seem'd to him an Age; he was a thousand times in a mind to run through the City, and expose himself to be discover'd in so dangerous a place. But the Transports and Agitations of his Soul are not to be conceiv'd, Love, Anger, Revenge, Fear and Jealousie, all at one time took possession of his Heart, and made such terrible Emotions in it, that it had like to have kill'd him. 'Oh, unfortunate Wretch that I am! what shall I do, if Clitie be dead? I will not live a moment after so cruel a loss.' Then all on a sudden another Passion wou'd predominate o're his Sense. 'But (says he) if this ungrate shou'd prove false to me, what wou'd become of me! Ha! I will revenge it with my own Hand, I will stabb my Rival through her Eyes.' All these different Passions, every one having as much ground for them as the others, cast him into such dreadful Incertainties, that he was the most afflicted Man in the World. Hardly had La Rock been gone one moment to inquire after his Mistress, but he was still running to the Door, or looking out of the Window to see if he were not coming back again: But after two hours La Rock enters so sad and dejected, that Darbelle soon suspected he had no good News for him. 'Well then (says he) I perceive you bring me little Comfort, by your looks, however speak freely, and whatever Sentence you have to pronounce, let me hear it quickly; for the Doubts and Inquietudes I have been in since you departed, has been more cruel and tormenting to me than the worst that can befal me. Is Clitie dead? Is she false? in short, What is become of her? and what will become of me?' La Rock who was extreamly perplex'd, cou'd have wish'd with all his Heart some other had his Office, was seiz'd with a shaking all o're, and knew not where to begin his Discourse. But Darbelle , fir'd with Impatience, and not being able to forbear any longer; ' La Rock (says he to him) hold me no longer in suspence, unless you wou'd see me expire before you.' He pronounc'd these words with so sad and disconsolate an Aire, that La Rock at the same time told him, Clitie lives, 'but she lives no more to you, for she is married to Prince Lysidor ; I saw him at her Father's House, where this day he makes a great Treat; there is nothing to be heard but confusions of Noises, Fiddles, and Musick, and Crouds of curious People go in and out, so that it is no hard thing to enter there.' La Rock had no sooner spoke this, but Darbelle gave a lamentable Groan, and said; 'O Heavens then is the unjust Clitie married? And cou'd you look on and suffer it?' Then he fell in a Swoon on a Couch against which he was leaning: La Rock run to his Assistance, and endeavour'd all he cou'd to recover him, yet all the Care and Pains he took, cou'd not for above two hours draw him out of this miserable Condition; but at length his Speech and Strength being a little recover'd, made fresh Exclamations against Heaven and his Mistress, accusing them both of Falshood that he had never merited; but it was not long ere he turn'd his Complaints into Threats, all the while raving on nothing but Swords, Daggers, and Poisons. La Rock for many Reasons dar'd not call for any body to help his Master, and to reduce him from the pitiful Condition in which he lay, for fear his Complaints and Transports shou'd betray who he was, and was forc'd to content himself with what he alone cou'd do to comfort him; but the Evil was too recent and violent to admit any Consolation, and there was an absolute necessity to let it take its Course. Darbelle (having all this while suffer'd a thousand Tortures) turn'd him towards La Rock ; ' Clitie has married the Prince Lysidor (says he to him) how was you inform'd of it, and what Certainty have you for it? I was told it (answers La Rock ) at their own House, who were all in a Confusion; tho' I had no other Information than the Musick and Hautbois, who when I approach'd and commended their playing and the fineness of their Aires, they were so pleas'd with me, that there was nothing I cou'd ask them that they did not resolve me.' 'They told me the Princess had given a great Dinner to a dozen Ladies of the Court, and that after that Repast, there was to be a splendid Collation, and all the Company wou'd sup with her; and to finish the day, there was to be a Ball, where many Lords and Noblemen wou'd be in Masquerade, in the most gallant Habits and Devices that cou'd be invented. This is all I was inform'd of, nor did I inquire into any more, knowing such sort of People cou'd give me but small Intelligence of the particulars of Clitie's Marriage; besides, this unwelcome News had so surpriz'd me with Grief and Trouble, that I had not the power to ask any more, or to stay any longer.' Darbelle having heard this dismal Relation, made a thousand fresh Complaints, and new Imprecations against Clitie , sometimes threatning her, and sometimes saying he wou'd kill himself: But after all the Disorders that Love and Anger had produc'd in his Heart, he made a Resolution to see her the same Night, and reproach her with her Falshood: And adressing himself to La Rock ; 'I am but a Fool (says he) thus to torment my self for a perfidious Woman, who has not deserv'd my Love; no, I will not kill my self, she is not worth that trouble; but I will have the pleasure to make her miserable by the Disdain I will shew her, and by the Crosses I will give to all the Delights of her Life; this same day will I go in Masquerade, and threaten her in the very midst of the Ball, and raise in her all those frightful Apprehensions which ought to terrifie one so criminal as she, in having cast off so true a Lover as my self.' When La Rock heard him talk thus, he presented to him the hazard he run in such an Enterprize, and that perhaps instead of revenging himself on Clitie , he wou'd be expos'd to the loss of his own Life, and be so far from punishing her Falshood, that he wou'd put her in a way no more to fear him. 'You mistake me (says Darbelle to him) I have so great a desire to afflict Clitie , that I will take care to preserve my self, and that I may the better effect it, I will be more cautious than you imagine; and since the Feast of which you speak is to be publick, and the Ball free for all Masquers, I see nothing I need fear, being well disguis'd.' La Rock cou'd not contradict him, only put him in mind that his Disguise wou'd not be enough, if he had not great care in governing his Passions when he shou'd see Clitie and speak to her. He warranted all things, and wanted nothing but the Disguise that shou'd gain him his Admittance. Darbelle thought he cou'd not invent a Dress that wou'd more afflict Clitie , than the Representation of one from the Dead; he imagin'd that one who was so guilty as she, wou'd be startled at the sight of a Ghost from the Shades below. He sent for a Tailor, to whom he gave directions what to do; and in a short time it was ready, it being a Dress of no great trouble, and few Ornaments. It was made of white Sattin, after the manner of a Vest, with large Sleeves of the same, and cover'd all over with a Vail of black Crape spotted all with white, which hung down to his Legs, which none cou'd see without some Apprehensions of Death. La Rock disguis'd himself after another manner, for he intended to keep always by his Master, but pretended not to be of the same Company; and he had order'd him so to play his part, that still as Darbelle was absent from Clitie , he shou'd be near her, and narrowly observe all her Actions and Behaviour. All being now ready, and the Hour come, Darbelle went forth; yet ere he went, he had writ in a Paper four Verses that might help to terrifie her. All things went as they cou'd wish; Darbelle and La Rock arriv'd there, and separated themselves as they enter'd. Darbelle appear'd alone, and La Rock seem'd to joyn with another Company of Masquers: The Ball was begun ere they came; the Ladies of which it was composed, made a glorious and splendid Appearance; but above all the rest Clitie , who never in her life had dress'd her self so rich, and so much to her Advantage; she was so pleasant, so beautiful, and merry, that it wou'd have griev'd any one to have disturb'd her. The Prince her Husband was not there, being engag'd at play in another Company with the King. Darbelle no sooner made his Entrance, but the whole Assembly were startled at his Disguise; there was not one of the Company, whom it made not for some time seem sad, especially after the manner of Darbelle's personating it; some at the first took it for a Ghost indeed come from the Grave to disturb their Ball, and put a stop to their Delights and Pleasures. However he prudently conceal'd his Sentiments, and the Disguise he had on, was a necessary help to hide the Violence he did on himself to keep in his Passion. He took a Seat near to Clitie's , and for a long time he fix'd his Eyes on her, without speaking a word, which she soon took notice of. But since Masquerades were design'd only for Adventures, she imagin'd this some Frolick that some Friend of hers had undertaken, and that she shou'd know the meaning of it the next day. All this while Darbelle's Eyes were fix'd on her, till he was taken out to dance by a very pleasant humour'd Lady who said to him, as she gave her hand, I long to have a Dance with Death. These words made him alter his posture; he perform'd the Dance with a mournful Air, but nevertheless with the greatest Crace that cou'd be, which made 'em all to understand he was a Ghost of some Quality. After having paid his Devoirs to the Lady who had taken him out, he presented his Hand to Clitie , as the Mistress of the Ball, and danc'd with her; and as he was taking his leave of her to go to his place again, he slipt the Billet into her Hand, which he writ ere he came forth, in which were four Verses. She was strangely surpriz'd both at the boldness of the Ghost, and the odness of the Adventures, but having no small stock of Wisdom, she thought fit to say nothing of it at that time, yet hop'd to be inform'd of the meaning on't ere the Sport was over; she almost dy'd with Impatience to know the Contents of the Paper, just as one came and made his Addresses to her to dance with him, so that at present she had no opportunity; she pretended she was weary, and that she was able to dance nothing but a Courant, which was no sooner ended, but she slipt aside into a Corner where there were but few Persons of Quality, in respect of the other parts of the Room, and going up to a Wax-Taper, she open'd the Ghost's Letter, where she read these four Verses:  This Ghost thou seest was in thy Fetters ty'd, By Falshood and thy cruel Scorn he dy'd. And to revenge his Wrongs, is hither come To bear thee to thy everlasting home. When Darbelle writ these Verses he counterfeited his Hand, but whether in his haste or otherwise, he had not so perfectly done it, but Clitie in the reading saw some tracts of a Hand she had formerly known, though she cou'd not precisely say whose it was; she read the Verses, and imagin'd he shou'd surely have known the Hand. This capricious Adventure caus'd in her a thousand Thoughts, yet was she not able to conjecture whose it shou'd be; she resolv'd to take more notice of the Actions of this Ghost, whose Eyes were never off of hers; she look'd upon his Stature and his Meen, but for her life cou'd not guess who it was. Having been a while in this musing condition, she found a means to get nearer this Ghost which gave her so much Curiosity, and whispering him, 'Is it long since you died, pray Mr. Ghost (says she to him) and may we not know in what Body you lost your life? I am (answer'd the Ghost in a most lamentable sad tone) the Spirit of Amasis , whom Darbelle kill'd in order to your Commands.' This Answer so surprizing, and so unexpected, that spoke of the unfortunate Darbelle and Amasis , whose very Names awaken'd (all at once) such cruel things in Clitie's Soul, and so astonish'd her, that she cou'd not refrain from changing Colour; and fetching a deep sigh, she fell into a melancholy which held her all the rest of that Evening and the Night following. What is it (says she to her self) that I have just now heard concerning Darbelle and Amasis? But she had nothing to reply to the Ghost on this Subject for a long time; yet having observ'd he kept his Eyes still fix'd on hers, she entred into Conference a second time, (and said to him) 'You have pronounc'd the Names of two the most false and perfidious Men the Eye of Day ere look'd upon, and Heaven has been but just, if it has thrown them into everlasting Torments (as you seem to intimate.) You do well for your own Credit to say so, (answers the Ghost) you who are the most ungrateful person in the whole World, and the most unworthy to be so intirely belov'd, as you ever was by the unfortunate Darbelle .' This Discourse yet more surpriz'd the Princess, since she fear'd the Ghost spoke nothing but Truth, touching the most important Adventures of her life; yet she cou'd not refrain making him this Answer: 'Ghost, you are very knowing, or (as least) you imagine your self so; but I pray you tell me what is the reason you take upon you to meddle in my Concerns? And wherefore do you take the parts of Darbelle and Amasis against me, who were so opposite in all things (during their Lives) to one another? Is it because that since their Deaths they are reconcil'd in the other World, and have order'd you to come and tell me their Injuries in this?' The Ghost took his turn now to be surpriz'd, hearing the Princess speak of the Death and Falshood of Darbelle to Clitie , who had always been so well treated by him, and who had always lov'd her so tenderly; however, he resolv'd still to disguise the matter, and go on as he begun; so that taking up the Discourse where the Princess left off; 'I cou'd pardon you (says he to her) the hate you have to the Ghost of Amasis , which you see before you, and whom you your self have caus'd to be kill'd; but for that of the unhappy Darbelle , wherefore do you insult over it, since he dy'd only for love of you? Is it not sufficient, that by an Ingratitude and Falshood (that has no parallel) you have violated the Faith you have given him, in hearkning to a Prince, with whom you fell in love, and at last have married? What cou'd you imagine (ungrateful as you are) but that the unfortunate Lover (having once heard this News) cou'd do, but ease his Sorrows by his Death? He need not have been so much concern'd as you report of him, if he had been alive when I married, (answers the Princess) his beautiful Wife wou'd have been Comfort enough to him for greater troubles than these.' As the Princess had finish'd these words, there came a Company of Masquers of great Quality, extraordinary well habited, amongst which it was suppos'd the Prince Alcander was. These Masquers plac'd themselves about the Princess, and did not leave her during the rest of the Ball: she her self silenc'd the Violins as soon as she cou'd conveniently, to the end that all Parties might mix together the remainder of the Night. The Princess (in whose head the Ghost and his Discourse still run, and who was exceeding impatient to unriddle all that he had told her) not being-able to comprehend the least thing of it, did what she cou'd not to go out of her own Lodgings, but it was not to be avoided; for these new Masquers were People of such great Quality, that she cou'd not deny them, and was forc'd to go with them. She had not the opportunity of speaking any more to the Ghost, but in passing by him (she said) 'I desire you, Mr. Ghost, not to go back to the other World, before you have visited us once more; I will dance a Courant with you to morrow in this very place, where I will have Musick on purpose.' All fell a laughing to hear her speak so to the Ghost, but she turn'd it all to Raillery (saying) Truly, she thought it but reasonable to have a little pity on the poor dead, and to give them a little Diversion. So the Ball broke up, and every one withdrew, Darbelle went out with the rest, and having met with La Rock , they went home together. This Adventure furnish'd them with matter enough to discourse of, but let them do what they cou'd, they cou'd not apprehend any thing of the Princess's talk. Wherefore (says Darbelle to La Rock ) 'does she tell me of Death, Marriage, and Falshood? Is it of me she spoke? Is there not some other Darbelle who lov'd her? Certainly it must be so, and all she said last Night was of a second Darbelle , not so much as dreaming on the first, who has lov'd her so well, for else why shou'd she (says he) go about to perswade me that I am dead, married, and false.' La Rock did all he cou'd to find out the meaning on't, but the more he endeavour'd, the less was he satisfy'd, so that they set up their Resolution to wait the Result till the next day at the time she appointed for their meeting again, where they hop'd they shou'd know all; for they both observ'd that the Princess was no less surpriz'd at the odness of the Adventure than themselves, and that she was loath to part from him, and that she had made that second appointment only to satisfie her Curiosity: It is certain, that she was so much confounded with what she heard, that she was not her self. She had heard that Darbelle dy'd for Love of her, and that was enough to give her Heart Inquietudes. On the other side, she cou'd not suspect the Ghost that gave her this Account, to be one of the ordinary Masquers; he had told her things so secret and so true, and what she believ'd no living person cou'd ever know, that it added to her Trouble; she was so surpriz'd at the same time, that she doubted if it were not a real Ghost that had appeared to her; she was in great Frights and Agonies all that Night, and as it is usual with us to dream of things which our minds have been fill'd with in the day-time: she had nothing all this Night but Darbelle in her Fancy, she saw him in a hundred Shapes, amongst the rest, that which so nearly touch'd her, was that of a weeping Lover dying, and reproaching her with Marriage, as the Ghost had done at the Ball. These Thoughts so disturb'd her, that she cou'd not rest all Night; and since she went late to bed, it being almost day, she made that a pretence not to quit it all the next day, that she might have the more liberty to consider what had happen'd, and by that means to conceal the Confusion she was in. Darbelle fail'd not to send La Rock three or four times to inquire how she did, and being impatient to see her again, not being able, without much Trouble, to attend the time of the Ball, he wou'd needs write a Letter to her to prepare her for what he intended to tell her the next Evening, and to double her Curiosity, that so she might be sure not to fail to meet at the time and place appointed; he caused this Letter to be deliver'd her by an unknown person, who was ignorant from whom he had it, and the place from whence it came. The Letter was in these words.  Madam , The dead have those Priviledges the living are debarr'd, they go where they please invisible; and it is by this means that Darbelle's Ghost is with you at this present, reproaching you with your shameful Infidelity, and to let you know how false all those Accusations are wherewith you tax him, assuring you, that he never yet loved any person but your self.  This Letter being deliver'd, the Princess at the same time she was profoundly musing on Darbelle , not having any body with her, she was so affrighted, that she fansied she really saw him come from the other World to talk with her; but recovering her self a little from the Fright, seriously consider'd what the meaning of all this might be, but cou'd conclude on nothing. Thus she pass'd away all the rest of the day; but in the Evening (that she might be better inform'd in what she saw so obscure) she sent to invite a few of her choice Friends to come to her House and hear the Violins: She gave orders to her People to let all that came in Masquerade enter, (saying, she hop'd it wou'd divert her.) The time was no sooner come but Darbelle enters, but he no longer represented the Ghost; he had put on the Habit of a Shepherd, the most rich and splendid that ever was seen, having all things answerable that made up this Pastoral Equipage: She knew him not at first, he having chang'd his Dress. But Darbelle being one of great Curiosity, was willing to conceal himself at first, that he might observe her Behaviour, and to see whether or no she had any Impatience to converse with the Ghost: He was soon satisfy'd, for he perceiv'd the Princess observ'd every Masquer with such care and diligence, that he might easily guess her Heart had no small disquiet; she always kept her Eye towards the Door, and the least noise that was made either in coming in or going out, raised in her some new Curiosity, which was not without some satisfaction to Darbelle : But at last it was impossible that such a Lover, who run all hazards to speak with his Mistress, wou'd any longer let slip so favourable an Occasion. He approach'd the Princess, and said to her; 'Madam, the Gods have sent for the Ghost back again, who has given me charge to come hither to you, and in his behalf to tell you that he will never forgive you his Death, nor the Sufferings you have caus'd him to indure for you.' At these words the Princess look'd at him, surveying him from Head to Foot, and having well observ'd him, says to him; 'Whoever you be, I conjure you keep me no longer in suspence, tell me what Interest you have in my person, and wherefore you speak to me of Darbelle ; I perceive well you have been his Confident, and that he has discover'd to you all the considerable Adventures of his Life; I'm sure you have given me reason enough to think so: In short, say what is it you wou'd speak in his behalf; has he order'd you, as he was dying, to come to me and beg my pardon for all his Falshoods?' Darbelle , by the help of his Disguise, heard all she said without running any Risque; but he was strangely amaz'd at what he heard, however he judg'd it necessary still to conceal himself, tho' he had enough to do to perform it; he made use of what the Princess had put in his Head, to clear himself; and speaking to her as tho' he had really been the Confident of Darbelle , who at his Death he had commanded to come and find her out, and tell her what he wou'd have her understand. 'Madam (answers he) I perceive you already know some of those things I have already told you, since you are not ignorant of Darbelle's Death; but it appears you are but little concern'd at what has befaln him, since you brand him with perfidious, and of whom you speak such injurious things. I wou'd therefore let you understand (adds he) that all the while he was in Tuscany I was his dearest Friend; we lay together, and we conceal'd not the least Secret from each other; you may well perceive he has not hid from me the Love you had for him; he wou'd talk to me of it a thousand times a day, giving me a Description of you; and it is as certain that he is now dead: But, Madam, you are the only Cause of it, every one of his Friends to whom he writ to send him News of you, told him you had deceiv'd him, and that you lov'd the Prince Lysidor , at which he was so much troubl'd, that it cast him into a fit of Sickness, from which when he had a little recovered, and that he had taken a Resolution to come hither in person, and kill his Rival, he understood by his Friends Letters that you had married him. At this second cruel News he fell so violently sick, that his Despair in two days finish'd his life. 'When he was breathing his last, he implor'd me with such words mingled with Sighs and Tears (that I cannot recount them without a most sensible Affliction) that I wou'd come and seek you out, and tell you, that for love of you he dy'd; and charg'd me at the same time to accuse you of Infidelity.' The Princess when she saw he had finish'd his Discourse (answer'd) 'Sir, if you had been sincere, you wou'd have added to what you have said, and have told me that he was married in Tuscany to one, who he so intirely lov'd, that he no more thought on me, than if I had never been; perhaps he imagin'd the distance of the places wou'd hinder me from prying into these sort of Affairs; but I am not so easily deceiv'd as you believe: And for my part (goes she on) I cannot yet apprehend that he has repented him of the Misfortunes he has made me suffer, by his desiring you to tell me that he always lov'd me.' Darbelle (hearing the Princess say this) was ready to die with a desire to discover himself, and know the depth of all these Mysteries; but he fear'd he shou'd spoil all, in the Circumstances in which he stood with her; he was willing to disabuse her first (he took on him then the Discourse, saying to her) 'Madam, these are all meer Inventions you have told me, which you ought not to believe against the poor Darbelle ; I have told you already that I was with him all the time he liv'd in Tuscany , and what I have told you of his Love to you, is a most infallible Certainty: As for a Wife, alas, Madam! he never had any, and I am sure that for the love of you, he wou'd have refus'd the most beautiful, and the greatest Queen in the World: But, Madam, be ingenious, and acknowledge that the Crime you lay to his Charge, is but to excuse your self for what you have done contrary to your Faith and Promise, which was never to marry any but himself. 'Sir, I find you know me not (answers the Princess sharply) if you believe what you say; but let us talk no longer of him (says she, fetching a deep sigh from the very bottom of her Heart) Darbelle is dead, and I am married.' She cou'd not refrain shedding some Tears at these words, and in the Rage and Shame that she conceiv'd, she left Darbelle abruptly, who was now alone, ruminating on what the Princess had said to him, which gave him greater Astonishment and Perplexity than what he had before; he question'd whether the Princess was in earnest or no, when she accus'd him of Marriage, and for his life cou'd not guess the right meaning on't. All this while Love had got the ascendant of him, and he cou'd now no longer counterfeit; he beheld the Princess more beautiful than ever, and her Discourse had disarm'd him of much of the Aversion he had conceiv'd against her, he began to excuse her: yet after all, he was not the less unhappy, since he had lost all hopes of ever injoying her, knowing her to excel in Vertue, and one who wou'd never exceed the bounds of Duty and Honour. Having a while consider'd these things, he addresses himself to her a second time (saying) 'Madam, I have but one day longer to stay in this place, and I have yet an hundred things to tell you ere I can discharge my self of the Commands the poor Darbelle gave me at his Death. I humbly intreat you wou'd not refuse me one Meeting more, where I may acquit my self, and perform his Will.' She told him he might come to her House the next where he shou'd have the liberty of discoursing to her alone. 'I am much troubled, Madam, (replies our Masquer) that I cannot be so happy as to wait on you at your own Lodgings, as you have commanded me, therefore I humbly request you would permit me to pay my Duty to you in some other place, for many Reasons which now I cannot tell you.' The Princess was surpriz'd at this Discourse, nevertheless having thought of a convenient place, 'I will (says she to him) grant what you desire; meet me to morrow at the Theatre in the second Box, where we shall have liberty to talk without being known, I will not fail to be there, attended only by one of my Women.' As soon as she had said this, she mingled into the Company of several Ladies of her Acquaintaince, not giving Darbelle any opportunity of speaking to her any more. After they parted, Darbelle return'd to his Lodging, the most amorous, impatient, and most afflicted of men. The next day he fail'd not to be at the Play-house above three hours ere any body else came there; he thought it convenient to let La Rock speak to the Princess when she first came in, as tho' he had been the same person whom she had been talking with the preceeding days: He cou'd not appear there in a Disguise, and therefore he cou'd not so well act his own part. He instructed La Rock therefore in all that he had to say to her, and order'd him as soon as he had thoroughly perswaded her of every thing he had a mind she shou'd know, to make some pretence or other to leave her, and that he himself wou'd supply his place, and there lay his Heart open to her; and the better to carry on their Design, they dress'd themselves both so like, that none cou'd distinguish between them. Having thus order'd every thing, he made La Rock sit in the place which the Princess had appointed, retiring himself at a little distance that he might not be perceiv'd. The Princess cou'd not but shew her Impatience by the haste she made to go to her Assignation, where she believ'd she shou'd be inform'd of a thousand things, which had given her so much trouble, and of which she had so great a desire to be inform'd. She came (accompanied only with one Woman) in a careless Undress, with a Scarf that almost cover'd her all over: As soon as she enter'd, she saw a single man whom she judg'd to be the Party whom she sought; but at the same time I know not what of Fear possess'd her Soul which set her a trembling all over; nevertheless, she advanced towards him, and took her seat just before La Rock , having first paid him the common Civility. La Rock , who knew her, altho' she knew not him, having a good Wit, thank'd her for the Honour she had done him, with a low bow, and supposing it not amiss to begin their Conversation with some indifferent Discourse (wherewith those sort of places easily furnish'd every body) 'Madam, (says he) I believe you will think the time long (if you are not endued with a great deal of Patience) before you hear the Musick, or have any Diversion, which never begins so early.' The Princess who apprehended she was mistaken, and that this was not the man whom she expected, was a little surpriz'd when she heard him talk thus, imagining that if this had been the person whom she look'd for, he wou'd have taken up the same Discourse they were on the day before; she answer'd him nevertheless in the same manner he had spoke to her, in civil and obliging words. But La Rock perceiving the Princess to eye him well, and sought to be inform'd of other things than what they were talking of, began his Discourse after this manner: 'For my own part, Madam, I have so much reason to hate the World and all its Pleasures, not to come to this place. But Madam (continues he) the Ghost which you saw at the Ball two days ago, haunts me every where to give you an Account of your Injustice and Infidelity; tell me therefore I beseech you, why you have deceiv'd Darbelle , and with what Reasons you can pretend ever to excuse your self of the Contempt you have of him? Is it not sufficient that he has dy'd of Love and Despair, hearing of your Marriage, without giving the utmost Marks of your Hatred in blasting the very Memory, as you do, of one who died so innocent?' Clitie hearkning to what La Rock said to her, with great impatience, cou'd no longer endure his Reproaches, but assum'd the Discourse (and said to him) 'I know not who you are, but these two days past I have suffer'd all that you have entertain'd me with of the greatest Secrets of my Life, and now I have met you according to your desire, I wou'd willingly run yet a farther hazard, and tell you something that yet you know not, provided (that on the other side) you inform me likewise of all those things which give me so much Inquietude, and have rais'd in me this Curiosity. Tell me then (says she) what was the true Cause of Darbelle's Death, for you have been at too great Charges and Pains in travelling so far to tell me things so contrary to Truth. What Devil was assisting at his Death, that yet inspir'd him to deceive, even to the Grave? And you that talk to me, and asperse me with Falshood and Ingratitude, how dare you say he lov'd none but me all the while he was in Tuscany , when he who protested to me by his Letters of an Eternal Love, at the same time paid all his Adorations to a Lady in Florence , whom he married, without giving me the least notice of any thing that might resolve me why he made so sudden a Change?' ' Darbelle married! (answers La Rock ) Ah, Madam! I swear, I swear to you by all that's good and sacred, it is not so; and if you wou'd give me leave to acquaint you what Pleasures, and what Troubles he has had during his Exile, I wou'd tell you he never had any Satisfaction or Content, but when he receiv'd your Letters, and that he gave himself up to all the Torments of Despair when he wanted them; all the words that can express the most intollerable Pain, cannot make you sensible of those that he endur'd when he saw that you forgot him, he complain'd Night and Day of the severity of his Fortune. But, Madam, it was in so moving a manner, that I (who was Witness to it, as well as Confident of his Amours) swear to you I had not the power to hinder my self from being sensible of his Afflictions, and share with him in all his Troubles.' 'What! (replies the Princess) is not Darbelle married in Florence ? Is he not Favourite to the Grand Duke? And (in a word) was he not establish'd in that Place with hopes to spend the remainder of his days there? No, Madam, (says La Rock to her) nothing of all that you have said is true, and he never had any other Imployment (in a long solatary House (whither he had retir'd himself) about three Miles from Florence ) but to think on you, and to sigh and grieve for your Absence Night and Day, which perhaps ere long you will believe.' In speaking these words he rose, and desir'd the Princess to give him leave to speak to his Page, who he had sent about business, and waited there to return him an Answer. No sooner had he left his place, but the Princess fell into a great Confusion, by what she had understood from him, that she cou'd not recover her self. She enter'd into a deep musing, so that she seem'd immoveable; she lean'd against one of the sides of the Theatre, ruminating of a thousand things one after another, and knew not what she shou'd believe. Mariana's Brother had seen Darbelle married, and La Rock swears he never was, but that he had always lov'd her most tenderly; she consider'd that Mariana's Brother's Assertions were the Foundations why she her self had married, which was the Occasion of Darbelle's Death, after she had been the Cause of his Misfortunes: Calling to mind all these afflicting Adventures, she cou'd not refrain pouring down Floods of Tears, and giving her self up to an excess of Sorrow which had took possession of her Heart. La Rock , who had order from his Master to leave his place to him, after he had satisfy'd the Princess of his Innocence and made his Fidelity appear, return'd to give him an Account of what he had done, and in what Condition he had left her, telling him she was now more perswaded of his Death than ever, insomuch that this poor Lover dying with Impatience to discourse with her, with his Heart lay'd open, cou'd stay no longer, but went and supply'd La Rock's place. In this obscure place the Princess having pull'd down her Hoods to hide her Tears, so that Darbelle had no great Difficulty to keep himself unknown to her for some time. She was plung'd into so deep a study, that Darbelle was forc'd to draw her out of it by speaking thus to her; 'Ah, Madam! what may be the cause of all these Tears you shed? They wou'd accuse a Heart (less barbarous than yours) of Love? But after having made Darbelle die for Love and Despair, I can never believe that you cou'd ever be troubled for such a one as he.' The Princess at these words startled (as one new waken'd out of a dreadful Dream) remaining still leaning on the Pillaster that was by her, supposing him still the same person that had spoke to her before, answer'd him; 'You but ill know my Heart, which you so accuse of Infidelity, and I shou'd be still happy, did not my Love (in spite of me) yet seek for the dead, even to the Grave. Alas! (continued she) Darbelle of whom you speak to me, is past seeing, and notwithstanding all the Care and Pains you have taken to justifie him, I know too well he is false and ungrateful, yet nevertheless his cruel Idea still haunts me every where. Believe not (adds she) that I wou'd confess my weakness, if I ever thought he could see me again; for, alas! he is dead; and cou'd I give the least credit to what you have told me of him, or that he dy'd for love of me, I know not the thing in the World that cou'd afford me the least Consolation.' Darbelle who heard her speak, found so much Sincerity and Truth in her words, that instead of answering her as La Rock had always done, at the same moment felt such an Extremity of Grief, that it almost kill'd him; nor cou'd he refrain from bursting out in Tears. The Princess who found something more than ordinary in his silence, lifted her Hoods a little up, and having perceiv'd Darbelle to weep, who still she took for La Rock 'Certainly (says she) Darbelle is very happy in having such a faithful Friend as you, who so much interest your self in things that perhaps have hardly ever concern'd him. What wou'd you (ungrateful as you are, replies Darbelle ) kill him yet a second time? O most cruel Woman! satisfie your Malice in looking on his Blood that shall be added to what you have already spilt.' In saying these words, he drew out his Sword to have pierc'd his own Heart, but the Princess, all in a fright, threw her self about him, not yet knowing who he was, being in the same Dress with La Rock , whose Face she had seen while he had discours'd with her, till the Transports and the Words he utter'd made her take more notice of him, who now she knew to be Darbelle himself. She shriek'd out, and stepping back to avoid him, she fell down, being obstructed by the Bench which was behind her. By good fortune there was not any body come yet into the place where they were, that might observe what pass'd. The Princess being thus fallen down, swooned with the Fright and Surprize, which she had to see Darbelle before her Eyes, who so long she had imagin'd dead, oblig'd Darbelle to think of nothing but to help her; but it was impossible so soon to bring her to her Senses, and to recover her, the sight of Darbelle alive had struck her to the Heart with mortal Wounds. She continued in this Condition for more than half an Hour; the Woman who she brought with her came to her, and joyn'd her Endeavours to those of Darbelle and La Rock , not knowing the Cause of her Lady's Disorder. At last after some time the Princess open'd her Eyes, and looking first round about her, she fix'd them stedfastly upon Darbelle , gazing on him to be inform'd if what she saw was Truth; but having well consider'd him, she let her Head fall negligently, which she rested on her Hand. Darbelle bid La Rock retire, that so the Princess's Woman might do the like, which was soon perform'd; and La Rock went some distance from them, with the Woman that came with Clitie , who he entertain'd with Discourse. Darbelle seeing himself alone with the Princess, took up the Discourse, and said to her; 'Where are those happy minutes, Madam? How far have you banished from me, which you said you wou'd employ upon all occasions to see and speak to me? Alas! What have I done since that time, and what Crime have I been guilty of that you shou'd run the hazard of your life to shun my presence? Speak (ungrateful fair) and tell me why you have so unworthily deserted me? Reproach me now with those Perfidies with which these three days past you have made a pretence only to excuse your own Falshood: Pray tell me to whom I am married, as you wou'd perswade me; and to whom have I ever offer'd a Heart that I have carefully (tho' to no purpose) reserv'd for you alone?' Darbelle pronounc'd these words with a tone in which Anger and Love had equal shares, that the Princess was quite astonish'd. But the greatest Emotion that the presence of Darbelle had rais'd in her heart, turn'd all to Joy, of that Joy which she had to see him yet alive, who she so long believ'd to be dead, nor cou'd hinder her self from giving him marks of it; wherefore (without studying any Answer to his Reproaches, nor concealing those Sentiments which her Duty perhaps wou'd have made her dissemble at another time, she said to him) 'Ah, Darbelle! is it your self that I see? and may I be assur'd 'tis not some Phantome that represents it self to me? Yes, Madam, (answer'd Darbelle ) I am yet living, but now I am ten thousand times more miserable than had I died, since I am ten thousand times more amorous.' The End of the Second Part. CLITIE, A NOVEL. The third and last Part, being an Addition to the two first Parts. was alive, altho' she saw him before her Face; she had form'd such strong Idea's of his Death, that he himself cou'd scarcely make her sensible he liv'd. They gaz'd upon each other for a while, and the Emotions of their Souls were so violent and sudden, that they hardly knew where they were, or what they did. But if Darbelle was amaz'd to hear her ask if still he liv'd, the Princess was no less confus'd, a thousand. Thoughts were crouding to get entrance into her Heart, and her Tears and Sighs increas'd the cruel Tempest, and nothing but a total wreck cou'd be expected: A second time she falls into a Swoon, nor cou'd Darbelle with the assistance of La Rock and Celia (Clitie's Woman) with all their Care and best Endeavours call her life back to its fair Habitation: at last it was concluded (lest the press of People who were now coming in, shou'd see her in this condition) that they shou'd carry her unto her Coach, and send her home with her Woman; nor did Darbelle fail to be by her on foot (meeting many of his Enemies, who tho' they knew him not, made him suspect they did) even to the Princess's Lodgings, where her Husband and several other Noblemen were coming forth to go wait upon the King to the Play- house. La Rock having his mind more disingag'd than Darbelle , told him the hazard he was in of being known, and that this rash proceeding wou'd be a means to deliver him into the Hands of those who wou'd not fail to take his life; besides, he represented to him the Danger to which he expos'd the Princess, shou'd he be found with her, who in the estate in which she was, cou'd no ways be capable at present of giving him any further satisfaction. But Darbelle was deaf to all his Arguments, nor wou'd he stir until he had seen the Princess once again, who by this time (what with the shogging of the Coach, and Celia's care) was a little recovered, and looking about her saw the disconsolate Darbelle by her Coach side; she rous'd her drooping Spirits, and was about to speak at the same moment he prevented her (saying) 'Madam, I find the sight of me is grievous to you, and I cou'd wish my Destiny had been so kind to have let me had that Death you spoke of, rather than let me live a life that's burdensome to all that know me.' She interrupted him here, and in a soft and mournful tone, her Eyes distilling Tears on her fair lovely Cheeks, and with looks so sad and languishing, she said: ' Darbelle , expose not thus a Life which Heaven is pleas'd to save, a Life more pretious far than all the Joys on Earth; and if you love me still, (as I have cause enough to think) preserve it till we have unravell'd this great Mystery; I can no more at present, but ere long I'le send you farther orders what to do; I see the Prince is going to the Play, and shou'd he find us two together, the Consequence I fear wou'd prove too fatal, both to our Lives and Honours.' Darbelle was all Obedience, and lest they shou'd be surpriz'd speaking together, left her entring into her Apartment, and hasten'd home to his. No sooner was he got into his Chamber with La Rock , but he threw himself upon his Bed, where for above an hour he lay without the least sign of Life, till (at length) by the Assistance of La Rock , he began to open his Eyes, from whence whole floods of tears did flow. ' O, La Rock! (said he) was ever any Misery like to mine? What shall I do? what will become of me? O lovely Charmer! (goes he on) there needed not this last Affliction; why wou'd you have me still preserve a Life so full of Woes and Griefs?' Then ceas'd a while; and after a small pause, which multitudes of Sighs did cause, he began to rave, and cry'd, 'O you immortal Powers! what do you mean! Can Heaven be Heaven? Can it be the Throne of Mercy, and yet not shew one glimpse of it to me? Has Justice banish'd thence all other Attributes, and that bright sparkling Roof beset with Golden Characters of Light, has it not one, not one propitious Star for me? Must I be still the Mark at which you level all your Vengeance? But, oh! why name I you who silently look on and see the Sport and Reaks my Fortune plays me?' La Rock , while his Transports were thus furious, thought it convenient not to interrupt them, but stood a mute Spectator of his Master's Passion, who having been silent for a time (his Grief and Anguish stifling all his words, lay rankling at his Heart) steps to his Bed-side, and with all the reason he cou'd urge, endeavour'd to allay his Trouble: 'What (says he to him) is become of all your Courage? and whither is your Patience flown? Patience is stale (replies he) and I am weary of it, my passive Fortitude has quite forsaken me, and nothing but despair supplies its place. At least (answers La Rock ) preserve your self till you have found out the Cause of all these Troubles; my mind still tells me Clitie is not so much to blame as you imagine, and 'tis most certain there has been foul Play us'd to both of you; her last words to you were not like those of hate, but rather (might I judge) of Love and Pity; and 'tis not impossible but Heaven may have yet in store a milder Fortune for you: Wherefore once more look up, and hope the best, for worse cannot befal you.' 'O, La Rock! (says he, taking him by the Hand) these words imply you are the best of Friends, but they can never ease my Heart; they are to me as Cordials to a breathless Corps, and Fate has set me beyond the reach of Comfort: Heaven, my Friends, Clitie , and Hope it self, have all deserted me; cou'd I admit the smallest Hope, I yet were happy; but alas! that Bladder that shou'd buoy up the sinking man, with me is burst, and leaves me in the Ocean of my Miseries, 'tis the last thing leaves us but our Lives; but Life is forc'd upon me still to augment my wretched State; shou'd Clitie (as you would perswade me) love me still, what Profit will it afford me? She is anothers now, and I must ne'er expect to see her more.' The poor afflicted Princess was no sooner got into her Chamber, but she went to Bed, watring her Pillow with those streams of Tears which fell from her fair Eyes. She began to reflect on this last Adventure, ' Darbelle still lives (says she to her self) and, as he says, (and I, alas! too late believe) is constant still. What Demon (envious of our Loves) contriv'd such false Reports? And curst Adraste , what more hellish Devil cou'd make thee tell me that thou sawest him married?' Thus for sometime she wou'd take the unfortunate Darbelle's part, when in an instant all her thoughts wou'd change, (and she wou'd say) 'What tho' he does live, may he not yet be married? 'Tis true, I had no Witness of his Death, but bare Report, but of his Falshood, I have Adraste, Mariana's Brother, who in Florence saw him with his Wife, and whose Portrait yet lies by me; wherefore then shou'd I afflict my self for one so false and treacherous, no! let him go back again to Florence , there he will find relief, and in his Spouse's Arms forget his Troubles.' These Thoughts prevail'd a while, yet (maugre all) she cou'd not think a man so guilty (as he seem'd to be) wou'd leave his Wife, Employments, and the Favour of the great Duke, and run the hazards of so long a Journey, nay, and his Life to boot to come to Paris , unless it were to clear himself. She cou'd fix satisfied on nothing, but with the Impatience she had to be better satisfied, early in the Morning she sent for Mariana , who suspecting nothing of the business, came to wait on her; but no sooner did she enter, but the Princess's Blood rose all in Blushes on her Cheeks, and I know not what of shivering possess'd her Heart. They being alone, she made her sit down upon a Couch by her, then in a low and lamentable tone she told her all that had happen'd since Darbelle came to Paris , and that he was return'd again alive and unmarried, and that her Brother had deceiv'd them all. Mariana was not a little surpriz'd at this Relation, however she conceal'd her Sentiments, and assum'd the Discourse; 'Can it be possible, Madam (says she) that what you say is truth, and are you confident you are not abus'd? Yes, Mariana (answers the Princess) I am abus'd, and so is he, but who has done this piece of Wickedness, is yet to me a Mystery.' Mariana was glad to hear her say this, and seeing she did not in the least mistrust her (since she had so freely discover'd to her all her Adventures with Darbelle , and his return to Paris ) and remembring that Machivillian Maxim, That those who begin in sin, must never quit that Road till they have reach'd their Journey's end,) seem'd to be much concern'd; and fearing lest the Princess shou'd send for Adraste , and by Gold and Presents get the Truth out of him (for she knew him to be one who would boggle at nothing, if Gold were the Reward) told the Princess that she wou'd write to her Brother, who she pretended was gone into England with the Embassadour, and know the truth, and wou'd leave no means unattempted to sound the very bottom of this business. They had many other Discourses concerning this Adventure, when Mariana pretended urgent business, and took her leave, promising to come and see her again next day, in the mean time she wou'd consider about what was best to be done in an affair of such great Consequence. She no sooner quits the Princess, but with all the Wings that Fear cou'd lend her, she flew to find out Lysidor , who she acquainted with the whole matter. The Prince when he first heard it, was no less amaz'd at it, than she had been; but having well consider'd every thing, he order'd her to meet him in the Evening at a certain place which he appointed, in the mean time to keep all secret, and to go back again to the Princess, and endeavour all she cou'd to wheedle out of her Darbelle's abode, whose Blood he told her, shou'd wash all clean again. Mariana left him, but it was not in her power to quit the horror of her Guilt, she now began to apprehend a fatal Consequence from all her Treachery had done, and had she not been married and with Child, wou'd have discover'd the Deceit to the Princess, and have made Atonement with her own Life; but her Heart was harden'd, and it was now too late to repent. She doubted not but if she cou'd contrive some means to send her Brother out of the Kingdom ere the Princess cou'd speak to him, all might do well enough yet. Upon which consideration she sends word to her Brother to come to her with all speed, but by good fortune the Messenger who she sent, found him not at home. As soon as Mariana had parted from the Prince, he began to think what Course he shou'd steer, and after many Contrivances he found none so expedient as the private making away Darbelle , and none so proper to effect the business as Mariana's Brother, who had so much injur'd him, that it was impossible he wou'd ever pardon him; therefore sending a Lacquey to Adraste's Lodging, and not finding him at home, he gave him orders to seek him out, and bid him come to him, which was soon perform'd. And Adraste having already felt the Bounty of the Prince, was not slack in making what haste he cou'd to receive his Commands. The Prince had on purpose taken Coach to go abroad and air himself, and had told the Messenger who he had sent for Adraste , where he shou'd meet him. The Lacquey perform'd his Master's orders so well, that in less than an Hour, he brought him to the Prince, who at his first seeing him, ran to him, and embracing him; ' Adraste (says he) I am already infinitely obliged to you, and you are a man on whom I shall make it my study to shew all marks of Favour to, that I am able; and I doubt not in the least but you will deserve more than I shall be capable of bestowing.' Adraste wonder'd at this unusual Discourse of the Prince, (and with a low bow, replies) 'Sir, I wish it lay in my power to deserve these Favours you are pleas'd to speak of, at your Hands; and the small service I have tender'd you, your goodness has already largely rewarded: But (goes he on) if the Life, or all the Fortune I have, will make me any ways further serviceable to your Highness, you may command me as your humble Vassal.' 'No more, Adraste (replies the Prince) I am sufficiently satisfied of your Power, and all I desire of you now, is the Will to put that Power in Execution, not so much for my sake, as for your own future safety: For know Darbelle is return'd to Paris , and has already spoken to the Princess, but neither of them apprehend as yet the Cheat that has been put upon them, nor must they; for 'tis most certain when he comes to understand the Trick you have plaid him, in averring that you saw him married in Florence , your Life must be the Offering to atone his Rage and Revenge. Therefore for the present be not seen abroad, but conceal your self in a place where I shall appoint you, till I get Information where he is, and put you in a way of securing your own life, and my quiet; and here are five hundred Pistols in part of what you may expect when I can hear you say Darbelle is no more.' Adraste was much surpriz'd at these Proposals of the Prince; but considering there were no other means for his safety than by Darbelle's Death, and how easily it might be done without any Discovery; but above all, the five hundred Pistols in hand, and a Promise of as many more when the Deed shou'd be done, return'd him this Answer; 'Your Highness is so generous and obliging, that my Life and all that I have, are no longer mine, than while they are employ'd in performing your Commands, which here I swear as soon as possible I can, to execute; let me but know where this Disturber of your Peace and Quiet is, and I will quickly ease you of your trouble.' Having said this, the Prince assur'd him of his Friendship, and both went into his Coach, which convey'd Adraste to a private place to lie incognito till further Orders. After this the Prince went home to his Apartment, and inquiring after the Princess, he was inform'd she was not well, and kept her Chamber: The Prince seem'd to take no notice of it (tho' he knew well enough the cause of her Malady) but made her a Visit after his usual manner, and was taking his leave just as Celia enters and whisper'd her Lady, of which the Prince took no small notice, suspecting it was something that concern'd Darbelle (as indeed it prov'd) however he kept on his way as tho he was the least concern'd in it, but calling to a Lacquey that was by him, gave him strict orders to watch Celia when she came out of the Princess's Chamber, and to observe whither she went, what she did, and with whom she should speak, and if it hapned to be any man, that he should carefully dog him home to his Lodging, and to make the most exact and secret Enquiry that he cou'd to learn who he was, and return him a faithful Account. The Prince's Suspicions were not to little purpose, for she came to acquaint her Mistress, That one of the Gentlemen that were with her at the Play-house the last night, was walking in a little Orchard behind the House, and came from his Master to enquire her Health, and receive her Commands. The Princess had before given Celia private orders to watch when any one shou'd inquire for her, and to inform her of it, who had for that purpose writ a Letter which she design'd the first opportunity shou'd be deliver'd to Darbelle , which she put into her Pocket; and after some time, musing and walking about the Room, she went down with a pretence to walk in the Gardens, and take the air; Celia follow'd her to give her notice where he attended, and the Prince's Lacquey followed her to give his Lord notice who he was. She went not directly to the place, nor did our Spie directly follow them; but the Princess having taken a turn or two in one Walk, went to another, from thence to a third, till at last as tho' not design'd, she came to the place where La Rock waited, who no sooner saw her, but seem'd as tho' he wou'd have retir'd to give way to the Princess's more private walking, who looking round about her, saw none but her Woman, bid him stay; this while the cunning Lacquey had hid himself behind a thick Hedge, where he cou'd see all that passed, yet be conceal'd that none cou'd see him. The Princess who knew she had no long time to stay there, it being a place where most of the ordinary sort of those who belong'd to the Palace us'd to recreate themselves, walk'd by him, and slipt into his hand the Letter she had before prepar'd. She inquir'd after his Health, bid La Rock tell him, if his Master thought it convenient to let her know his abode, she wou'd send the faithful Mariana to him, who wou'd be no small assistance to them in the finding out the Foundation of both their Misfortunes. La Rock with all Reverence took his leave of her, and flew to his Master with the Princess's Letter; but Lysidor's Lacquey as nimble as himself, was as soon at Darbelle's lodging as La Rock ; he pretended a little while after to inquire for a Gentleman, whose Name he had forgot, which he knew if he heard it nam'd; but to the best of my memory (says he) he told me this was his Lodging. I know not who you shou'd mean (answer'd the Servant of the House) for we have two Gentlemen who lodge here, the one they call Mr. Conrade , the other Mr. La Rock . No, certainly (says the Lacquey again) 'tis none of them, and sure I have mistook his directions. Oh, I beg your pardon (goes he on) yonder just at the turning of the Corner of the Street passes the very Person who I seek: so took his leave, and went to find out his Prince, who he doubted not but to please with his diligence and success, not only in dogging Celia (as he had been order'd) but also by making a Discovery that the Princess was concern'd in the business, who had given the man a Letter, and that he had not only found out his Lodging, but as he thought his Name which he was confident must be one of the two the Servant where they lodg'd had told him. La Rock no sooner enter'd, but with Transports of Joy he tells his Master that he had seen and spoke with the Princess, and that he question'd not but he wou'd in the end find her free and innocent, and that undoubtedly there had been great Treachery, cou'd they but find out where it lay; to which purpose she desir'd he wou'd acquaint her with his Lodging, and that she would send Mariana her faithful Confident unto him. But Darbelle (at the very Name of Mariana (for what Reason he knew not) started, as at some sudden Accident, and an unusual Horror seiz'd him all over, his very Soul was turn'd, and a harsh unpleasant noise seem'd to grate his Ears at the very sound of Mariana \---) interrupted him (saying) 'I know no grounds I have for my Suspicion, but I fear that Ma---' There his Speech faltred, and he cou'd not go through with the word. 'That Woman (I say) has had a large share in causing all those Miseries I now endure; nor dare I any longer trust her; for if my Suspicions are true, that 'tis she that has robb'd me of my Rest and Peace, nay, of my Clitie too, she will not stop there, but take from me my life, when once she has it in her power.' La Rock knew there was much Reason for what he said, considering that after all the Protestations she had made of Fidelity and Friendship to his Master, promising to give him a faithful Account of all that passed with Clitie , especially were there the least Suspicion of a Rival, kept silent: Add to this, that they had heard that the Prince had given her a good Estate, and married her to a Gentleman something related to him, they no longer doubted but she was the Imposter that had betray'd them. However, waving any further talk of her at present, he deliver'd him the Princess's Letter, which Darbelle kiss'd a thousand times ere he open'd it, blessing the dear Hand of her who writ and sent it. The Letter was as follows,  unfortunate Darbelle not only lives, but loves me still; I know not yet who to accuse, but I have been perswaded not only by an universal Report, but by a particular Messenger who I sent into Florence , that you were married there, and had gotten the Esteem and Favour of the great Duke, and resolv'd no more to think of seeing these Parts again, and withal brought me your pretended Lady's Picture, which to my great Sorrow I have still preserv'd by me; and soon after, not only my self, but the whole Court was assur'd of your death. Judge then, Darbelle , if after all these Misinformations of your Inconstancy and Death, if I cou'd do less than give my self up to a total Despair, till by the Perswasion of my faithful Confident, Mariana , and her Brother (who was the Person I sent into Tuscany ) together with my Father's Commands, and the assiduous Addresses and daily Importunities of a Prince whose Love and Constancy seem'd to challenge some return; I made him Master of my self by marrying him. Nor did I need any further Confirmation of your Infidelity, than after three Months writing to you almost every day, I receiv'd not one Line of Answer. This I am forc'd to tell you for my own Justification, and doubt not but you have as large and specious Pretensions for yours, which tho' it will be some Satisfaction to me to find you innocent, yet will it give me more in injoying the last fatal stroke my Misfortunes can lay on me, and ease me at once both of my Life and Misery; and that since I cannot live for Darbelle , I can willingly, and with content die for him.  Darbelle , after having read this Letter, seem'd as a perfect Statue, and stood as motionless as so much Marble. La Rock who was an Ear-witness to this fatal News became almost as senseless as his Master, but considering with himself, that the Grief which bleeds not in the Eyes, still festers inwardly, and clogs the Heart, broke silence first; 'Now it is plain (says he to him) you both have been betray'd, and 'tis as evident by whom. O hellish Perfidie! O cursed Crocodile! (says Darbelle ) who whilst thou seem'dst to weep, and bear a part in my Misfortunes, was thus contriving my Confusion. O damn'd deceitful Mariana! Eve in her fall was innocence to thee. What Plagues, what Torture, Death, what Hell it self has Punishment enough to give thee? And thy accursed Brother, more false and treacherous, and more inventive of Lyes, than that Devil that first seduc'd Mankind, and flung him from the state of Innocence. But you are fruit both of a Bough, which with the Stock and all the Branches, I will cut down and throw to everlasting Ruine. And Lysidor , thou Prince (of nought but Devils) I have mark'd thee out for sure Destruction; nor all the Kings on Earth, nor all the Fears of Death, nay, nor thy Wife her self, shall stop this vengeful Arm from doing Justice on thee.' Here he stood still a while and read again the Letter. 'Nay, I will do't (he cry'd) if I were sure this act (with me) would ruine all Mankind, and mould the World into a second Chaos.' Thus the Transports of his Fury thought of nothing but Revenge. But a little after, (with a deep sigh, his Eyes brim-full of Tears and Languishments, Love takes his place) 'But, O La Rock, La Rock , (says he) my dearest charming Clitie still is true; she loves, unfortunate as I am, still; and since she cannot come a pure and spotless Virgin to my Arms, resolves to wash her guilt off with her Blood. Alas! she was betray'd as well as I. Then stops again, and having paus'd a while; Lie still my Heart (says he) and hush thy Injuries a while asleep, and use the utmost means you can to save the life of one more pretious than my Soul, of one the Gods themselves wou'd mourn to part with, and grieve a Loss can never be repaid: She must not, shall not die for me; or if she does, (flying again into a raving Fit) I'le sacrifice the lives of all those wicked Monsters, nay, the Blood of all their cursed Race, to appease her Injur'd Ghost.' In the mean time the Prince's Lacquey had given him a full Account of every thing; Mariana being by, who as soon as she heard the Name of La Rock , knew the other must certainly be Darbelle under the false Name of Conrade . The Lacquey was dismiss'd, and the Prince and Mariana staid together above two hours consulting what to do, knowing that without they cou'd find some speedy way to prevent it, nothing cou'd hinder a Discovery of their Practice. They thought on many Projects, but fix'd on none but what they first design'd (to wit) Darbelle's Death. That will not be enough (says the cruel Mariana ) for whilst La Rock survives we are not safe; they must both die (as they have liv'd) together. The Prince was soon brought to consent to it, and without more ado left Mariana and went to her Brother, who (as was said before) was conceal'd in a private House that the Prince had order'd. When he came to him (says he) ' Adraste , have you well consider'd what I told you last? And are your Resolutions firm to the Design? As firm (answers Adraste ) as my Love and Faith to you; and were I sure the Deed wou'd brand me o're with Curses, nay, throw Anathama's on all my Race, and in the end procure the Wheel, I wou'd not boggle at it.' The Prince embrac'd him, and commended his Friendship and Resolution, and withal told him, since none in the World but them two and his Sister knew of the deceit, none but themselves shou'd be employ'd in making good what with so much Success they had begun. Therefore presently disguising themselves in Ruffians Habits, and arming with sure and good Weapons, (the Night now coming on apace) they went out of the House into the Street, where Lysidor's Man had told him he had dog'd the Gentleman: They had not waited long ere (by a light that was brought to the door) they perceiv'd two Men in Cloaks come forth: The Prince made no doubt but they were the very same he look'd for, but for more certainty he went up to one of them, and softly touching him on the Shoulder, Darbelle (says he) a word with you in private: It hapned to be La Rock who he had taken for his Master; however the faithful La Rock thought it not safe to inform him of his Mistake, but throwing his Cloak aside, says, Who is that? The Prince replies, One from the Princess Clitie : At which La Rock stepping a little nearer him to hear what he wou'd say; 'The Princess, says Lysidor , commends her to you, and has sent you this,' running at La Rock with his Sword, which by good chance miss'd his Body, and was so intangled in his Cloak, that he had time to draw his own in his Defence ere the Prince cou'd disingage it. Adraste follow'd the Prince's Example, and set upon Darbelle , who as soon as he had heard himself named, had put himself into a posture to defend him. The Combat was not long, for the second Pass La Rock made, he run the Prince quite through the Heart, who immediately fell, pronouncing these words, 'I am justly rewarded for all my Treachery;' and so ended his Life. But Darbelle , after he had given Adraste several Wounds, seeing a light appear at the other end of the Street, together with La Rock , (without inquiring who or what they were had set upon them) fled to avoid being apprehended; they had both the good fortune not to be wounded, and lodg'd themselves in another quarter of the City in a place as private as the former. The Light (we spoke of) was a Magistrate of the City, with several of his Officers, were going to search a suspected House in that Bye-street for Goods that had been stoln; who, so soon as they came to the place (where before they heard, as they thought, some clashing of Swords) they found the Prince (who at present they knew not) dead, and a little from him the false Adraste (all wounded and bloody) on the ground, who they perceiv'd still had life in him; he caused both the Bodies to be taken up, and conveyed to a House hard by, where they laid Adraste into Bed, and sent for Chyrurgeons to dress his Wounds, and if possible to recover him again, that they might learn of him the meaning of that Adventure, and who he was that was kill'd, for the Disguise the Prince had on, hindred them from knowing him. The next Morning (the Prince not having been at his Lodging all Night, not being known ever before to stay out) Enquiry was made to know what was become of him, and about four a Clock in the Afternoon the Report of his Death was spread over the whole City; but they kept it at present from the Princess, who was bewailing the Misfortunes of Darbelle to Mariana , who was come at that time to visit her; 'Alas, Mariana! (says she to her) What can we think of this Affair? Who has betray'd us? What more than savage Beast cou'd do so barbarous an Act? What you tell me (says Mariana ) is to me all Mystery, and it wou'd require some Oracle to solve the  nigma ; however, Madam, you can ne're be blam'd, and all that you have done, was what the most wise and vertuous Lady living might justifie; therefore afflict your self no more about it, but leave it to the Heavens and Darbelle , who you say is alive and return'd, (a thing, but that you say it, I cou'd scarce believe) to find out the Treachery. Come dry those Eyes, and think of this no more; your Duty now does bind you wholly to your Lord, in whom you'l find those Joys and Comforts will allay your Sorrows. You are young, and in your Beauty's Prime, and shou'd not wear so black a Cloud of Woes; you'l give him cause, it may be, to suspect your Love, and think some other Object has usurp'd your Heart; I wou'd not for a thousand Worlds that he shou'd see you thus. O, Mariana! (replies Clitie ) can you ere think I lov'd, and lov'd so well, and entertain one mite of Joy, while I have ruin'd the most constant, tender, and most deserving man alive; alive, said I! alas, wou'd he had dy'd when false Report made me give credit to it; he's yet alive, but will not long be so; his Griefs and his Misfortunes will soon put an end to his Life, and all the Guilt will light upon my Head.' Thus were they discoursing when one came in and told them the Prince was murther'd, and that Adraste, Mariana's Brother (who was mortally wounded, as they believ'd) was suspected to have been the Murderer. 'My Brother kill the Prince! (says Mariana ) sure it cannot be; and without saying any more, she went to know the certainty.' The Princess now was left alone, and fresh streams of tears run down her lovely Face, when she complain'd thus to her self; 'Ah, wretched Clitie! when will thy cruel Destiny have done? When will the Dregs of all its wrathful Malice be poured out? What is reserv'd in all the power of Heaven to ease thy Sufferings? Unhappy Prnice! unhappy 'cause thou lov'dst me, and I a thousand times unhappy 'cause I was thy Wife.' Thus we will leave her bemoaning her sad Misfortunes. The Chyrurgeons had by this time search'd and dress'd all Adraste's Wounds, who was now come a little to himself again, and had Promises from them, if he would be rul'd, he might do well. But Mariana arriving, wou'd by no means be kept from seeing her Brother; she ran to him, and conjur'd him to tell her how he came thus wounded, and who had kill'd the Prince: But he (not suspecting that she knew any thing of Darbelle's being in Paris , having been kept up close by the Prince that he cou'd not see her) told her, that as the Prince was going upon a Design wherein he had done him the honour to make him his Companion, they were set upon in the Street by men they knew not, who had left them in that Condition. The Chyrurgeons wou'd not suffer her to discourse or stay any longer with him, alledging it wou'd retard the Cure, if not render all their Medicins useless, put her out of the Room, and left him to himself. Darbelle was no sooner in his new Lodgings, but new Afflictions did possess his Heart; he was more surpriz'd at this last Adventure, than at all the rest; he rais'd a thousand Doubts about it, which wou'd not let him take one moment's rest that Night; he reflected afresh on all his Calamities, and particularly on this last Misfortune; and Jealousie was now the Master of his Soul, he turn'd all to Clitie's Disadvantage, imagin'd her yet false, and all her Oaths and Protestations Air, and the last Letter and the Message she sent by La Rock to know his Lodging, was only a Trap to insnare his Life; and that those Bravo's who had assaulted him (as they themselves said) were sent to him by the Princess; he rav'd and exclaim'd against her like a Mad-man, nor cou'd all that La Rock cou'd say, mitigate his Passion; he call'd her perfidious, ingrateful Tygress, Murderer, and all the barbarous Names his Fury cou'd invent; nor did stick to threaten her self, and fully resolv'd the next Morning to execute this Resolution. La Rock still preach'd Patience to him, telling him this might be a Mistake as well as all the rest, and desir'd leave to go out and inform himself what those Assassinates were, and what they meant. Darbelle cou'd not in reason but consent to what so much he long'd to know. La Rock putting off his Disguise he had on when he saw Clitie , went to the Exchange and to several Coffee-houses, where he was soon inform'd that the Prince was murder'd last Night, and Adraste mortally wounded, and that none knew the Murtherers. The unhappy Darbelle still rav'd of nothing but Blood and Revenge, pouring out whole Volleys of Curses and Imprecations against the innocent Princess: 'What, Traytress! (wou'd he say) was't not enough for thee to murder Amasis , and make me the wretched Executioner, but you must seek my Blood? Inhumane as thou art, I who have over tenderly adored you, I that have suffer'd so many Afflictions and Miseries for thy sake, must I be made (to summ up all your Cruelty) the Draught to quench your bloody Thirst? Thou, worse than Hell, cou'd not you spare that life a few short minutes more, which wou'd it self extinguish shortly, but you must ride me post to death?' In these and such like Cogitations was he, when La Rock enter'd. 'Well then (says Darbelle ) what news from Hell? What was that She-Devil's Design? And who were they that did attempt our Lives?' He spoke these words in such a furious tone, his Eyes all sparkling Rage and Fire when La Rock told him, it is Prince Lysidor whom I have kill'd, and Adraste that you have wounded mortally. 'Thanks, bounteous Heaven (replies Darbelle ), I find you now begin to mend your hand, and have not quite deserted me,' so let all fall who have contriv'd my Ruine, so let her fall who first occasioned it. There is no question but there was diligent search made to find those men who slew the Prince, but all in vain. In a few days after his Body was interr'd with all the Pomp and State that became his Birth and Quality, while the poor Princess bewail'd a double Loss; for she began now to suspect Darbelle , and impute it to his Jealousie, which gave her far greater disquiets than any she had had. 'Will Fortune (says she) never tire! Can she be constant only to my Miseries? Can she have any Vengeance yet in store? Or if she has, Why does she thus by piece-meals deal it out? O Fate, be merciful in Cruelty, and heap my Woes by Wholesale on, that with their Weight I may be crush'd into my Mother Earth again. But why do I complain? My cruel Destiny is deaf to all my Prayers, and takes delight to see me suffer; what then remains, but that I brave my Foe, and arm my self with Courage to endure the worst?' Hitherto the false Mariana was prosperous enough in all her Undertakings, and all her Plots succeeded to her wish; but now she fear'd all her Deceits were found out, and doubted not but they were Darbelle and La Rock who had slain the Prince and wounded her Brother, and that the next that fell, must be her self; she studied how to escape the Blow, and wou'd not let her active Brain have rest, till she had found some way to revenge the Prince's Death, and Adraste's Wounds. She thought at first to have discover'd, that Darbelle was in Paris , but that Design soon vanish'd; for she imagin'd after the Prince's Death, Darbelle had surely flown to his Retreat in Tuscany , and she shou'd but alarm the Town to no purpose, and therefore she contriv'd another way, which was to write to the Princess, as from Darbelle , in which she made him own the Fact, and glory in the Prince's fall; by which means she doubted not but to set so great a variance between Darbelle and the Princess, that there shou'd be no likelihood of his ever seeing her, or at least speaking to her again. Big with this Project, she hastens home and writes the Letter, and having some of those Billets by her, which Darbelle had formerly writ to Clitie , and which she had kept still by her, it was no difficult matter to imitate his Hand so well, that the afflicted Princess in her Tears and Sorrows cou'd not well distinguish it. Having finish'd her Letter, she went to the Princess's Apartment, with the shew of an inconceivable Trouble, which she did not now altogether dissemble, for her Brother's Wounds, and the ill posture of her own Affairs, gave her no small Inquietudes. She found the Princess (as she cou'd wish) alone, and almost drown'd in Sorrow, bewailing her hard Misfortunes, who as soon as she saw her enter, began to renew her Complaints, and made such Lamentations they almost touch'd the Heart of cruel Mariana , but she was pitiless, Remorse was still a Stranger to her Breast; she look'd on Clitie with so sad and mournful Eyes, as told her almost what she came about. The Princess made her sit down by her, telling her, now her Fate had done its worst; she demanded of her many things, but Mariana answer'd all with Sighs and Tears, looking as tho' her Soul was just expiring, which the Princess taking notice of, ask'd what new matter she had to tell her? 'Surely (says she to her) your looks have something that wou'd fain discover what lies at your Heart; your Face seems fill'd with something of Import; the things must needs be strange within the Book, when it does bare so sad a Title-page. Mariana reply'd, My Countenance but sutes my Heart, and blabs out what I wou'd gladly have conceal'd.' \---But here her Sobs and Sighs stopp'd up the passage of her Speech. 'Speak on (says the poor Princess) for I can hear you now, I am now grown familiar with my Misery. As soon (says Mariana to her again) as Grief will give me leave, I will tell you one of the saddest Stories ever pierc'd your Ear.' Darbelle \---at that word the Princess started, as at some horrid sight, 'Proceed (says she) What of Darbelle? Is he dead, or is he taken? Alas, unhappy Princess! (answers Mariana ) his Death's a Favour Fate will not bestow on you; wou'd he were dead, or rather (for why shou'd I wish Death to one I vow'd an everlasting Friendship to) wou'd I were dead ere I was made the Messenger of these sad Tidings I am come to tell you, Darbelle (by what means I know not) found my Lodging out, and coming to me (all wreaking in the Prince's Blood, in which he took such pride, that I (amaz'd) cou'd not demand him any thing. ' Mariana (says he to me) I am come to give you thanks for all your cares and faithfulness in my Amours with that perfidious Princess, and have but this one last Request to make, which by our former Friendship, I conjure you to perform. Go to that false Ungrate (says he) and tell her how you see me; tell her (goes he on) I now have on my Wedding-Cloaths, and all the Glory in the World wou'd sit but loose and troublesome upon me, when compar'd to this rich purple, bloody Dress: Bid her expect no more to hear from me, for this shall be the last: With that, he put this Letter into my Hand, and went directly forth again. Grief and the horrid Object of the dear Prince's Blood, which still look'd fresh and beautiful upon his Garments, strook such a Terrour in my Soul, that I no longer cou'd support my self, but sunk down on the floor, where I continued long before my Senses did return; but then, alas! it was too late, or else I wou'd have rais'd the House to have stopp'd the Murderer; and fearing to bring your Vertue and Honour into question, if it shou'd be known that he who kill'd your Husband was the Ghost at the Ball, and the next night the Shepherd, for whose sake you made a second Ball, where you appointed an Assignation with him in the Play-house. These things came all into my thoughts, for which I let him make his escape, (knowing his own guilty Conscience will in time be worse to him than death) and came to render you this true Account, and deliver you the Letter which he left.' Mariana having ended her Discourse, the Princess took the Letter, and in opening it, 'It is enough (she said) it is enough, you heavenly Powers, keep back the remnant of your Anger, and let my Death at once appease your further Wrath; then read these words:'  might by Amasis have learn'd I cou'd admit no Rival, I wou'd condole your Widowhood, did it not thwart the Joys which fill my Heart to see your Husband dead. My Injuries were great, and nothing but his Blood cou'd make me satisfaction; but least my sight shou'd ere offend your Eyes, I'le fly as far as day does spread his Wings, and having by this glorious Act appeas'd my tortur'd Soul a little, I'le take such ways, that I ere long will banish your Idea from my Heart, till when I ne're shall be what formerly I was, Darbelle.  The Princess read this Letter with a seeming calmness, but when that she had done, and found Darbelle was indeed (for so the Letter tells) her Husband's Murderer, it wou'd require a Heart as much afflicted as her own, and one more eloquent than ever was, but to conceive one half of what possess'd her Soul, she immediately took her bed, nor cou'd the care of all her Friends, her Kindred, or Physicians, procure one word from her, or make her take the least nourishment for three whole days, which so dispoil'd the Beauties of her Face, and brought her Body to that low estate, that all despair'd to see her live a day. When a man was brought into her Chamber, sitting in an arm'd Chair, all sick and wounded, and plac'd by her Bedside, he was Adraste , who hearing the sad Condition of the Princess, and finding he was himself departing, desir'd leave of her Father to be brought to Clitie , telling him that he, and he alone cou'd ease his Daughter, and work a Cure which no Physician with their Medicins cou'd: he desir'd to be left alone with her, or at least that they wou'd withdraw a little from the Bed-side, for what he had to say was short, and only for her Ear. All things thus dispos'd (the almost-expiring Adraste ) raising his voice so high that the Princess might hear him, 'Unhappy Princess (says he to her) behold a Malefactor at your Feet, imploring yours and Heaven's Pardon; behold the false Adraste at the point of Death, yet cannot die till he has made you happy.' At the naming Adraste , the Princess (whose Eyes till now had been clos'd) open'd them, and looking on him, 'Can there be any happiness for me' (replies the Princess in a tone of one just giving up the Ghost)? 'Have you an Art to bribe the Destinies? Or can you change an immutable Decree? No less than this can ever make me happy. O hear me out (says he, interrupting her) my life is too too short to tell you what I wou'd, I feel it mouldring every minute: Darbelle is yet true; the deceas'd unhappy Prince to gain your Love, did bribe me and my Sister Mariana to betray you---there he stopt. Speak on, Adraste (saies the Princess) for I feel something at my Heart, which bids me hear you out; speak, and I'le lie as still as Death it self.' In short, Adraste discover'd to her the whole Cheat (after the same manner as you have heard it in the foregoing Parts) he told her how the Prince and Mariana kept back all hers and Darbelle's Letters, and that the Picture he made her believe was Darbelle's Wife, was nothing but a Counterfeit, which was made in Paris , that he himself (who she had sent) had never been in Florence , but that all the time of his pretended Journey he lay conceal'd in Prince Lysidor's Apartment: He told her that Mariana had discover'd all her Adventures with Darbelle , since his return from Florence , to the Prince, and the Design the Prince and himself had to take his life, which had brought them into the estate in which they were; That it was none of Darbelle that slew the Prince, but his Servant, and that he himself was the man with whom Darbelle fought. All this he swore to her was true as he expected mercy from the Gods, who now had sent him Summons to depart this life. Mariana having been at her Brother's Lodgings, and hearing that he desir'd them to carry him to the Princess's Apartments, in order to discover something of Importance to Clitie , found now all her Designs discovered, and all that she had plotted utterly frustrated, especially this last inhumane horrid one she had in hand, which was to have poison'd her Brother, who she found had at the point of Death remorse, and in his repenting fit might betray her; she resolv'd to have sav'd him the trouble of penitance by laying him asleep with a Cordial she had with her, but missing of him, she made all the haste she cou'd after him, hoping she might yet prevent the Discovery, or if not, to make a larger. No sooner did the Princess see her, but she cry'd out, 'O! for Heaven sake help, and take that Monster from my sight, she is the cursed Cause of all my Misery, and the sad Worker of the Prince's Death.' Several at this Out-cry stepp'd in, and laid hands on Mariana , who seeing the Princess in that sad Condition, and her Brother just fall'n dead at her Feet, her self now in the hands of Justice, desir'd leave only to speak one word before they forc'd her away, which with the Princess's permission was granted her; 'I doubt not, Madam, (says she, applying her Speech to the Princess, but my Brother has discover'd to you all my Treachery (I mean all that he knew) that the Prince deserv'd the Death he found, and that Darbelle is yet spotless from any Ingratitude or Falshood, but he cou'd not tell you it was my self that writ the last Letter to you, as from Darbelle , and counterfeited his Hand, which had you nicely mark'd, you might have found before. Here I protest to you I know not where he is, nor have I seen him since he went to Florence , and what I told you of his coming to me, was all forg'd; tho' I suppose he is not far from these parts. 'All I have now to do, is to crave your pardon, which I can never deserve, and Heaven and Justice will not grant. Then taking the Bottle she had prepar'd for her Brother, she drank the Poison off, and bid them bear her to her Bed, for she told them she had not half an hour to live.' They took her thence, but ere she cou'd reach her own house, what with the Grief, and the fatal Cordial she had taken, she expir'd. These tragical Actions cou'd not be without much Grief and Trouble to all who were either Friends or Relations to any of them; they gave much matter of Discourse, but more of wonder to those who were present, and heard Darbelle nam'd: Those who knew nothing of the forementioned Adventures, thought it only some raving Fit, which the extremity of Grief for the Prince and her Brother (who lay dead before her) had caus'd, took but little notice of it; so that in few days there was neither talk nor thought of it among them, but all was still as if it ne'er had been. Clitie's Father was not offended at this Discovery, which had brought his Daughter to her Speech again, and seeing her now look with a more chearful Aire, and follow all her Doctors Prescriptions, was overjoy'd with the hopes, that in a few days she might do well again. So strangly fond was this Old Man of her, that all the time of her Sickness hitherto, he had not left her Chamber; but being comforted with the Endeavours Clitie made, and the promises the Doctors gave for her recovery, he grew weary and tir'd with long Watching and Sorrow, went that night to his Bed; and after his first Sleep (which we'll suppose was sound enough) he awak'd with a certain heaviness at his Heart, unlike to any he had felt before, but he continued not long ere soft slumbers clos'd his Eyes again; and (as he told the King and others afterward) he had this Dream. 'Methought (says he) I was walking in the Garden of the Artulieres , and from thence passing to the Orange-walks, I met a man all pale and bloody, who coming up to me, ask'd if I knew him; I look'd now a little more heedfully on him, and told him (if I remembred right) he was the unfortunate Amasis , who the unhappy Darbelle had slain, for which cause he had quit his own native Soil, and fled to Tuscany , where he has laid his Bones. I am (says the Vision to me) the same Amasis you speak of, unfortunate, as you have justly term'd me, in that I was the occasion of all that unhappy Man's and your Daughter's Misfortunes, and I am come to tell you that he is wrong'd. My Friends have been too severe in his Prosecution; 'tis true, he sent me to my Grave, but 'tis as true he did it nobly, and like a Gentleman, having Reason and Provocation enough for what he did. My vain Ostentation, and maintaining Injuries I had committed, urg'd me to do those things which caus'd my Fall, and will not let me rest till I have clear'd him of my Death; nor can my Ghost have quiet, until he be again happily establish'd in the King's Favour, and your vertuous Daughter's Love, which none deserves but he. He ne'er was married (as is reported) and is still alive; he has left his Solitude in Tuscany , and is return'd again to Paris , where he laments his sad Misfortunes; use therefore all possible means you can to comfort him, and ease my weary Spirit.' In finishing these words the good old Man awak'd, nor cou'd he sleep again that Night, a thousand Thoughts assaulted him at once, nor knew he what result to make; but at the break of day he rose and went to Clitie's Chamber, who he found pretty cheerful and hearty, for she had rested well that Night; he made all quit the Room, and seating himself by her Bed-side, he began a Discourse in this manner. 'My dearest Child, (says he) why will you let your aged Father pine and mourn away, his few days left him, in Grief and Sorrows, and not ease his Pain? Thou knowest I ever dearly lov'd thee, nor was there any trouble seiz'd thy Heart, in which I did not share. I do remember yesterday that Mariana spoke to you of Darbelle , and what she meant by it, I come to learn of you; therefore dear Daughter, hide from me nothing of the Truth, for if Darbelle be yet alive, and not married (as I have cause to suspect) and in this City, I shou'd be so far from disturbing his Peace, that I will use all my diligence with the King to get his Pardon, and perhaps establish him again at Court.' The Princess was not a little surpriz'd to hear her Father speak in this manner, tho' she cou'd not but be well-pleas'd to see his kindness to Darbelle ; and not to keep her Father any longer in doubt, she acquainted him with the whole Story from Darbelle's going into Florence , even to his coming back again to Paris , all the Tricks and Cheats Mariana and the Prince had put upon them, and lastly, the Murder he and Adraste would have committed, wou'd the Heavens have permitted it, who in the same time sent others to take their lives. The Princess here alter'd a little the Truth of her Relation, for none but her self knew who were they that kill'd them. Celse was a hundred times about to have interrupted her, but the oddness of her Story, and her soft manner of relating it, mov'd him to such a Commiseration of their Misfortunes, that it drew Tears from the Eyes of the good old Gentleman, who when she had made an end, he recounted to her his Dream, in all things so agreed with what Clitie had told him, that he wanted no further Confirmation to establish his belief that Darbelle was still virtuous, tho' still unhappy in his Princes's Favour, who he resolv'd to solicite so in his behalf, that he wou'd never let the King rest till he had got his Pardon. Many Discourses they had touching the means to bring it about, which now they had more likelihood to effect than before, since the Prince Alcander, Amasis's Brother, and Lysidor , were dead, who daily press'd the King for Justice (as they call'd it) against Darbelle . Who having escap'd the Hands of his Assassinates, and those of the Magistrate and his Officers, return'd again to their old Lodgings, fell into such Perplexities and Torments of mind, that it cast him into a dangerous Feaver which held him some Months, with little hopes of his Recovery; but Youth and Nature being strong, prevail'd with Death, and once more set him on his Feet again. He resolv'd to spend no more of his days in a place where every thing combin'd against him, but to return again for Florence , where he design'd in solitude to end his days, and to efface whate're his Love had made him write upon his Trees, in favour of his Mistress, and in their room to write Invectives against the whole Female Sex. To this end one day he discover'd his mind to La Rock , and order'd to prepare Horses, and all things necessary for such a Journey; and that at the beginning of the next Week he wou'd set forward. La Rock seconded his Design, and commended his Resolution, and in pursuance to his Commands, went the same day to furnish himself with Horses, when Fortune, who is never constant in any thing, conducted him to a man whose Horses were at Grass in a Field in the Countrey, near the place where the Princess had her House, and to which she was retir'd, in order to the better recovering her Health. The Man and La Rock took Coach together, and went to the place aforesaid, not being above four or five Miles from Paris , and while the Horses were fetching in, La Rock walk'd forth to see the Beauty of the place, which was certainly one of the finest Seats in that Countrey, and walking along a River, whose purling Streams seem'd to keep Consort with the noise the Winds made among the Leaves of the Trees that grew in the Grove, he heard (as he thought) at the other side of a thick Hedge, the Sighs and Complaints of a Woman; his Curiosity led him to go as near as possible he cou'd, without been seen, and listen to what she said; who having seated himself in a convenient place, cou'd through the Leaves behold a Woman lying on a Bank of Flowers, making her Arm (more white than Snow) her Pillow; her curling Hair hung negligently o're her Face, which as the friendly Wind remov'd away, made him perceive a Cheek more beautiful and fair, than ever he had seen before; but what mov'd him most, and hid what most he long'd to know, was the other fair Hand, that ever and anon was imploy'd with a Handkerchief, in wiping away those Tears which fell in streams from her distilling Eyes; he had not long attended, but the beautiful disconsolate broke forth again into Words, and said, 'Fond Wretch! what avails it to complain to Heaven, who, as they are just, ought not to take thy part? Blame Heaven no more, but lay the Fault upon thy own Credulity, that is it has wrought thy ruine, and the overthrow of one whose Love and Constancy can meet no parallel.' Oh!---(there drying her Eyes again with her Handkerchief, she stifl'd the name of some Man, so that he cou'd not understand who she meant.) 'What a foolish Man art thou to be so faithful to one who has so little deserv'd it? How has thy Love blinded thee to make a second Venture, when thy first cost thee so dear? And thy too much Constancy has been the Cause of all thy sad Misfortunes? To what purpose dost thou pursue thy passion, when it leads thee to thy Ruine? And to what end dost thou indulge thy own Destruction?' Here she ceas'd her words, and spoke with Eyes whose silent Rhetorick ran gliding down her Face, and drew the perfect Map of Sorrow. 'But (goes she on) thou canst weep, and that thou think'st enough, a few Woman's Tears, the next akin to Crocodiles. Cou'dst thou weep Blood, and through the Sluces of thy Eyes, drain all the Moisture of thy Veins, 'twere yet too little to wash away the Misery they have caus'd. Rest and Content are now grown Strangers to me, or if perchance sometimes the Night gives me Repose, my Sorrows waken with the Day, and gush upon me with the greater power. I know I torment my self in vain, for he knows nothing of it; or if he did, his Injuries, are grown so great, I never can expect Relief from him, nor ever to possess the place I once had in his Heart, which I deservedly have lost, tho Heaven can bear me witness, I always priz'd it more than life. I have chosen here a solitary place to sympathize with him, and to be as far distant as I can from that where my Afflictions first begun: But, alas! in quitting that, I cannot quit my Grief, but must for ever mourn my cruel Fate.' La Rock was hearkning to her moan when he observ'd a Woman to come up to her, who he knew to be Celia , with whom he had discours'd in the Theatre, by which he imagin'd the disconsolate Lady to be the Princess, and by the moving Complaints she had made, he cou'd think the man she meant, to be no other than his Master; but he was soon put out of doubt, for Celia coming to her, says, 'O dearest Mistress! give not way to your Distemper, we all must die, and he has only paid a Debt that Nature will exact from you and me, and all the World. Dear Princess, rise, your Father is arriv'd to see you.' With that, she help'd her up, and then he plainly saw it was Clitie , whom all this while he had heard, but was more surpriz'd, when at her parting she turn'd her head aside, and said in a low and mournful tone, 'O Darbelle, Darbelle , thou little know'st what my poor Heart endures for thee!' La Rock was so surpriz'd at these last words, and his Soul so transported with Joy, that he was once in the mind to have follow'd her, and have told her that his Master was still in Paris , and that nothing but her Commands cou'd hinder him from going where perhaps they might never see each other more; but upon better Thoughts he resolv'd first to acquaint Darbelle of this Adventure, and take farther Orders from him. I need not tell you that he saw, lik'd, and bought the Horses which he came about, and made all the haste he cou'd back again to Paris , where we left Darbelle venting his Griefs, and making exclamations against the poor Clitie ; his Heart was so acquainted now with Misery, which had so long been his Companion, that all hopes of Comfort had long since been banish'd, he expected no more to see the day with Comfort, or to pass the Night in any thing but Sorrow; every thing was matter of new trouble to him; others Felicities increas'd his Woes, and others Miseries did but add to his; and he cou'd see none so unhappy as himself, and all the Thoughts that fill'd his Mind were either of his Mistress's Disdain, or of his Journey into Florence ; and in this Condition was he when La Rock came home. Who gave him an Account of what he had done, that he had bought the Horses, and had given order for all the other necessaries that wou'd be needful in their Travel. 'It is well done (says Darbelle ) let us go, let us go, La Rock , and injoy our Solitude alone, where free from Noise of Pleasure and of State, we shall in a soft quietude yield up our latest Breaths, and free from Woman (wou'd I cou'd as well free my self from the Thoughts of 'em) live out the remnant of our miserable days; we'll fear no Falshood or Treachery amongst our selves; for surely none will there envy our sorrowful Lives, nor endeavour to shorten those few minutes Heaven will lend our Miseries. But (answers La Rock ) how if after all this, Clitie shou'd be true, and love you yet more than she ever did? Darbelle , with a scornful smile, return'd, Why dost thou talk of things impossible? La Rock answer'd him, Twas not impossible, and that he had more than probability for what he said.' He related to him all that he heard the Princess say, and how he came to the knowledge of it. Darbelle was much surpriz'd at what he said, and imagin'd if this were true, his Condition was not so bad as he suppos'd it; but Dispair had so wholly possest his Soul, that it cou'd admit no other than guess; however he resolv'd that the next day La Rock shou'd inquire further about it. Clitie's Father had made what Interest he cou'd with the King for Darbelle's pardon, but as yet had receiv'd no favourable Answer, though he hop'd to bring the business to a happy Issue. But the next day being the King's Birth-day, and a time when all the Court appear'd in Jollity, and no mourner whatsoever was suffer'd to come within its Walls, Celse hop'd that day wou'd prove more propitious to him than any hitherto, intended to set all Wheels to work, and leave no means unattempted that might make his Enterprize successful, went on purpose into the Countrey to bring the Princess up to Court to sollicite (amongst the rest) for Darbelle's Pardon, whose request he hop'd the King wou'd grant, for both the King and the Queen had a great Respect for her. Nothing but this business cou'd have prevail'd with her to leave her Solitude, and appear again at Court; for now she thought nothing she cou'd do, enough for one who had suffer'd so much for her; so that the same Night she return'd with her Father to Paris . La Rock next morning went into the City, and as near the Court as he dare venture (for he had notice that the Princess was come to Town) to get a sight of Celia , who came up the Night before with her Mistress; he had learn'd also, that the Princess intended to appear at the Solemnity, at the end of which there was to be a great Ball, where most of the Nobility wou'd be in Masquerade, and that the Court was free for all Gentlemen that were curious either to see, or partake of the Sport: He waited some time, but found there was no likelihood of speeding that day, for he saw all sorts of Tradesmen going in and out of the Princess's Apartment, Tailors, Milliners, Lace-men, Perfumers and Jewellers, all to adorn a Beauty, which without those Foyles, was more splendid and illustrious than any in the Court besides. He return'd home to Darbelle , who waited for him with incredible impatience, thinking each minute an hour, and every hour a day: how often wou'd he run to the Chamber-door (if any body came up Stairs) expecting to meet La Rock ? And as often wou'd return again with much disquiet when he found it was not he; at last the so much long'd-for minute came, in which he enter'd, he told him (in short) all he had learn'd, telling him, there was no hopes for him to get a sight of her that day, unless he wou'd once more make use of his former device of going in Masquerade. He was resolv'd to venture all hazards to see and speak to the Princess, and from her own Mouth to receive his doom. But it was grown by this time so late, that he had no time to get a Disguise made; and rather than not go, he took that which had serv'd him in one of the former Balls, 'twas that of the noble Shepherd, saying, he car'd not what became of him; and if Clitie still lov'd him (as La Rock had perswaded him) she wou'd the sooner know him, if not, it was but death at last, which wou'd only shorten his Misseries, and give him a Pass-port to the other World but some few days the sooner. La Rock , by no Arguments he cou'd use, cou'd alter his mind; however he was resolv'd to run all Dangers with him, and though Death it self should happen to share with him in this Adventure. The Night began to grow old when Darbelle and La Rock enter'd the Room where they were dancing; but a more glorious shew of Jewels, and Beauty which far out-shin'd them, was no where in the World to equal what was there; but above all, the Princess was the Load-stone which attracted the Eyes of all the Spectators; she had on a Gown so rich with Imbroidery, and so cover'd with Gemms, that one wou'd have thought wou'd have purchas'd a whole Province; she was dancing a Minua with the King, which hinder'd her from taking notice when Darbelle enter'd, and it made much to his purpose, for at the sight of her, he was strook with a sudden Fear, which for the present depriv'd him of all his Senses, and he stood just in the Door, not able to go forward, which most of those at the Ball imputed to his unwillingness to enter till the King had made an end of his Dance; by which time our Lover was ten times more amorous than ever, and all those cruel Thoughts he had before of Clitie , quite disappear'd, and Love, All-powerful Love again had got possession of his Heart; he gets up to La Rock , and speaking to him in a low voice, ' La Rock (says he) if I fall, I shall fall gloriously, and never man receiv'd his Doom in so illustrious an Assembly, let us go on, and dare the worst our Fate can do; for having seen her, if she love me not, I have no further use for life.' The Princess being seated, had time now to look about her; but, O Heavens! no sooner did she see our amorous Shepherd, but her Colour went and came, and in spite of all the Constraint she laid upon her self to hide her Surprize, she cou'd not hinder her self from falling into a Swoon; all run to her, amongst the rest Darbelle was not idle; he had her by one of her Hands, while others run for Water; the good old Celse was not least concern'd, he got her in his Arms, and bath'd her with his Tears; but after a while she began to recover, and Celse asking her what was the matter, she whisper'd in his ear, Darbelle , the unfortunate Darbelle was in the Room. He seem'd to take no notice of what she said; but having placed her again in her Seat, and left her to the care of the Ladies who were about her, he went to the King and talk'd in private with him for some time; after which there was a Command given, that all the Doors shou'd be shut, and none stir in or out. Darbelle till this time had Eyes and Thoughts employed on the Princess, and observ'd not Celse's talking with the King, but when he heard this Command, that none shou'd go in or out, he was not a little surpriz'd, who altho' he did not in the least suspect that he was the occasion of it, yet was far more astonish'd when the Princess was pretty well recover'd, he heard the King give a second Command, that all who were masqued, should pull off their Vizors, and discover who they were. Now was the time our masking Lover saw himself the Mark at which all was levell'd, he began to repent his Curiosity, and within himself to muster up all those Reproaches and Revilings he had had against Clitie : But (in short) the King's Commands must be obey'd, and all unmasqu'd but Darbelle , who was unwilling to discover himself, which drew the Eyes both of the King and all the Company upon him, who admir'd who that shou'd be, who was repugnant to the King's Orders; when Celse himself comes up to him, and takes off his Masque, crying out in a loud Voice, O Heavens! it is Darbelle . It is not to be conceiv'd the several Opinions that were in this Noble Assembly, but above all, the poor Princess who did not dare to speak, and her Heart was almost rent in sunder at this last unfortunate Disaster, she doubted not but he was now become a Prey to the King's Anger, and inveterate Malice of his Enemies; but she was more surpriz'd when the King coming to her, took her by the Hand, saying, Come hither Lady, do you know this Man? Then stepping to Darbelle , he in an angry tone, ask'd him how he dar'd appear before a King so much incens'd? To which Darbelle (falling upon his Knees, and humbly crav'd his pardon)
