 Contributary to the Joy and Satisfaicton of your Friends? You are yet too Young, and too Beautiful to make so early a Renunciation of the World, wherein the Nobleness of your Extraction and your high Merit have plac'd you in so considerable a Rank. And though the Death of Ortemon, on whom you were bestowed e're you were well fit for the Management of Man, may haply give you some occasion of Grief, yet methinks you might derive some Comfort hence, that it is now almost Three Years since you lost him. But since I had observ'd, before that Loss happen'd to you, that you were subject to the same Sadness, which I perceive you cannot even now overcome; am I not to imagine, that it is the Effect of some Passion, it being not within the reach of my Abilities, to find any other Cause of it? 'You afford me matter of much Astonishment, my dear Emerida, reply'd Asteria, that it should be so long e're you could find, that I had good reason to break off my Acquaintance with the World. I have seen and known enough of it, to raise in me a disgust of its Enjoyments, and a desire to pass away my time amidst the Charms of Solitude; which since you affect as much as I do, and would make as frequent recesses from Conversation, if your Domestick Affairs would permit, how can you desire to see me involv'd in new Dangers, out of which I fear it would not be so easie for me to extricate my self, as I have done out of those wherein I have already been concern'd, knowing my self to be subject to a sensibility of whatever makes any pretence to Merit? 'Ah! My dear Asteria, reply'd Emerida, how gladly would I leave you in that happy State, could I but believe that you were in it; but you will Pardon me, if I doubt it. I am willing to acknowledge, that when a Person enters into Solitude, without any Passion, he may continue in it with greater Tranquility and Safety, than in the greatest Cities: but if-such a one carries some weakness along with him, we find his Indisposition augmented, by the time he has there, to reflect upon it, and to humour it by those pleasing Idea's, which smite the Imagination so much the more dangerously, the more they represent the delightful Objects, the loss whereof do occasion a regret.' Asteria having continu'd a while in suspence, as reflecting on the precedent Discourse, broke it up with a deep Sigh, and then embracing Emerida, she said to her, 'Though there be not any thing I would keep secret from you, yet take it not amiss, if I tell you, that if my Soul were chargeable with the weakness of being in love, I should be so much asham'd of it, that I would endeavour to conceal it from my self; so far should I be from being willing to acknowledge it to another.' She pronounc'd these last words, after such a manner, as depriv'd Emerida of the freedom of prosecuting a Discourse, about a thing, whereof she was more satisfy'd, than she had been before; and so they continued their walk, till they came to the End of the Park. From which place, having the Prospect of the Road, they saw coming along, a Chariot, drawn by Six Horses, having one single Person in it. Asteria, not knowing who he was, took Emerida with her, and they hid themselves behind a Palizado; by which the Chariot passing, Emerida look'd through the Boughs, and having discover'd who the Man was; 'To little purpose, said she, smiling, to Asteria, do you endeavour to avoid Company; I question not but the return of Tazander, whom I see, will force you to the reception of many Visits from him, if he makes his residence, as long as I am told he will, in these parts. 'All the Visits which shall be made upon the score of Civility, reply'd Asteria, are but little trouble to me, because I have the Secret of either shortening, or diverting them; and having hardly ever seen Tazander, I do not expect he will be so liberal, as you imagine, of his Visits to me.' While they were thus discoursing, the Chariot overturn'd in the Rivulet, which issu'd, at that place, out of the Canals of Asteria's Park Those two Beauties were much startled at that Accident, especially Emerida, who, fearing that Tazander, a Person whom she number'd among her Friends, had hurt himself, entreated Asteria, to give her leave to proffer him the Entertainment of her House; but Tazander's People had so soon refitted what had been broken, that he was gone, e're Asteria had resolved what she should do. Whereupon those two amiable Persons got out of the Park into the Road, and, e're they were aware, to the place, where Tazander had overturn'd. Asteria, who went before, casting her Eye towards the Rivulet, and perceiving a piece of Scarlet Ribbon fasten'd to the Reeds, she reach'd to it, and found, that at the end of it there was a golden Case, ennamel'd with Blue, and beset all about with Diamonds. That Adventure seem'd to her so extraordinary, that she call'd Emerida, and having open'd the Case, they found within it the Picture of a very handsom Lady: 'How glad am I, says Emerida, to find at last, that Tazander is concern'd in Love, after so long a continuance without any Engagement: and whereas he had resolv'd to regulate his Amours, subserviently to his Ambition, I am apt to imagine, that, in this Beauty, he has met with the advantages of Birth and Fortune, as well as the Charms, which this painting Represents. That is to say, reply'd Asteria, that he is so well conceited of himself, as to Court a Person, of whom he is not so worthy, as he imagines. When you shall be better acquainted with him, says Emerida, you will judge more favourably of him. He is well enough stock'd, as to Wit and Worth (not to say any thing of his Extraction and Estate, whereto you are no Stranger) to pretend to the advantages, which he ought to have found, in the Person whose Picture we see. Then admiring the Painting: What an excellent Symmetry is there in this Face, continued she! How rarely well is this Mouth drawn! and what discoveries of Ingenuity are there observable in these Eyes! If I had so great a kindness for Tazander, as you have, said Asteria, this night should not pass e're I eas'd him out of the trouble he must needs be in. I am not of your Opinion, reply'd Emerida; I would have him come and look after his Picture, that he may be oblig'd to tell us the name of this great Beauty.' This Curiosity of Emerida rais'd as much in Asteria, and made her wish for a visit from Tazander, which upon any other occasion she would have been afraid of. The next day, Tazander hearing of their being there, went to visit them. After the first Civilities, they fell into discourse of his Travels, and afterwards came to the precedent days adventure; upon which Emerida saying, that it was a happy turn he had not hurt himself: 'For my part, retorted Asteria purposely, I do not think him ever the happier Man for it; it is possible he may have lost something upon that occasion, which afflicts him more than a considerable hurt would have done, especially if it were such a thing, as his Mistress's Picture, or some other present, which he had received from her. 'I cannot have made any such loss, says Tazander, as having never obtain'd any such favour, nor indeed ever desir'd it. Had I ever receiv'd a Picture, it should have been so well set up, as not to be easily lost. You are much deficient in point of sincerity, reply'd Emerida; and the amiable Person, who has presented you with hers, is much to be bemoan'd; and it must be inferr'd, that you seldom see it, when you can be a whole day, without perceiving that you have lost it. I apprehend not what you say, replies Tazander; at least, if I have lost any thing of that importance, I have not yet found that I have done so.' The two Ladies lookt upon each other, not knowing what to think of that answer, and whether they should not imagine that some other person, besides Tazander, had lately pass'd by that place, where they had found that Picture, and so that they ought not to attribute that loss to him. In fine, Emerida desirous to be fully satisfied, resum'd the Discourse, and said to him: 'If I am to believe answerably to what I have seen, I cannot doubt of your being in Love; and if I give any credit to what you say, I still find you the same insensible Person: but to deliver me out of this perplexity, see said she, whether you know this lovely Picture.' Tazander having fix'd his Eyes a while on what they shew'd him: 'Now, Ladies, said he, smiling to them, do I not repine at the disadvantagious Judgments which you pass upon me. I must acknowledge, that yesterday I lost this Picture; and there cannot be a greater argument of its not representing any Person that I am in love withal, than that it has been so long e'er I perceiv'd that I had lost it. What you say, replies Emerida, seems very strange; for it is not ordinary, that a Person of your Quality should carry about him any other Picture, than that of his Mistress. If I were the object of your Love, interrupted Asteria, I should never forgive you these two great Crimes, that of losing my Picture, and that afterwards, of denying that you lov'd me. I am afraid, Madam, reply'd Tazander, that, to take of the ill Opinion you have of me, I shall be forc'd to discover to you the Secret of a very intimate Friend. I find you extreamly at a loss, what to do, replies Emerida, and I know not which of the two extremities you will endeavour to avoid; to wit, that of leaving us to censure you so disadvantagiously, as we do, or that of revealing the Secret, wherewith you have been entrusted. Had it been committed to my trust more seriously, reply'd Tazander, I should really be at the loss you speak of; for though it be one of the greatest wishes I have to make in this world, that I may have a fair Character in your Opinion, yet I should think my self oblig'd not to tell you, what I had been intreated never to discover. But, to my good Fortune, I can as well satisfy your Curiosity, as keep my self in good repute with you.' He deliver'd these last words with a submissive smile, and then assuming a more serious look, he went on thus, 'There is not any necessity, Ladies, that I should give you an account what kind of person Eurimantes is; his Extraction, his great Endowments, and his Merit cannot be unknown to you, he being one so eminent in the Province where we now are; nay, possibly, you may have been inform'd, that there hath always been a great intimacy between him and my self; yet so it happened, that notwithstanding the Friendship he pretended to have for me, I must confess, that for the space of Four Years; that is, from the time he hastily left his own Habitation, without any one's knowing the cause of it, he was not pleas'd to communicate it, even to me, during all the Progress and Travels wherein we had been all that while jointly concern'd. This I took somewhat unkindly at his Hands, yet made not the least discovery of it to him; save only, that when he would have engag'd me in another Voyaging Progress, which would have taken up a considerable time, I could not forbear expressing my unwillingness to go any further, and my weariness of having my Foot every day in the Styrrup. Nay further, considering with my self, that I had no plausible pretence for my absence from home any longer, I us'd what Arguments I could, to induce him to think of his Domestick Concerns; but not prevailing with him, it happened, that, the night before our Separation, foul weather having forc'd us to take up our quarters at a small House, within two days Journey of this place, we both lodg'd in the same Chamber: Being got up in the morning, before our Servants were come to wait on us, I found the Key of Eurimantes's little Cabinet in the Lock, and him fast asleep in the Bed. That rais'd in me a sudden Curiosity, insomuch, that I open'd the Cabinet, and, amongst other Papers, I found two Letters, writ in a Womans hand. I read them, and in the former I found these words, without any Subscription.'  SIR, greatest Persecutor has taken his Progress out of this world, and the others are already come of our side, by a change, which Heaven it self has been pleas'd to make, in order to the rewarding of your Constancy. I hope, within few days, to assure you, that you may have access to me, without fearing that any thing shall again separate us. In the meantime I send you, what you have so often desir'd of me, my Picture, which when you look upon, I hope you will pass away, without melancholly, the remainder of an absence, which is as cruel and afflictive to me, as it is to your self, how well soever I may be assur'd, that it will soon be at an end.  'I should have had some reason, upon this discovery, to have been dis- satisfy'd at the little Confidence, which Eurimantes had in my Friendship, if, upon a Self-Examination, I had not found my self capable of being as careful in concealing a Secret of that importance. However, I would search a little further, and see whether I could find out what Lady it was, who treated my Friend with so much Favour and Familiarity; and so having felt in the Cabinet, I found the Picture, which you have return'd me. As I was going to open it, our Servants came in, and Eurimantes awak'd, which made me hastily Lock up the Cabinet, not having the leisure to put the Letters and Picture into it. But not being able, when I had the time to examine it, to find out who she was, I several times press'd Eurimantes, before I left him, to acknowledge to me that he was in Love. Which he obstinately refusing to do, I was once in a mind to convince him of it; but, upon other thoughts, I resolv'd to punish him, in not restoring to him the Picture and the Letters, till he were return'd home, which will be, as he assur'd me, within two or three Months. 'How am I troubled, says Emerida, that we cannot make any discovery of the Lady, who is so favourable to Eurimantes. I had fancy'd it a pleasure to my self, that this Picture might belong to you, and that you should no longer continue in your defiance of a Passion, which Men must be sensible of, at least once in their lives.' As Tazander was going to make some answer to Emerida, word was brought to Asteria, that two Ladies, near Relations of hers, were come to give her a visit; which for the present interrupted the Conversation. When those Ladies, and the Men, who came along with them, had made their Complements to Asteria and Emerida, and express'd their gladness at the return of Tazander, after his so long Travels, they fell into discourse about several indifferent things, and having made but a short visit, they went away, and took along with them Tazander, whose House was not far from theirs. As soon as Asteria found her self disingag'd, she went out to take a walk alone in the Park, where having staid a considerable time, Emerida thought fit to go and look for her, and found her fitting in a Green Arbour. She came so suddenly upon her, that she could perceive Asteria wiping her Eyes, after a plentiful shower of Tears. 'Have you not yet says Emerida to her, sufficiently tormented me, with the concealment of what afflicts you? 'You have but lately been inform'd, that, how precautious soever a Person may be in disguising and palliating his Sentiments, fortune does many times make it her divertisement to discover them; and that Eurimantes should have oblig'd Tazander, by a sincere acknowledgment, of his advantages, since that Confidence would have ingag'd him to keep his Secret. It matters not, reply'd Asteria, he will not have any reproach to make to himself, of his having betray'd his Mistress. Though the keeping of a Secret were necessary, in reference to Men, reply'd Emerida, the case is not the same, in reference to us. Cannot we, without any injury or offence to those who love us, express the advantagious Sentiments we have for them, since it makes for their Reputation? But, said Asteria, sighing, when we are sensible of our weakness, and endeavour to overcome it, is it not more rational to conceal it, and to spare our selves the Shame, which must accrue to us, from an acknowledgment so hard to be made?' Asteria spoke these words with so mournful a tone, and had so small a command of her Tears, that Emerida closely imbracing her, made her this reply: Ah, my dear Asteria, I have hitherto been but too Jocose in all I have said to you; but now I perceive there is a necessity of being more serious, since you have made me an over-manifest discovery of some great trouble which lies upon you, and therefore I cannot forbear begging your acknowledgment of it to me, and your imbracing of this firm persuasion; that, Loving you as I do, with the greatest tenderness imaginable, if I am so unfortunate, as not to alleviate, I will bear some part of your affliction. The more easily to induce you, not to conceal any thing from me, I dare tell you plainly, that it is in a manner out of all question, you are highly concern'd in the ingagement of Eurimantes. All cruel Emerida says Asteria to her, why do you ingage me to acknowledge Sentiments, which, though they have ever been innocent, and, to the Person who occasion'd them, unknown, yet have caus'd me so much Shame and Grief to this very day? But what you already know of them, together with the esteem I have for your Friendship, and the confidence I have of your discretion, force me, my dear Emerida, to this vlolence, in order to your satisfaction. Whereupon having wip'd her Eyes, she resum'd the Discourse, and proceeded thus. You do well remember, Emerida, that the great Friendship and Intimacy there was between Eurimantes and Artemon, gave the former a fair pretence of making frequent visits at our House. My small stock of experience, and his reservedness and wary deportment having hindred my perception of the Love he had for me, I innocently favour'd him so far, as to make it appear to him, that his advantages gave me satisfaction, and that I could not forbear grieving at any thing that troubled him. But it happen'd one time above all the rest, that being alone with me, he continu'd a good while in a kind of extasie, or dreaming unmindfulness of the Circumstances he was in. Which I much wondering at, ask'd him so often what the reason of it might be, that at last my Imprudence was punish'd, and I have this eternally to reproach my self withall, that I gave him the boldness to make a confident acknowledgment of his being in Love with me, before ever I was Artemon's: That he was upon the taking of some desperate Resolutions, when, upon his return after a small Journey he had taken, he understood that I was another Mans: That notwithstanding all his endeavours, to smother the Affection he had for the Wife of the best of his Friends, he could not overcome his Passion; and that if I had not guess'd at it, he would have kept it secret all the remainder of his life. 'Twas then, my dear Emerida, 'twas then, continu'd Asteria, that you should have seen me, or rather you should have known all the Transactions of my Soul, in order to an estimate of my Indignation against Eurimantes, and against my self I could not find any expression picquant enough, to make him apprehend the enormity of the Crime he had committed against me and I thought it not a sufficient punishment to me, that, with the greatest resentment imaginable, I reproach'd my self with my extream Imprudence. In short, after I had, by words, without any Order or Connection, eas'd my self to him of some part of my Resentment, I would not be appeas'd, notwithstanding all the assurances he gave me of his Penitence, and of his never speaking to me any more of his Passion. I told him he had too highly offended me, in that he had presum'd to tell me, that he lov'd me, and that since I ought not to pardon him such an act of confidence, even though I were uningag'd, he might well judge, that in the condition I then was, I should be less apt to do it. In fine, that very reflection, of his thinking me weak enough, not to disapprove of his Love, wrought so cruel an effect upon my Apprehensions, that I disdainfully left him, with this resolution, That I would henceforth look on him as a mortal Enemy. Yet did not this rigorous treatment hinder him from coming to visit Artemon, at which I was so highly incens'd, that I sent him word, that if he forbore not those Visits, especially when I was in the House, I would either retire to my Mothers, or haply take some other more strange Resolution. I would neither look on, nor receive any Letter from him, though importun'd thereto by a particular Friend of my own Sex, who assur'd me, that his only desire was, to take his last leave of me, and thenceforwards to expiate the fault he had committed by a voluntary banishment. And yet I must acknowledge, that when I was assur'd of his departure, without taking leave of, or acquainting any one whither he went, I became sensible, that he was not so indifferent to me, as I had imagin'd; and, notwithstanding all my Indignation and Vertue, I could not forbear fearing that he might take some desperate Resolution. 'Twas then, my dear Emerida, that you began to take notice of my melancholly, and the disturbances of my mind; and if the Sickness, and afterwards the Death of Artemon, at which I was really afflicted, had not been a great pretence of my grief, as well as a great occasion of my tears, I should have found it a hard matter, long to conceal from you what I have now at last acknowledg'd. Whether Eurimantes came not so soon to know my loss of a Husband, or was willing to give me the full time, which Civility requir'd, e'er he saw me, he return'd not till a Year after. But though I could not divert his first Civilities, yet I made a shift to avoid the Consequences of them: The tenderness I have ever had for my Reputation, suffering me not to mind any thing but the injury he had done me, I rejected all the Messages he sent, in order to any Pacification; and to give him a further assurance, that he was not to hope any thing from me, and that I was fully resolv'd to oppose my own inclination, I retir'd hither, upon other pretences, than those which I gave out to the world. Some days after, having received one of your Letters, which acquainted me, that you were coming to visit me, I went into the great Walk of the Park, but was much surpriz'd, to meet Eurimantes there. At which, as if I had seen the greatest of my Enemies, I turn'd short, and ask'd why he came to disturb my quiet. I have no such design, Madam, said he, laying hold of my Garment, and casting himself at my Feet, and the boldness I take, to appear before you, is only to take my last leave of you. I was in some hope, upon my return, that, since you were at your own disposal, I should induce you to approve of a Passion, which is still the same, in defiance of all your scorn; but in regard you condemn it, and that it is not in my Power to smother it, I am going to deprive my self of your sight henceforth, with this Protestation, that no other Beauty shall ever move this heart, which has had the confidence to discover to you, what it suffers for your sake. 'I was so incens'd at this discourse, that not knowing whether I should make Eurimantes any answer, or get away from him, he was yet speaking when, to my happiness, your Coach appear'd at the entrance of the Walk, which oblig'd him to get into the Wood, and to give me time to compose my Countenance, so that there was no great appearance of the trouble I was in. Yet could I not do it so well, but that you perceiv'd somewhat, which made me tell you that I was not very well. 'I have ever since pass'd away my time in this pleasant Wilderness, without any News from Eurimantes; and here I now find, to my Confusion, that it was an extravagance in me, to be in a continual fear, lest some misfortune might happen to him in his Travels: and to give you a full account of my weakness, I have flatter'd my self many times, that his Constancy would induce me to pardon him. But now that I have so many Arguments of his Fickleness, I should never admit of any Consolation, if he come to know what has pass'd in my Soul, in reference to him, and that it will be less trouble to me to forget him, than it has been to keep his concern undiscovered. 'You give me a great deal of satisfaction, says Emerida, to find you in that Sentiment; and indeed his Inconstancy justly deserves your Contempt, and the Interest of your Quiet and Reputation, must raise in you, at least, an indifference for a Man, who has made himself unworthy of your Affection.' Which discourse she clos'd with all the Reasons and Arguments which she thought fit, to confirm her Friend in so rational a Resolution. Though Asteria made the same Reflections, yet she had not the command of her heart, as absolutely as she would have had. She sometimes flatter'd her self, that Eurimantes lov'd no other than her self, since he could be a whole day e're he perceiv'd that he had lost the Picture; then she fancied that he had receiv'd it from some other person, or found it. But after all, finding no likelihood it should be as she thought, she would say to her self, Let us not deceive our selves, Eurimantes is unconstant; I ought to forget him, and to be reveng'd on his fickleness. To fortifie her self in that Resolution, she intreated Emerida to be assistant to her, in the execution of it. But they would have taken pains to little purpose, if, about two days after, Tazander had not shewn her a Letter which he had receiv'd from his Friend, wherein he express'd the disquiet he was in for the Picture, and importun'd him, by all the Obligations of their Friendship, to send it him back, in case he had found it, affirming that he had seen it in the Cabinet, the day before they parted. 'You see, Ladies, said Tazander, that Eurimantes is in great perplexity; and yet he deserves for his punishment, that I should not restore this Picture, till his return, and after he has acquainted me who that beautiful person is, whom it represents.' Asteria, confirm'd by the Letter of Eurimantes, in the Contempt he had for her, was so highly incens'd against him, that fearing then the sight of him, more than she had wish'd it before; 'Send him back his Picture, said she, with a greater sally of passion than she could master, and let him keep to himself a Secret, wherein we do not concern our selves.' Emerida being of the same opinion with Asteria, Tazander did as they would have him, and writ a Letter to Eurimantes, wherein he exercis'd his raillery upon his Love- ingagement, adding, that he would never pardon him, if he did not acquaint him with the Name of that Beauty, who was so favourable to him, that so he might repair the injury he had done their Friendship, in disguising his Secret so long. Eurimantes made no answer to that Letter, and Tazander receiv'd an account, that, assoon as he had receiv'd the Picture and the two Letters, he took Post, and was gone no body knew whither. This procedure, which would have vex'd Asteria at another time, caus'd her a kind of joy, in that she had a new motive not to love Eurimantes any longer. From that very day she intreated Emerida, never to mention him to her; and set her mind so far from any thought of him, that, in order to an absolute oblivion of him, she began to divert her self, more than she had done in a long time before; and knowing that the company and conversation of Tazander, whom she found to be a very ingenious and divertive person, might contribute much to the carrying on of her design, she permitted him to make more frequent visits than he was wont to do, at the beginning of their acquaintance. In those familiar Conversations, whereto Emerida's company did not a little contribute, she was much taken with Tazander, who on the other side, finding in her a great Talent of discernment, and an excellent good nature, was easily induc'd to discover to her whatever pass'd in his Soul, or related to his Affairs. A comportment so obliging did insensibly engage Asteria, to demean her self with the same freedom towards him; and if she had not appear'd to Tazander of an Humour extreamly opposite to Love, he might have been inclinable enough to entertain that Passion for her. That misapprehension not permitting him to harbour any Thoughts, but such as were confin'd within the limits of respect, she kept off all the other Sentiments of his Heart at such a distance, that he contented himself with the pure Correspondence of Friendship towards Asteria. But such was the misfortune of that fair Lady, that both she her self, and Emerida too, who, upon that score, had often droll'd with the other, were of Opinion, that Tazander was really in Love with her, and that his taciturnity was a great Argument of his Affection. That perswasion gave her some disquiet at first, out of a fear of finding in Tazander the inconstancy of Eurimantes. She thereupon was content to admit of his Love, yet without feeling in her self any disposition to answer that Love. But whether her former tenderness had dispos'd her Heart to a second, or that Tazander was more capable of being lov'd, then Eurimantes had been, it was not long e're she knew that her Heart was not insensible of his Applications. Nay, she sometimes wish'd, that he would presume to acquaint her with his Affection; and yet not being absolutely prepossess'd with that new Passion, assoon as Tazander had said to her, that he had a business of the greatest importance in the World to communicate to her, she was much startled at it, and pretended some pressing Affair, purposely to put off the audience which she must otherwise have given him. In the mean time, she was attack'd by a diversity of apprehensions; her Modesty made her blush at the very thought of that Declaration, and her Reason made her fear Consequences yet more troublesome than any she had found in the Love of Eurimantes. If Tazander had not one day met her all alone in her Park, she would not so soon have resolv'd to hear what he had to say to her. And then, not being able any longer to avoid him, she gave the attention he desired, and heard him deliver his Mind to her, to this effect. 'I find in my self, Madam, so great a deference for your Sentiments, that I am unwilling to conclude any thing upon what is propos'd to me, without first consulting you.' Asteria imagining, by these words, that he intended to speak of some thing quite different from what she was afraid of, took courage, and at the same time was troubled, that he made not his advantage of that opportunity, to make a discovery of his Love to her. With these reflections, she suffered Tazander to proceed in his Discourse, in these Terms. 'Be pleas'd therefore, Madam, to give me your advice, in the most important Concern of my Life. There is a proposal made for my intermarriage with a Lady of very great Quality, and a vast Fortune.' A Discourse so little expected, at a time when Asteria might, with so much probability, have thought that she only was possess'd of Tazander's Heart, coming to undeceive her to her shame, her Mind became immediately the Stage of whatever could be most Afflictive and Cruel, in an emergency so surprizing. And if her Recollection and her Reason had not assisted her to make greater efforts than any she had made in all her Life, to conceal what pass'd in her Soul, she would have discover'd it to Tazander. But she would give him no further audience, when he had once told her, that the Name of that fair one, of whom they had spoken to him, was Eurimonda, and that she knew her extraction and Family. Asteria, during this Discourse, had the leisure to recover her self out of the disorder she was in, and to tell Tazander, that an Affair of that importance requir'd some time to examine it. Tazander, contenting himself with that Answer, after he had made another Protestation, that he rely'd more upon her, than upon all the rest of his Friends, took his leave of her, leaving her a new Cause of Affliction, when she consider'd, that he who had so great an esteem, had nothing of Love for her, and giving her withal some matter of Astonishment, that she having as great an Estate, and as much Beauty as Eurimonda, could yet affect a Man, who was inclin'd to engage himself elsewhere, and one, who, for so long time, had had an indifference for her. The thought of the injustice which Tazander did her, in causing her so great an Affliction, rais'd in her an Indignation against him, and being disgusted to the highest degree, she several times said to her self, I must slight him, as he slights me, and there must be nothing left in my Heart, as to his Concern, but the pure regret, that I ever had any esteem for him. When she had taken this Resolution, she thought her self so well fortify'd in it, as that she should never change it; and she was extreamly satisfi'd, that she had so great a Command of her Inclinations: And yet as soon as ever Tazander came into her sight, she could not by any means consent, that Eurimonda should have him. But afterwards, coming to understand, that his Applications for that Marriage were not over-earnest, she had this Consolation, that if Tazander had but little Love for her, he seem'd to have much less for another. This reflection having wrought some tranquility in her mind, she endeavour'd to smother the affection she had for him, by avoiding to see him so often. However, she could not forbear admitting him into an Assignation, which Emerida, and some others of her Friends, had appointed at her House, in order to their going all together to visit her Mother, who was come to one of her Houses not far thence. Emanfrida (so was that Lady call'd) entertain'd them with great joy and Civility. She had in her Company a young Lady, who seem'd to be hardly Fourteen Years of Age. Tazander, in a manner dazled at the transcendency of her Beauty, was desirous to try, whether her Wit were answerable to the Charms of her Features, and so took occasion to give her his hand, as they were going to take a walk in the pleasant Gardens of Emanfrida, and soon found, that all was prodigious in that admirable Person. Her resemblance was so great to Asteria, that it made him guess she was very nearly related to her; but he was much the more surpriz'd, when, after they were got into an Arbour, he understood that she was her Daughter. 'Nay, Madam, said he, addressing himself to Emanfrida, say rather that she is her Sister.' Whereupon Asteria, assuming the Discourse, said to him, by a Sentiment which made her blush, 'I do not think, that it is either upon the score of my Beauty, or my Youth, you should so much question my being Mother to Eliciana (so was that Young Lady call'd) at least my Friends look upon me, as one that has renounc'd those two advantages. Methinks it is not a thing to be endur'd, says Emerida, smiling, that for this only Reason, that you had a Daughter at thirteen, and that the Daughter is much about the same Age, you should rank your self amongst those Women who imagine Age coming upon them. I am not inferiour to you, as to Years, and yet I am accounted a Young Woman.' These words gave the whole Company occasion to speak advantageously of Asteria, and her Daughter, so that they had both of them reason to be well satisfi'd therewith. Tazander had his thoughts so taken up with the Beauty of Eliciana, that he did not concern himself much in the Conversation; by which demeanour Asteria made a full Discovery, that she was not to hope that he would ever have any Affection for her; and thereupon, to shun the occasions of seeing him, and that he might become by degrees more and more indifferent to her, she stay'd with her Mother, suffering those who had accompany'd her thither to depart. During her abode there, she us'd all the endeavours imaginable, to smother the Sentiments of tenderness which she had for Tazander. Whenever she thought her self Mistress of them, the satisfaction and serenity of her mind were visible in her Countenance, and when she found them reviving, and gaining ground upon her, she fell into an extream pensiveness and disquiet of mind. During this distraction of thoughts, over which she would have the Victory, whatever it cost her, she took the strangest Resolution that haply ever was heard of: And for the better succeeding of it, she sent to entreat Emerida to come to her, and craftily to engage Tazander to accompany her. Emerida acquitted her self of the charge impos'd upon her, and Tazander was very glad of that opportunity of visiting Eliciana, and telling Asteria, that his Friends press'd him to make a speedy answer, upon the Marriage they propos'd to him, that they might afterwards enter into Discourses with the Relations of Eurimonda. Assoon as he was come to Emanfrida's House, and had the Convenience of Discoursing privately with Asteria, he ask'd her, whether she had thought of him. 'I have, said she to him, and I will be so bold as to tell you, that it is more to your advantage, not to make any allyance, but within the Province where you now are. 'I have so great a complyance for your Advertisements, Madam, ( reply'd Tazander) that I am resolv'd to follow them. Nay, I am so far fixt in that Resolution, continued he, that I will never engage my self, but with your Approbation.' These words put Asteria to a change of Colour, and then making an effort to recover her self out of the disturbance she was in, she said to him, 'As to that point, Emerida will give you greater satisfaction, than I can; but I should think my self not much oblig'd, if you did that out of pure complaisance, which ought not to be done, but by the Dictate of Reason, or Inclination.' She could not forbear closing these words without a sigh, though she endeavour'd to divert it; and so left him, out of a fear he might make some Discovery of what she pretended to conceal from him as long as she liv'd. Tazander went immediately to look for Emerida, who was then gone out to take a Walk, and having not found her, the revery he was in brought him insensibly to a remote and a private place, where he sate down by a Fountain- side, reflecting on what Asteria had said to him, yet without any hope, or so much as a wish, that Emerida would speak to him of Eliciana, for whom he felt in himself something which might be call'd Love. In the mean time, Emerida having been inform'd, that he sought her, came to the place where he was, and began to be smart upon her finding him in so Melancholy a Posture. 'I was thinking, Madam, said he, on what you are to tell me from the Lady Asteria. ' Emerida made answer, that she would satisfie him before the day were over. Whereupon she chang'd the Discourse, examining in her Thoughts, how she should make a Discovery to him of the Person whom Asteria desir'd that he would prefer before Eurimonda. Some time after, Asteria and Eliciana casually passing into another Walk, not far from them, yet so as that they did not perceive them, Tazander being still full of the same thought, said to Emerida, 'See, Madam, there go two transcendent Persons, who cannot be too much admir'd.' Emerida thinking that occasion favourable to her design, made him this answer, smiling, 'What, your meaning seems to be, that you are so highly pleas'd with both, that I conceive, you would be much at a loss which to take, if you had your choice of them. I am so far unworthy of Asteria, reply'd Tazander, that I never durst transgress the limits of that profound Veneration which I owe her. If your Respects be so great for the Mother, says Emerida, can you not find in your Heart to have some tenderness for the Daughter? I am unwilling, reply'd Tazander, to make you acquainted with all that I feel for her sake, since I should express Sentiments, which it were requisite that I should smother, or such as I should see condemn'd, assoon as I should make a Discovery of them. You are deficient, in point of confidence, reply'd Emerida, and that you may assume as much as you stand in need of, I am to tell you, that you may pretend to Eliciana, and never fear that Asteria will propose any other to you. 'The happiness you put me in hopes of is so great, Madam, said Tazander, over-joy'd at what had been said to him, that, if I were not assur'd of your being one of my best Friends, I could not credit your words: However, you will give me leave, not to be absolutely convinc'd of it, till such time as I shall have receiv'd the assurance thereof from her own Mouth, who has the disposal of a Heart, which I acknowledge my self uncapable and unworthy to gain.' He thereupon left Emerida, and went to look for Asteria, taking the same way, which she and Eliciana had gone before: And having understood, that she was retir'd all alone to her Chamber, he made all the haste he could thither, and said to her, 'Can I, Madam, without temerity, pretend to the happiness which Emerida puts me in hopes of? Or will my submissive Prayers be sufficient, to induce you, to admit of the Services which I have vow'd to Eliciana? ' These words were uttered with so many Discoveries of Passion, that Asteria easily comprehended, what Sentiments Tazander had for her Daughter; whereto she continuing a good while without making any Answer, 'What, Madam, continued Tazander, do you repent you of the kindnesses you were pleas'd to have for me, or am I so unhappy, as to be displeasing to Eliciana? ' Asteria, doing her self a great violence, made him this answer, 'You injure Eliciana, in thinking, that she can have any Sentiments inconsistent with that of obeying me, and in doubting, whether she knows not, as well as my self, the advantage it will be to her, if she have the honour to be yours.' Tazander, transported with joy at those words, cast himself at Asteria's feet, in acknowledgment of the favours she did him, while Asteria felt a secret grief, not to find him in that posture, as she could have wish'd, in reverence to her self. And so, to close up a Conversation, which gave her some disturbance, she told him, that she was going to acquaint Emanfrida with that affair, not questioning but that she would approve of it. She thereupon left Tazander, and, desirous to put a speedy Period to a thing which she thought necessary, in order to the suppressing of her Passion, she prevail'd with her Mother, that Eliciana should be removed from her, and they both of them acquainted that young Beauty, that she was to look upon Tazander, as the Person for whom she was design'd. Though Eliciana seem'd to be very much inclin'd to obey her Mother, yet would her Tears have betray'd her, if Asteria had not attributed them to the regret it was to her, to part with Emanfrida, who had brought her up from her Childhood. So that she had an absolute freedom to sigh, and yet none knew the true Cause of it. Oxaris, a young Lord, of a very vast Estate, had had a sight of her at Emanfrida's House, whither he frequently came, under pretence of the Friendship and Allyance there was between their Families. He had had a Love for her, from her infancy, and having first discover'd it by his Services, and afterwards by his words, he was so happy as to please her, yet all was so closely carried on, that the Love of Oxaris; and Tenderness of Eliciana were perceived but by very few Persons. This unhappy fair one, finding her self then design'd for another, could not forbear extreamly grieving thereat; she sigh'd, she wept, she pray'd, that the Heavens would change the Will of Asteria, yet all without making any Discovery of the repugnance she had to follow it. But at last the Tenderness of her Age, and the Law she had impos'd on her self to do what in Duty she ought, induc'd her to obey, whatever might be the Consequence of it. So that, some few days after, she was not Discontented at all, when Asteria return'd with her Mother, to the City, where they some time pass'd over the Winter, and took Eliciana along with her, intending, in a short time, to consummate her Marriage with Tazander. It was discours'd in so many places, and not without some Astonishment, of Tazander's being in Love with Eliciana, after it had been the common report, that he had made his Applications only to Asteria, that Oxaris came to hear of it. He at first broke forth into complaints at the fickleness of Eliciana, and then it came into his Thoughts, that he must either take away the Life of his Rival, or fall by his hands. But the fear of incensing her, whom he could not forbear Loving, and the hope of preventing his Misfortune, made him defer these violent Courses, and to endeavour to find out some expedient, to speak with her privately. He found it a hard matter to get that opportunity; but it happening one day, that he met her at Emerida's House, and he thus whisper'd to her, 'Ought I not to look on all those as Enemies, who have given me the Cruel Tidings, of your being design'd for Tazander? And since you know, that that Misfortune would be insupportable to me, can you your self contribute to the causing of it. Know then, Madam, continued he, that the mortal disturbance, which some have rais'd in my Soul, cannot be appeas'd, otherwise than by an assurance from your self, that you will never consent to promote my despair, by that change. Be pleas'd to remember, that Justice, as well as your own kindness, obliges you thereto, since you have not found, in my Passion, any thing which might inspire you with Sentiments so inhumane. I know not, replyed Eliciana, sighing, whether I ought to hearken to you, or not, much less to be perswaded, whether I should do as you say; but this I well know, that I am oblig'd, rather to comply with my duty, than my inclination, that thence proceeded the permission I gave you to Love me, that nothing in the World, though I were to dye of Grief, shall be able to make me oppose the design which Asteria has to dispose of me. Ah! Madam, how indifferent have I been to you, replyed Oxaris, wholly transported with Amazement, and how dear is Tazander to you! if we may Credit this easy disposition which you have to obey Asteria. That argue you know not what Transactions then are in my Soul, interrupted Eliciana and that you may the better judge of them, I give you my permission, to Act your self, and to make what interest you can, with my Mother; but I must give you this assurance withal, that if you cannot obtain any thing of her, I shall never oppose her Will, but submit to whatever she shall require of me.' Eliciana perceiving that they were observ'd, and that Oxaris was going to make some reply, made up towards the Company, after she had said thus to him; I have made so great a discovery to you, of both my weakness and resolution, you never ought to expect any more. Oxaris being somewhat comforted, to find in Eliciana so much kindness, as to wish that he might be happy, employ'd all the Interest he had with the Friends and Relations of Asteria, to gain her Consent, that he might have Eliciana. Asteria, who had, as we said before, some particulal Reasons to wish that she might be Tazander's, excus'd her self upon this allegation, that, before Oxaris had made any discovery of his Love to her Daughter, she had engag'd her word to another. Oxaris, finding he could not prevail that way, endeavour'd to oblige Eliciana, to oppose what was exacted from her by Asteria. But Eliciana, perceiving that her Mother persisted in her former Resolution, chose rather to expose her self to whatever a Heart is capable of enduring when they would force it to surmount a great Passion, than to disobey her, and imposing on her self a necessity, upon the Consideration of her duty, she would not see Oxaris any more, nor receive any of his Letters, though it was impossible for him to forget her, or to have only an indifference for her concern. Oxaris could not have any access to Eliciana, but what he got by stratagem, and artifice, and so he made his advantage of the freedom they take in masquerading, at Carnival Time, and came disguis'd to Asteria's, where the Ball then was, being got near Eliciana, he spoke to her of his Passion, as if it had been to one of his Friends. Eliciana made answer, with so much indifference, that, discovering himself to her, he could not forbear speaking to her thus. 'I must then dye, Madam, or not Love you any longer; have you consider'd, that if I embrace the former, you will one day repent you, when too late, that you did oblige me thereto; and are you yet ignorant, that nothing can diminish the Passion I have for you? Ah! Madam, continued he, finding that she made no answer, what a Cruel thing is it, after I had been the first who had Sacrific'd his Heart to you, after I had been countenanc'd in my Passion, and had resolv'd ever to be the same, what change soever there might happen of your side, what a Cruel thing is it, I say, to find my self cast out, and possibly hated, whilst a Rival insolently Triumphs over my misfortune.' Eliciana being vext that Oxaris should entertain her, and make such a Discovery of his Passion, and fearing withal that he might be known; 'You complain, said she to him, without any cause; I have ever had a great Friendship for you, but give me leave to do my duty, and force me not to wish something worse than your indifference. How, Madam, reply'd Oxaris, can you desire what you speak of? As I ought to do it, replyed she, so I can do it.' These last words were pronounc'd after such a manner, that they pierced the very Soul of Oxaris, who immediately thereupon left the Ball in order to his return to his own Habitation, there to resign himself up to Despair: But unfortunately it happen'd, that he met Tazander's Coach, in which there was only one Person, who had a Vizard on. That unexpected Rencounter giving him a Prospect of all his Misfortune, upon a surmise that his Rival was belov'd, and going to be happy, he grew so enrag'd, that, leaping out of his Coach with his Sword drawn, he stopp'd that of his Enemy, and forc'd that Vizarded Person to fight him, by the light of their Torches. The Combat ended with a wound, which Oxaris receiv'd in the left hand, and a pass which he made through the Body of his Adversary, upon which he fell down weltring in his own Blood. Many Persons, who came in too late to separate them, endeavour'd to relieve the wounded Person, while Oxaris, having got into his Coach, was conducted to a Friend's, named Sezamis, where being arriv'd, he had hardly the Patience to suffer himself to be dress'd, e're he writ to Eliciana, and made Sezamis promise him, that, the next Morning, he should carry his Letter to her, and endeavour to perswade her, that she ought to pardon that just fally of his discontent. He pass'd away the Night between hope and fear, and in the Morning, it was no hard matter for Sazamis, as being a Person related to Asteria, to see Eliciana, and to deliver Oxaris's Letter, wherein she found these words.  Combat, which hath happen'd between Tazander and my self, you will be apt to condemn me. But if you consider, that having so lately found in you such unsufferable marks of your indifference, you will, no doubt, judge, that I could not forbear attacking a Rival, who was coming to receive from you all the kindnesses which you were sometime pleas'd to promise me, and which I should never endure to be communicated to others. My Life and my Death, depending on the Sentiments you shall have for this Action, I am in expectation, with an inexpressible disquiet, Madam, what Sentence will you pass, either for, or against the unfortunate. OXARIS.  Assoon as Eliciana had read it, Sezamis gave her a short account of the Combat, wherein Oxaris had been engag'd; and though he endeavour'd to excuse it upon the impossibility of avoiding that Misfortune, yet she seem'd to be extreamly incens'd thereat, and look'd upon that Action as a mark of great Contempt, rather than of an excessive Love. From that Sentiment, she pass'd to another, of Compassion for the Misfortune of Tazander, and bemoan'd him with such expressions, as would have cast Oxaris into despair, if he had heard them. Sezamis much afflicted that he had succeeded so ill in what he had undertaken, was making all the fruitless efforts he could, to appease the indignation of Eliciana, when they were both infinitely surpriz'd to see Tazander coming into the Room, along with Asteria. Sezamis knew not what to think of that Adventure, which he took for a piece of enchantment; and Eliciana, imagining that Oxaris had but a trick upon her, was so highly incens'd against him, that after Tazander had saluted her, and was fallen into Discourse with Asteria at one of the Windows, she said to Sezamis, 'I know not who has put the greater affront upon me, you, or your Friend, in conspiring together to give me an account of the death of a Person, who, for many Reasons, ought to be henceforth the more dear to me; and to make me believe, that he was mortally wounded by him, whom my duty forbids me to look upon, as I had done at the beginning. Ah! Sezamis, continu'd she, this does infinitely exasperate me, and 'tis such an injury as I shall never forget.' Sezamis Swore, that he was not concern'd in the imposture, related to her what he knew of his Friend; blam'd him, and threatned to be reveng'd on him, for having engag'd him to be the Messenger of that false intelligence. With that Resolution, was he disposing himself for his return home, but Asteria stopped him, asking whether he had not bemoan'd Tazander, who had been given over for a dead Man all that Night? Sezamis, imagining that Asteria had overheard the discourse between him and Eliciana, took these words for a piece of Raillery, which made him the more angry with Oxaris, when Tazander assur'd him, that what Asteria said to him was true, and that some Enemy, whom he knew not, having taken Perimus (who, being unwilling to be known, had borrow'd his Coach) for him, had mortally wounded him. ''Tis possible, says Asteria, that he who attack'd Perimus, knew him through his Vizard, and never thought of you. I have some ground to believe it, Madam, replyed Tazander, who was yet ignorant that Oxaris was his Rival; for I do not think, that I ever injur'd any Man, so as to oblige him to set upon me in the night time.' While he was discoursing upon this adventure with Asteria, Sezamis came up close to Eliciana, 'Well, Madam, whisper'd he to her, you see Oxaris is vindicated, and I am no longer incens'd against him; will not you do the like, and tell me something, which may recover him out of the cruel despair, wherein he is now envolv'd? I know not, replyed Eliciana, with a Countenance which did not argue any thing more of favour towards him, I know not, whether he had not less displeas'd me, in pretending there had been such a Combat, that so he might penetrate into my Sentiments upon it, than in really designing to kill Tazander. Howe're it were, he should have consider'd, that he might have displeas'd me, and it behoves me, to let him know, that I ought not to pardon him.' Sezamis not being able to appease her, with all the Arguments he could use, took his leave, and brought these unwelcome tidings to his Friend, who having sent him back again, the same day to Eliciana, and receiving from her no other returns, than those of her continu'd indignation, resolv'd to depart out of the Province, partly upon the score of despair, partly upon the Sollicitation of his Friends, who, though there were fair hopes of the recovery of Perintus, were yet fearful of the just severity of the Laws. Eliciana was not so highly incens'd against him, but that it was a sensible Affliction to her, to think of his absence, out of a reflection, that, in a short time, she should be Sacrific'd to the Passion of Tazander. For though she had resolv'd to obey her Mother, yet she thought it so difficult a matter to make Oxaris an absolute Exile from her Heart, that she concluded, her Misfortune would be of an equal extent with her Life. But she was not so near that Misfortune, as she was afraid. Asteria, not being able any longer, without a piercing Affliction, to see, that Tazander met with, in Eliciana, those attractions, which he had not found in her self, began to be more unwilling, than ever, to resign him over to another; and whereas, at first, she would not have bestow'd him on Eliciana, but out of a design, to take him away from Eurimonda, as soon as she found, that she was going to lose him, she look'd upon her Daughter, as the Person who depriv'd her of that Lover. Her Passion gaining the Supremacy over her Reason, she follow'd the suggestions of it, and endeavour'd, by all the Artifices she could think of, to make a Rupture of that Correspondency of Affections, which she her self had produc'd between Tazander and Eliciana. Upon that prospect of her concerns, she would perswade Tazander, that Eliciana was of a light and fickle humour, and not over-forward to make acknowledgments of the kindnesses which were done her. That Artifice having not succeeded, she began to commend very highly another Daughter, whom she had brought up in a Religious House, from which place she sent for her, out of a design to have her Courted by Tazander, thinking it her happiness, to take him away from Eliciana, whom she already look'd upon as her Rival. 'It was ever my opinion, said she to Tazander, the first time she presented to him her second Daughter, that Elamira would in time be a most beatuiful Person, but now that it is above a year since I have had a sight of her, I find, that, when she shall have attain'd that period of years, and perfection, which her Sister has, she will be the greater Beauty, and with this additional advantage, that she is of a greater sweetness of Nature, of an humour more grateful and obliging, and of a disposition which is more insinuating, and more capable of pleasing.' These Commendations would not have disgusted Tazander, if they had not given Elamira the precedency before her Sister: Accordingly, that Lover could not be so complyant, as to endure so great an injustice, nor forbear to make her an answer suitably to his own Sentiments. It must needs, Madam, said he to her, argue an extraordinary prejudgment in any one, not to see, that Eliciana, in the most negligent Mode, will always outshine Elamira, though set out with all the advantage of Art and Dressing. These words were spoken loud enough, to be heard by some Ladies, who were near Asteria, and who having confirm'd the opinion of Tazander, she thought it no prudence to contradict them, and so waited for another opportunity, to take off the Love which Tazander had for Eliciana. I freely pardon you, said she to him another day, that being prepossess'd, as you were, you could not perceive the difference there is between Eliciana and Elamira; but I should reproach my self with it, as a great miscarriage, as long as I live, if having that Esteem for you, which I have, I had not in a manner forc'd you to be more happy with Elamira, than you could ever be with her Sister, whom I know better than you do; And to assure you, continu'd she, that I seek only your Good and Welfare, I promise you far greater advantages with Elamira, than ever you should have had with her Elder Sister. And whereas your Love to Eliciana was grounded upon my engaging you thereto, the change of your Affections proceeding also from me, you cannot be reproach'd with Inconstancy. Tazander, who apprehended not upon what Motives Asteria was so pressing in this Concern, being displeas'd that she should do so much Injustice to Eliciana, and that she should pretend to gain him by Interest, acquainted her in few words, that he was not only uncapable of being mov'd by so disallowable an overture, but also, that he would prefer Eliciana, without any thing of Fortune, before the richest Heiress of the Kingdom. Asteria was too perspicacious, not to be convinc'd that she was not to hope any thing by that way. And therefore, to gain, by Flattery, the Soveraignty of a Heart, which her other Artifices had not been able to subdue; O Tazander! Cry'd she, after she had continu'd a while in silence, O generous Tazander! How much do I admire your constancy! How few Men are there in the World who have so great a Portion of that precious Virtue. And how unjust would Heaven seem to be, if it bestows not on her, whom it has design'd for you, the same Sentiments, and the same knowledge, which I have of your Merit. She thereupon entertain'd him with an elaborate Representation of the happiness, and unhappiness of Marriages, adding, that a Man cannot be happy, if a Woman has not ingenuity enough, to know his Merit, and if she does not esteem it, as she should do; since, without that, The Love, said she, which is at first observable in that mutual engagement, is weakned by degrees, dwindles into indifference, and most commonly degenerates into aversion. She entertain'd him with several other things of the like kind, all which were design'd, craftily to beget in him an apprehension, that Eliciana was not capable of having all those Sentiments. Though all these Arguments were not so prevalent, as to convince Tazander, yet the fear of incensing Asteria, by too open an opposition of her, and making her his Enemy, check'd him into a forbearance of contradicting her any longer. Whereupon Asteria, thinking she had shaken him, hop'd, upon another assault, to gain the Post she desir'd. Answerable to that Consideration, she began to have a greater Complaisance for him, than she had yet had, to entertain him more frequently, and for longer time than ordinary, and cunningly to keep both her Daughters from speaking to him, at least where Civility did not dispense with it. Nay, she writ to him several obliging things, under several pretences. But though her Passion inclin'd her, to make a more open Discovery to him of what she felt for his sake, yet her disdainful humour, and her Virtue diverted her from following its advice. And so not finding Tazander dispos'd to Love her, as she had promis'd her self, she was so highly disquieted thereat, that she continually made secret reproaches of it to her self, and charg'd her own Heart with weakness and Cowardise. In fine, ready to burst with regret and shame, she could hardly endure her self; and considering, with a certain indignation, him who was the cause of her distraction, yet had not the same Sentiments for her, which she had for him, she began to look on him, as the Enemy of her quiet and happiness, and so came gradually to hate him. Whereupon, being equally possess'd by those two most enrag'd Passions, she determin'd, never to consent to Tazander's Marriage with Eliciana, but to defer it from time to time, upon divers pretences. According to these Measures she manag'd her Affairs, and indeed it happen'd, at that time, that she had a very plausible pretence, by the Sickness of Emanfrida, whom, before her Death, she perswaded, to settle all her Estate immediately upon her self, having previously represented it to her, that it was the surest expedient, to keep her Daughters in a constant observance of the duty they ought her. Tazander, having forborn all applications, during all the time that Asteria was in Mourning for the Death of her Mother, entreated her now to make good her word, and meeting only with affected delays, he sollicited the Friends and Relations of Eliciana, to bring things to a conclusion. Asteria, being press'd of all sides, took the opportunity of a discourse, which had divided the Company, to oppose the opinion of Tazander, and though he maintain'd it with as much civility, as he ought to have done, yet she seem'd to be offended at his Answers, was as Satyrical upon him, as possibly she could, and designing a Rupture with him, she made as if she took his excuses for a new injury. She afterwards gave it out every where, that she had reason to complain of his want of Complaisance, and his incivility, and sent him a Message, to desire him to forbear seeing her any more. On the other side, Tazander omitted not any thing, which might conduce either to the appeasing of her, or making their common Friends sensible of the injustice of Asteria's procedure. He was particularly advis'd by Emerida, to forbear exasperating a mind, which was to be gain'd by patience. That remedy he thought so tedious, that it was insupportable to him, and a while after, he thought it quite fruitless, when Eliciana would admit of no discourse with him, or receive any of his Letters excusing, her self, upon the Prohibition which her Mother had impos'd upon her to do so. Though that Beautiful Maiden, did without any repugnance obey upon that occasion, yet had she not the same deference to the Will of her Mother, when she spoke of bestowing her upon another; nay, she earnestly intreated her, to pardon her, if she could not so soon change the Sentiments wherewith she her self had inspir'd her. Asteria found that excuse too just for her to speak to her any more of it; and Eliciana, not finding her self any longer press'd by her Mother, flatter'd her self, that in some time Oxaris would return, and might vindicate himself to her. With that Reflection would she say to her self, 'I have given sufficient Testimonies of my Obedience; I may be allow'd henceforward to follow my Inclination, since Asteria will not any longer force it.' She was thus flattering her self, when she saw Tazander coming into the Room, at which sight, being discompos'd and troubled, she thus scornfully entertain'd him; 'What, has Asteria permitted you to visit me? No, Madam, reply'd he, I come to acquaint you with the insufferable condition wherewith her Aversion and your Indifference have reduc'd me. I have been troubled at it, said she to him, but you are too Rational a Person to desire, that I should oppose her Will, or that I should not submit to her Commands without ever examining the Justice thereof.' Tazander finding in this Discourse a much greater Indifference than he had expected, was so disturb'd, that he continu'd a good while e're he could make any answer. And Eliciana, who though she had said enough to disabuse him, was also silent, when upon Asteria's coming in to them, that unfortunate Lover, not giving her the time to express the Indignation she might conceive at his being with her Daughter, cast himself at her Feet, and with an intermixture of sighs, address'd himself to her in this Discourse: 'Do you come to my Relief, Madam, said he to her, or do you come to give me the last shove into Despair? If my Misfortune has been such, as that I have displeas'd you against my Will, punish me, Madam, by any other way than that of depriving me of the Glory of being Eliciana's: And do you, adorable Eliciana, said he, turning to her, do you, who know the Grandeur and Sincerity of my Passion, appease the Heart of Asteria; one word of yours can make her comprehend she owes that which she has rais'd in me, and will prevent my taking of fatal Resolutions, if I lose the hope of being yours.' While Tazander was speaking this, Asteria felt her Indignation increasing against him, by the marks he gave of his Love to Eliciana; so that not looking upon him any longer, otherwise than as a person who had slighted her, and of whom she would be reveng'd, 'Go your ways, Tazander, said she to him, with a scornful look, go your ways to find out her who has been already proferr'd to you; I am too much your Friend, not to divest you of the pretences which detain'd you in places where you will not find either so much Beauty or so much Wealth as in Eurimonda. And for your part, Daughter, continued she, addressing herself to Eliciana, think henceforth of bestowing your self on a Man, who may not some time or other reproach you with your being the loss of a greater Fortune to him.' After these harsh words she went into her Closet, having given Eliciana a sign to follow her, which she did, leaving Tazander to encounter with what might be most cruel in so troublesome an Adventure. 'Is it come to this, said Tazander, and are these the Advantages I am to make of the marks of that Affection which Asteria and Eliciana pretended to me? What implacable rage do I find in the one, and what fickleness in the other! They both express'd an Inclination to make me a happy Man, and they both combine to hurry me into Despair. Ah Tazandar! continued he, after a little respite, let us satisfy them both, let us go far enough from them, since they have so much horrour to see me, and let us go and seek in the hazards of War, the period of both our Life and our Misfortune.' This Resolution was so fixt in his Mind, that he immediately prepared for the execution of it; but e're he could depart, the desire he had to visit Asteria and Eliciana once more, was so violent, that he could not oppose it. The next day he went to their House, and having found them alone, without expecting to know whether Asteria was pleas'd with his Visit or not, but o'repress'd with a new grief, he said to her, I do not come now, Madam, to desire you to perform your Promise; an unfortunate person as I am, is far enough from entertaining such sweet hopes; but I come to take my last leave of you, and to assure you, that I am going to court my own Death, without remitting ought of the profound respect which I have ever had for you, and without any diminution of the viloent Love I still continue to Eliciana. As soon as he had acquitted himself of this Complement, he went out of the Room, without expecting an answer, which he thought would not be much different from those he had already receiv'd. Eliciana, who had no reason to hate him, could pity his Affliction, yet without any more favourable sentiments for him than she had before: But Asteria, who still lov'd him, and could not forbear doing it; coming to consider that he was going to expose himself to so many dangers, wherein desperate persons, such as he was, are commonly destroy'd; and being not able to recal him, in order to her seeing him a happy Man with her Daughter, was expos'd to all the Rigour which such opposite apprehensions could exercise on a Soul, and went into her Closet, to conceal her disturbance from Eliciana. After she had continued there some time, sighing and shedding Tears, without knowing precisely what caus'd them, whether Love or Compassion; she consider'd, that Solitude was not likely to divert grief, and so out of a desire to dispel it, she went to Emerida's where she found Company. As soon as she was come in, they gave over speaking of the sudden departure of Tazander, which they knew was occasion'd by her not permitting him to have Eliciana. Asteria, to have it thought that she had heard nothing of it, ask'd Emeridia, whether she would go into the Country; to which Emerida having agreed, they began to talk of the return of the fair season of the Year, and other indifferent things. In the mean time, a Servant of Asteria's enter'd hastily into the Room, all in a fright, and out of breath, insomuch that he could only say these words, Eliciana, Madam, Eliciana! Ah wretch that I am, cryes out Asteria, Tazander has carried away Eliciana, follow after the Villanous Author of the Rape. The grief which that Reflection caus'd her, was so great, and wrought so suddenly upon her, that she fell into a Swoun. The Men, who at that time chanc'd to be at Emerida's went out for the recovery of Eliciana, without expecting till the Servant had express'd his meaning; and though he affirm'd, that was not the occasion of his coming thither, yet Emerida and the other Ladies were so troubled, that they only minded the helping of Asteria. But as soon as she had recovered her self, they gave audience to that Servant, and understood that Eliciana had not been carry'd away, but that she was dying, being fallen extreamly ill on a sudden. Whereupon Asteria, Emerida, and their other Friends, immediately took Coach, to go and see what condition Eliciana was in. As soon as Asteria had ask'd her, what she ail'd; Ah, Madam, said she to her, with a mournful tone, how dear has my Obedience cost me! She had hardly utter'd those few words e're she fell into a second fit. Asteria beheld her no longer with Eyes of her Passion, but the Affection she had for a Daughter, who was so worthy of it, and the fear she was in of procuring her Death by crossing her Desires, oblig'd her indifferently to intreat those who were in the Room, to run after Tazander, and to tell him from her, that he should return, and question not but to find her dispos'd to make him a happy man. In the mean time, the Report that Eliciana was dying, coming to Tazander just as he was ready to take Horse, made him immediately change his design, flattering himself, that all the grief which Eliciana endur'd, proceeded from the affliction she conceiv'd at his departure. Thus perswaded, he was going to Asteria's, when he met two of his Friends, whom he undeceiv'd, as to the belief they were of, that he had carry'd away Eliciana; and a while after he met with others, who rais'd in him an extraordinary joy, when they told him what Asteria had said to his advantage: But that joy was soon alleviated, when he found Eliciana in such a condition, as that there was but little hopes of her Life; and when Asteria having called him to her Bed- side, Eliciana said, turning her self to the other side, without so much as looking on him, I am now past all Relief, and therefore none is to imagine that he can give me any. Asteria and Tazander not being able to get her to speak any more, withdrew, while Emerida, who had a tender Affection for Eliciana, stay'd with her, endeavouring to comfort her, and to perswade her, that her Mother would no longer oppose her desires. My grief admits of no remedy, reply'd Eliciana, looking very disconsolately on Emerida, when she found her self alone with her, and so held her peace; and having taken her by the Hand, which she grasp'd very hard, she gave a deep sigh. Emerida, who till then had been extreamly astonished to think, that though Eliceana had not given any mark of a violent Passion for Tazander, she was yet reduc'd to that sad condition, upon the meer fear of his absence, did now conclude, that there might be some greater occasion of that extraordinary affliction, and was in hopes that it would be no hard matter to induce her to discover it; but imagining that she was not in a condition to speak, she thought fit to let her rest till the next day, for fear of augmenting her Indisposition. The next morning betimes she came to Asteria's, and having understood that Eliciana had pass'd the night in great disturbances, without receiving any great Consolation from all her Mother could say to her, and that she had desired, about an hour before, that they would suffer her to take her rest, she apprehended that her desire of being alone, proceeded from that of abandoning her self more freely to her grief, rather than from any thoughts of Repose; and judging that a favourable interval to make her acknowledge what she was desirous to know, she came into the Room without any noise; and casting her Eye towards the Bed, found her reading something in a Table-Book, and shedding Tears in abundance. As soon as Eliciana had perceiv'd Emerida, whom at first sight she knew not, she was so troubled at her being surpriz'd in that manner, that desirous to hide the Table-Book, she let it fall. Emerida having taken it up, Eliciana reaching forth her hand, said to her, Ah, Madam, I beseech you, return it to me before you open it. I would do so, my dear Eliciana, said Emerida, embracing her, if I were not in hopes to find here what it is that causes your Affliction. And since I have no other desire, than that of being serviceable to you, be no longer obstinate in concealing from me that which haply will not afflict you any more, when you shall once have acknowledg'd it. Your Mother loves you too well to deny any thing that may promote your satisfaction; and if she had known how much you are concern'd in the happiness of Tazander, she not would have demean'd her self as she has done. Emerida observing that Eliciana was somewhat gravell'd at these words, imagin'd there was some great Mystery in the perplexity she seem'd to be in; and thereupon thus continu'd her Discourse to her, I shall not restore you the Table-Book, till you have acquainted me with the cause of your Affliction, that so I may the better serve you, giving you this assurance, that I will keep the secret you shall commit to my trust, as long as you shall think it necessary. That afflicted Beauty having ruminated a while upon what had been said to her, and eas'd her self by several deep sighs; Do not imagine, Madam, said she, that your having got that Table-Book into your hands, and consequently your inferring thence, that you have made a discovery of my secret, is the motive of my acknowledgment thereof; but what I do upon that score, is to assure you of the entire confidence I repose in your Friendship, as also to the end, that if I dye, you may affirm, that I have just cause to be afflicted. But you would be the occasion of an extream trouble to me, if before my death, you acqnainted Asteria, or any other person, with it. Emerida having promis'd her all that she desired, Eliciana began to acquaint her with the Passion which Oxaris had had for her, and all we have already related to the day of his departure for the Army. That Table-Book, continued Eliciana, changing colour, and sighing more deeply than she had done before, will give you better information than I can, of what has reduc'd me to the condition I now am in. One of his own Servants brought it me but yesterday, while my Mother was at your House. If he has been so meanly Spirited, said Emerida, before she had opened the Table-Book, as to fall in love with another, his Inconstancy ought rather to afford you matter of contempt than of grief. Do but see, said Eliciana, with a weak voice, how things stand; for 'twould be Death to me, to give you an account of it my self. Emerida did as she desired, and found these words writ with Oxaris's own hand. Since this Letter, Madam, is not to be delivered to you, till after my Death, you will be pleas'd to give me leave to flatter my self, with the hope of your being satisfy'd, that the regret of having offended you, has made me seek my punishment amidst the Arms of our Enemies. My Wounds are so great, that giving me only the hopes of a few minutes of life, I am forc'd to write to you in this Table-Book, in the very Field where our Party has been victorious. The person whom I have entrusted with it, will give you an account of my last words; in the mean time, I can assure you, that your Indignation has not made any diminution of my Love, and that I shall not speak or think of any thing but you, to the last groan of my Life. OXARIS dying. How, cry'd out Emerida, is Oxaris dead? has Oxaris been killed? and is it Oxaris who has had so accomplish'd an affection for you? Ah! Eliciana, continued she, how just is your grief, and how little reason should I have to condemn the first transports of it! But my dearest Eliciana, said she to her, embracing her, and intermixing her Tears with the others, it is now that you are to summon up all the constancy of your Soul, that you may avoid incurring blame, by a fruitless despair. She would have proceeded, and press'd all the Reasons she thought capable of Moderating so great an Affliction, had she not perceiv'd, that Eliciana was ready to Swound in her Arms. Whereupon having cry'd out, Asteria and her People came in to give Eliciana the Assistance they were oblig'd to give her from time to time. Emerida having not said any thing to Asteria of all she had discover'd concerning Eliciana, sent out to look for the man whom Oxaris had sent. But he, according to the Instructions he had receiv'd from his Master, had only made his appearance to Eliciana, and was gone immediately out of the City: Mean time, the Letters which came from the Camp, brought Intelligence, that Oxaris having done prodigious things in an Engagement, wherein the Enemy had been Defeated, had been carried, among the other wounded Persons, into a House near the place where they had fought; and that the Enemies having set it on fire, all those who were within had been destroy'd, e're they could be reliev'd. All did extreamly bewail the loss of Oxaris, as being a young Lord, of very great hopes, and generally belov'd. Though this was not any thing of News to Eliciana, yet was her Grief augmented, not only upon the confirmation of those ill Tidings, but also by the sight of Tazander, who was oftner near her than she could have wish'd. But what the Attendances of Asteria, and the consolatory applications of Emerida, would never have done, her vigorous Youth, and the strength of her Disposition began to do; and that so effectually, though against her will, that in few days she grew better, and there was no cause of fear, as to her life. In the mean time, Tazander, relying on the late Promises of Asteria, and the assurances which he thought Eliciana had given him of her Affection, impatiently expected the recovery of her Health. About that time, there came an Express to him from one of his Unckles, a Man of a great Age, who order'd him to come with all the Expedition possible, to take Possession of a considerable Charge at Court, the Reversion whereof the King had bestow'd upon him. Tazander communicated this good News to Asteria, and press'd her to Consummate his Marriage with Eliciana, before his departure. Asteria, who after she had seen her Daughter out of danger, had reassum'd her former Passion, found in her self withal, an invincible repugnance to see him Happy with Eliciana, and endeavour'd to make him apprehensive of the impossibility there was of thinking of Nuptials, during the Indisposition of her Daughter. 'Twas to little purpose for Tazander to remonstrate, that that was not without Example, and that upon those occasions, the Ceremonies are adjourn'd to another time. He vainly employ'd all his Friends to Solicit her, and to tell her, that he was resolv'd to lose his Relation's Employment at Court, rather than quit Eliciana before she were secur'd to him. Asteria, having in a manner no farther Evasion, bethought her self of giving Tazander such assurance as he should desire, provided it were not a downright Marriage with Eliciana; pretending to be of a Persuasion, that there was something fatal and disastrous in those sorts of Nuptials. In fine, her obstinacy prevail'd so far with Tazander, as to content himself with a Promise, that as soon as Eliciana was recover'd, she would bestow her upon him without any farther delay. Tazander had this Promise drawn up, and having dictated it to Asteria, she Transcrib'd it, Sign'd it, and Seal'd it with her own Seal, and those of two of the Relations of Eliciana, and as many of those of Tazander, and then deliver'd it into the hands of that Lover; who thus secur'd of his Happiness, went away the next day to find out his Uncle, wthout saying any thing to Eliciana concerning that Promise when he took his leave of her; for she was yet so weak, as that it was thought convenient, she should be ignorant of what pass'd. Emerida, who alone knew the cause of Eliciana's Affliction, and tenderly lov'd her, made it her only Business to comfort her, or at least to divert her from her Pensive Reflections, and kept her Company as much as ever she could. One Evening, as she was returning to her own House, she was extreamly surpriz'd, to find Euramantes presenting her with his hand, to help her out of the Coach. How, said she to him, after the first Civilities, and as he was conducting her to her Chamber; is it possible that you should at last remember this Country, after you have been so long out of it? And can your Friends receive you otherwise, than as a Man who has all this while neglected them? But above all, continu'd she smiling; how dare you, if I may so express my self, approach the Beauties here, after the Injury you have done them, in having engag'd your self elsewhere, and been insensible to all their Attractions? At these Reproaches, Eurimantes could not forbear Sighing yet made her this Reply; The Reasons, Madam, which forc'd me to leave these parts, which I never fansied above all the places in the world, are so Cruel for me, that if you had been acquainted with them, instead of accusing me, you would have bemoan'd me; and as the Engagement you reproach me withall, it's possible it would have been more advantageous to me, than that which I had before my absence. Emerida, who knew more of his Adventures than he imagin'd, Reply'd; Come, come, Men do not commonly for so long a time, quit those places, where they have an Engagement. But, Madam, replies Eurimantes, when a Man is Banish'd thence, what can he do more, than return, as I do; and to endeavour by new efforts, to appease her who is the Mistress of my destiny. You speak after such a manner, says Emerida, that, if I had not seen certain things, you would make me believe, that you have no Love-obligation elsewhere, What have you seen? interrupted Eurimantes, somewhat startled at what she had said, A very Beautiful Picture, and two Love-Letters, which are great Arguments, that a forreign Beauty has a great esteem for you, that you have an extream Passion for her, and that possibly you are already happy. Ah! Madam, cry'd out Eurimantes, transported with indignation against Tazander, He then, whom I thought the best of my Friends has been a second time perfidious to me: Let him know, that I will not pardon him this second Crime, as I did the former. Emerida, being troubled at that Resentment of his, said to him, with a more serious look, When you shall be inform'd how Asteria and I came to see those Letters, and that Picture, you will have no cause to complain of Tazander. She thereupon related to him, whatever might conduce to the vindication of that Friend, as we have mention'd before; and though Eurimantes seem'd to be no farther incens'd against him, yet he made so great a discovery of disquiet, that Emerida was of opinion he had fixt his Love elsewhere. Which occasion'd her speaking to him thus: Though you have heretofore had a Passion for Asteria, yet if the change you have made be more to your advantage, it ought not to give you any trouble: For inconstancy being at this day such a defect as most Men brag of, you have no Reason to be Asham'd of it. That Raillery, Madam, reply'd Eurimantes, does not suit with the posture my Soul is in at present; and if the sight of the Picture and the Letters, which Tazander took from me, gives you any trouble of mind, you shall find, that I can justifie my self; and to that end, I will acquaint you with what he knew nothing of. 'Within the two last years of my Voyages, having contracted Friendship with a young Gentleman of Quality, named Elicidor, of the next Province to this, we Travell'd together into Spain and Italy; and returning for France in a Merchant-Man, we were Attack'd by a Turkish Pirate. Elicidor, some other Passengers, and my self, perswaded the Master of the Ship, to change the Resolution he had taken to yield, out of a fear of being worse Treated, if he made any defence; and after an Engagement of about three hours, the Valour of our Men, but particularly that of Elicidor, forc'd the Pirate to leave us. The joy of that happy Success I soon found abated, by a most sensible grief at the wounding of Elicidor; when, after the first Dressing, the Wound was thought to be Mortal. When he found Death gaining ground upon him, he thought fit to requite the Affliction which I express'd at his Misfortune; and thereupon have desir'd to speak to me, without any others standing by. He thus, with a faint Embrace, address'd himself to me.' I have hitherto thought, my dear Eurimantes, that my Duty and my Discretion enjoyn'd me to, forbear communicating the state of my Soul to you, and to keep it a Secret to my self: But now, that my time in this world is but short, and that I am so Happy, as that I can commit it to the Trust of so Real and so Judicious a Friend, I am to tell you, that, having Lov'd Eunimonda, of whom I have often spoken to you, without making any discovery of what I felt for her, that Beautiful Person would have compleated my Happiness, if her Father's Second Wife had not oppos'd it, out of a design to bestow her upon one of her own Relations. Eunimonda, Scornfully rejecting that Proposition, and peremptorily declaring, that she would be only mine, so incens'd her Father, that by the Advice of my Friends, and by the Command of Eunimonda her self, I was oblig'd to go into some remote parts, to try, whether my absence would reduce things to their former Station. During my Travels, I often receiv'd Letters from that Fair one; and it is not above a Month since, that upon the receipt of one, together with her Picture, by an express Messenger, I press'd our repassing into France, being inform'd by the said Letter, that her Step-Mother was Dead, and that her Father had consented to my Return. In the mean time, Heaven, as you see, is pleas'd to oppose my Happiness, and leaves me only the Comfort of putting into your hands, the Picture and Letters of Eunimonda. The greatest Obligation you can lay upon me, and the greatest Demonstration you can make of your Friendship towards me, and Remembrance of me, is, that you will restore them to her your self, and endeavour to comfort her for my loss. With those words, he Embrac'd me again, shed Tears abundantly, which made me do the like, and had only the sad Comfort of being assur'd, that I would acquit my self of the Charge he had lay'd upon me, as soon as I could. He Liv'd some hours after, and to the last gasp of Life, his Discourse was wholly about Eunimonda. I was as much concern'd and troubled at his Death, as if he had been my own Brother. I would not suffer his Body to be cast over-board into the Sea, as it is commonly done upon such occasions; but got it Embalm'd as well as it could be done, and when we were come a-shore, I had it Interr'd, with all the Ceremonies due to his Merit and Extraction. What you intimated to me, continued Eurimantes, makes me imagine, that you know how Tazander took away the Picture and the two Letters from me, and how he sent them me back again; which having receiv'd, I would not vouchsafe him any answer, as being much incens'd against him for that Action. As soon as I had receiv'd them, I made all the haste I could, to perform what I had promis'd my Friend; and, not to give you any account of what affliction Eunimonda endur'd upon the news she receiv'd of the Death of Elicidor, nor yet of the pains I took to comfort her, I am to intreat you, to credit what I have said. Nay, to inform your self of the truth thereof: You may the more easily do it, knowing, as you do, the House and Country of Eunimonda. Emerida, who, by the precedent discourse, comprehended, that Eunimonda was the very same Lady, of whom Tazander's Friends had spoken to her, thought not fit to acquaint Eurimantes with it. But to examine, whether he still had any affection for Asteria, she thus continu'd the discourse to him. 'I need no other Testimony, as to that point, Eurimantes, than your own. Let me find you equally sincere in acknowledging who that Person is whom you have lov'd, and whom you do Love at the present, that I may owe that double confidence which you repose in me, to the Ancient Friendship there has been between us. You do not desire any thing of me, Madam, reply'd Eurimantes, sighing, which it is not my design to acquaint you withal. I do Love, and I have lov'd Asteria, from her infancy; I have been Banish'd from her as soon as I could no longer forbear discovering the Passion, I had for her. From that time, she would never pardon me, not permit me to come near her. But, notwithstanding all her severe Treatments, and my own long absence, I have not felt any diminution of that strong Passion; and so I come, though not without some apprehension of the impossibility of obtaining my desires, to make a final effort, for the gaining of Asteria. Give me therefore, Madam, the advice, or rather, assistance, I beg of you, and I shall owe you all my Tranquillity, and all my happiness.' Emerida pretended to be much surpriz'd at a thing, which she already knew; and to avoid discovering to Eurimantes, that Asteria had spoken to her of him, she oblig'd him to relate to her, the initials and Consequences of his Love; and finding, that her Friend Asteria had made her a full and faithful recital of it, she found it so difficult a matter to demean her self with such indifference, as not to do any thing against either of them, that she thought it requisite, to tell Eurimantes, that he should continue Incognito, till such time as she had set him right with Asteria. She made him so well comprehend the Reasons which he had, so to comport himself, that, at last, he consented thereto; and thereupon, the next Morning, at the break of day, he took a Journey into the Country, to a Friend of his, to whom he gave no account of his Love, but made him believe, that he had some Affairs of very great importance, which hindered his appearing publickly, till they were terminated. Emerida, having a design to serve Eurimantes, and being in hopes, to induce Asteria to reassume her former Sentiments, would often take accasion to speak of him to her. And though Asteria still interrupted her, yet it happen'd one day, that she found her in a disposition to give her Audience. But as she was going to say something of the Letters and Picture which Tazander had taken away from Eurimantes, and intended afterwards to proceed to the vindication of that Lover, the Arrival of some Ladies, who came to visit Eliciana, prevented her, and oblig'd them to go into that young Lady's Chamber, who was already got out of her Bed. They had not been long in Discourse, e're another Lady came hastily into the Room, having a Letter in her hand, which she affirm'd that she had receiv'd from her Brother, who was in the Army, and said, Ladies, I bring you good News, Oxaris, whom you have given over for dead, is only a Prisoner amongst the Enemies. Having so said, she shew'd them the Letter, which gave an account of Oxaris, which at first rais'd a great joy amongst them. But there being in it no other particulars, they did not give it that Credit, which the other Lady did. In the mean time, Elciana, seiz'd by different apprehensions of fear and hope, was so troubled, that, after she had chang'd her Colour several times, she felt her self growing weaker and weaker: And the fear of making a discovery of her being concern'd in the destiny of Oxaris, oblig'd her to go into her Closet, whither Emerida, perceiving it, follow'd her. Whereupon Asteria, not finding her in the Company, and fearing she was fallen ill, went to see how she did. Hearing her sighing from an adjoyning Closet, she stay'd a little, and then heard these words. No Emerida, said she, I am not so happy, as that Oxaris should be yet alive; It would have been more advantagious to me, if I had not had at first so weak a ground to flatter my self, that I should gain a Happiness, which I have lost, by my implicite obedience to the Commands of my Mother. Asteria, as much surpriz'd, as she was satisfy'd, to find, that Eliciana had no Love for Tazander, and incited by her own interest, and the desire she had, to gratifie a Daughter so submissive, went into the Closet where she was, and embracing her, said, Assure your self, Eliciana, that if Oxaris be living, I will consent to your happiness; and if that news prove not true, comfort your self with this assurance which I give you, that you shall never be Tazander's, nor any other Man's, but by your own free choice. These words fully recover'd Eliciana out of the fear which the sight of Asteria had put her into; yet could they not flatter her so far, as to perswade her that Oxaris was not dead. There needed greater proofs of that good Fortune, e're she could believe it. Nay, she would not give any Credit to the Letters which confirm'd that news, till after it was known, that the Enemies having been inform'd by a Prisoner, there was a Person of Quality wounded in the place into which they had dispos'd Oxaris, some Soldiers, incited by the hope of getting a great ransome for him, had expos'd themselves, to recover him out of the midst of the flames, and had taken care to get his wounds dress'd; and that Oxaris, being fully Cur'd, had found some means, to make his escape out of their hands. The joy of Eliciana was now without any Mixture of fear, insomuch that within few days she was in a far better way of Recovery, when a Friend of Oxaris's came, from him, to desire Asteria's permission to wait on her; which request was easily granted. Oxaris, who, at his return, had been inform'd, that Tazander was not possess'd of Eliciana, went to Asteria's, by whom he was entertain'd much more favourably than he could have expected: And when she obligingly told him, that, having been extreamly troubled at the news of his Death, he must needs believe, that her joy was no less to find him among the living. Ah, Madam, replyed Oxaris, if you do not give me hopes of a pleasant Continuance of this Life, which I have so strangely recover'd, I shall endeavour to put a Period to it in greater dangers than I have yet encountred withal. Asteria, who knew well enongh what oblig'd him to speak at that rate, discover'd to him, that she was not ignorant of his Sentiments; nay, made some reproaches to him of his not having made his Applications before Tazander; and promised him, that she would promote his concerns much more than those of his Rival: And to give him some assurances of it, she conducted him to Eliciana, who had had so little time to prepare her self for that Interview, that she could not forbear discovering too visible a disturbance. She blush'd when he saluted her, and being much more taken with his Person than she had ever been, she found in her self a far greater tenderness for him. You see, Madam, says Oxaris to her, that presumptuous person, who has been so unfortunate as to displease you against his will; and though Asteria makes but little account of my offence, yet I am ready to undergo a further punishment if you are not pleas'd to pardon it me. You need not any pardon, Sir, reply'd Eliciand, from me, if it be true that you have obtain'd it of her whose Sentiments shall ever regulate mine. You say much, Madam, reply'd Oxaris, when I consider the little I have deserv'd at your hands; but you have not said enough for a Heart which has such a constancy and violence of Affection for you as mine has. Asteria perceiving that Eliciana was somewhat at a loss how to answer him, came opportunely to her relief, by changing the Discourse, and obliging Oxaris to relate what Adventures he had been concern'd in, from the time of his departure. That Lover was so well satisfy'd with Asteria, that after he had made all the submissive Acknowledgments he could make of her Favours, and assur'd Eliciana, that he was still her most humble and most faithful Servant, he return'd to his own House, fill'd with the most pleasing hopes which he had ever had in his Life. Having already made his peace with the person whom he had wounded, taking him for Tazander, and there being no Inquisition made after the Combat that had happen'd between them, there was nothing hinder'd him from appearing in publick the next day, and receiving the visits of his Friends. As soon as he had dismiss'd them he return'd to Asteria's, by whom he was receiv'd as a person who did her an honour in having a kindness for Eliciana; and desirous to have their Marriage consummated before Tazander's return, she us'd all the expedition she could for the effecting of it. In the mean time most judicious persons were afraid, that Tazander would do somewhat which might be fatal to those Nuptials. Nor were they much mistaken, for those whom that Lover had entrusted to write to him, and to give him an account of whatever pass'd in reference to Eliciana, having inform'd him, that she was to be married to Oxaris, he return'd with all the expedition imaginable, and came time enough to intreat Asteria to remember what she had promis'd him. Asteria gave him some reasons for it, which did not satisfy him; and though he went several times to her House, yet he still found it impossible for him to speak either with her or Eliciana. He knew nothing of the Affection which this young Lady had for Oxaris, and therefore that procedure seem'd so strange and so new to him, that he examin'd himself, whether he were the same Tazander who had been so much esteem'd by Asteria, and so well belov'd by Eliciana: He found not any thing in himself which might cause so great a change, and he could not comprehend how, or upon what grounds Oxaris should be so highly favour'd, and he so visibly neglected. In fine, not daring to make any complaints against Eliciana, he resolv'd to fight his Rival. He sought the opportunity of meeting him alone; he no sooner found it, but he attack'd him with a fury answerable to his Jealousie. The Combat lasted a good while without any advantage of either side, till that Tazander's Sword being broken, Oxaris cry'd out to him, That he should not force him to kill him. Tazander being extreamly exasperated at that misfortune, yet making no answer at all, endeavour'd to close with his Adversary; but Oxaris being as expert as he was generous, still kept him off, and said to him more than once, 'Let us be Friends, Tazander, force me not to make use of the advantage which Fortune has given me over you, and be perswaded, that it is I who should have cause to complain of your having lov'd Eliciana, after she had once approv'd of my Passion.' Tazander smitten at those words, which so many things made likely to be true, and so many others made appear otherwise, and tyr'd with pressing Oxaris to no purpose, with the little he had left him of his Sword, gave over and went his ways, abandoning himself to Indignation, Hatred, Love, and all the most cruel and most contrary Passions; nay, he had some thoughts of hazarding another Duel with Oxaris, but upon better Resolutions, he consider'd, that he could not again attack a Man, who, though his Rival, had been unwilling to kill him, as he might have done. In fine, after several deliberations, he thought his safest and most rational way would be to make use of the promise which he had from Asteria. With that Resolution he went and intreated the Relations of Eliciana to tell Asteria, that if she bestowed not her Daughter on him, he should be oblig'd to force her thereto by that Promise. Asteria was content to execute what she had promis'd him in that Writing, and appointed a certain day, on which, at her House, it should be open'd before those of their Relations who had put their Seals to it. As soon as that Lover appear'd before her, he protested to her, in the most civil and most respectful manner imaginable, that he would never have taken that course, had he not been forc'd thereto by a Passion which she her self had given life to, and approv'd; whereupon, setting his Knee to the ground, he humbly besought her, to grant him, without any Repugnance, that Favour which he begg'd of her, with all the Submissions and Instances imaginable. Asteria only made answer, that she was ready to submit to the Laws which she had impos'd on her self; which, as she was saying, she took the Promise out of Tazander's hands, and deliver'd it to one of that Lover's Relations; but instead of finding in it the name of Eliciana, they found that of Asteria. Tazander thinking that his Kinsman mistook, caus'd him to read it over again; and in fine, he read it himself, and having found that he was not mistaken, his surprise and his grief were so great, that he could not say any thing in a long time. Asteria, who till then had conceal'd from all the World, the Passion which she had for him, and which it was not in her power to smother, would needs, either out of Pity or Insultation, make a further tryal of Tazander's Patience; upon which Reflection, snatching the Writing out of his Hands, and casting it into the Fire, she thus address'd her self to him; 'Be not so fond, Tazander, as to imagine, that it is my design to make any advantage of what was contain'd in that Writing: But this you may assure your self of, that as you cannot make any further pretence to Eliciana, who never had an Affection for you; so on the other side, you are much less to fear that of Asteria, who having hitherto conceal'd her weakness from you, will in a short time convince you, that she can triumph over it.' These words were no sooner out of her Mouth, but that it repented her of having made so plain a discovery of that secret Passion which she had kept so long undiscover'd. The confusion arising thence, together with some other Reflections, wrought so violently upon her Mind, that she could not endure the sight of Tazander, and so she withdrew into her Closet, to recover her self out of the disorder she was in. Mean time, never was any astonishment comparable to that of Tazander, upon his finding of Asteria's name where he thought to have found that of Eliciana, his being inform'd that Eliciana had never lov'd him, and that Asteria had had so violent a Passion for him. All these unforeseen things put him to the greatest loss imaginable, insomuch that he in a manner knew not whether he were awake, or in a Dream. In that confusion of thoughts he left Asteria's, yet not well knowing whither he went; and though they who had been present at that Action were in the Coach with him, and advis'd him not to mind Eliciana any longer, yet he made them no answer at all; nay, he did not so much as hear them; and he had hardly recover'd himself so far, as to give them thanks when they left him at his own House. As soon as he found himself alone, and that his first Astonishment had given his Reason the leisure to examine this strange and magical Adventure, he sometimes thought himself not so unfortunate as he imagin'd before, and at other times he had such an amazing prospect of his destiny, as almost run him into Despair: But at last, for his better information, he went to Emerida's, acquainted her with what had pass'd, and made great complaints that she had not advertis'd him of the Sentiments of Asteria and Eliciana. Emerida compassionating his condition, return'd him this Answer; 'Had I had the knowledge of those Sentiments before, you may be assur'd, Tazander, that I should have undeceiv'd you; but it is a very short time since I came to know that Eliciana had no love for any Man but Oxaris. What is that you tell me, Madam, interrupted Tazander, smitten with a new trouble and astonishment? I am willing to believe, that at the present she has that Sentiment; but after she had made so great discoveries of her readiness to obey her Mother on my behalf, and given so many demonstrations of Affliction when I came to take my leave of her, with a design to put a period to my discontented life, ought I not to think that she had an affection for me at that time, unless I must believe Eliciana to be the best skill'd in Dissimulation of any Woman in the World? Ah ! Tazander, said Emerida, how have you been abus'd by those hopes, before Eliciana ever saw you, Oxaris had had the good Fortune to please her; and though her Passion were violent enough, yet the Obedience she ought her Mother, who knew nothing of her Sentiment, made her consent to the choice which she had made of you: Nay, I am further to tell you, that Eliciana would not from that time so much as see Oxaris, and look'd upon you as the person whom Heaven had design'd to be her Husband. But what is strange and remarkable in this Rencounter, is, that she receiv'd the news of the death of Oxaris the very same day that you took your leave of her and Asteria; and so being overpower'd by her grief, she quite abandon'd her self thereto, as you know; so that you find that you have no cause to complain of her Inconstancy, since she has always persisted in the same Sentiments for Oxaris. And, this consider'd, you ought not to retain any further Animosity against Asteria; and what I have told you, I have from Eliciana her self. 'And as for Asteria and her Deportment towards you, I am somewhat astonish'd at it, for I thought her a greater Mistress of her self than I find she has been. It is therefore to be imagin'd, that the Passion she has for you must be very great, since it has occasion'd her doing a thing so contrary to her Humour, and so injurious to her Reputation. I am no longer surpriz'd at all the obstructions she found out, to suspend the consummation of your Marriage; for there can be no reason given of her acting so preternaturally, as to oppose a thing which she had wish'd to see effected, and of which she her self had first spoken to you, but that she was wholly carried away by the violence of her passion.' Tazander was so far from making the Reflections he ought to have made, on the account which Emerida gave him of the sentiments of Asteria, that his thoughts were wholly possessed with perplexity and shame, that he had been so long deluded with a perswasion of his being beloved by Eliciana. Then did his love begin to degenerate into indignation; but it being impossible that so great a change should be made all of a sudden, he suffer'd himself to be hurry'd away by the first transports of his grief, upon a consideration of the loss he was to make, and would often break forth into this exclamation. 'O Eliciana! why did you pretend that you had a love for me? O Asteria! why did you conceal the Affection you were pleas'd to have for me? Could I have thought you capable of loving me, the very hope of my attempting a correspondence to that love, would have been as prevalent over me, as the perswasion I had was, that I was not displeasing to Eliciana. ' Emerida mov'd with compassion at the weakness of Asteria, and the misfortune of Tazander, and desirous to render them both more happy, resolved to use all the Industry and good Offices she could for the effecting of it. And so, without communicating her design to Tazander, she dismissed him, with a promise, that she would inform her self of all the sentiments of Asteria, and give him a full account thereof. She thereupon went to visit Asteria, who, breaking forth into a blush at her first appearance, said thus to her. 'What, my dear Friend, do you come to reproach me with my imprudence, or charge me with a breach of Friendship, in concealing my late weakness from you? I am sufficiently punished for it, my dear Emerida, therefore do not augment my affliction.' Emerida endeavoured what she could to comfort her, and acquainted her that Tazander was extreamly troubled at his being ignorant of the esteem she hath for him. 'Woe is me! replies Asteria, am I so unfortunate, as that he should know my weakness? Ah! how am I oppressed with grief, that I have not been able to conceal it from him as long as I lived. Alas! my dear Emerida, how afflicting is the very thought of it to me, and what regrets must I expect to undergo?' Emerida stayed with her all that day, using all the endeavours she could, though to little purpose, to alleviate her affliction, and to raise in her some hopes, that things would end more happily than she imagin'd. And so, presuming that Asteria would be the next day in a better disposition to submit to her arguments, she return'd to her own house, whither as soon as she was come, some of her Servants brought her word that a certain Person desired to speak with her. She at first thought it might be some body from Tazander, but she was surprised to see Eurimantes advancing towards her, who seem'd to be in some extraordinary disturbance. She had hardly ask'd him what business brought him thither, and told him she had written to him to this effect, that within few days she would acquaint him with the sentiments of Asteria, e'er Eurimantes thus interrupted her, 'I am but too well acquainted, Madam, with those sentiments, which are so ignominious to her, and which hurry me into despair.' He thereupon gave her an account of what he had been informed of concerning Asteria's promise, and the Love she had for Tazander. Emerida perceiving that he knew too much and that it was to little purpose to conceal any thing from him. 'You have not been deceived, said she, and if I had known it sooner, I should have been advertised by you of it. Alas! replies Eurimantes sighing, when he found himself assur'd of a thing, which he had wish'd not to be true, how comes it that it is my fortune to love a Person who has an affection for another, who yet has not any for her?' He thereupon broke forth into bitter complaints against his own ill fortune, and against the inconsiderate deportment of Asteria, which he call'd downright right baseness, and threatned that he would be revenged on Tazander. Emerida, to prevent a misfortune which might be fatal to one of those two Lovers, did so well represent to him the little reason he had to hate a man, who was not his Rival, and one who had devoted his love only to Eliciana, that she got him to promise her that he would not look after Tazander; but she found it a harder task to obtain this of him, that he would not see Asteria, purposely to load her with reproaches. Then having said to him, out of no other design than that of appeasing him, that the belief she had had of his having been in love with Eurimonda, had diverted her from vindicating him to Asteria; Eurimantes continued a while without making any answer, and at last said to her, 'Alas! Madam, there is now no necessity of that Vindication. I have had too great an affection for Asteria, and she has done nothing answerably to my Passion. I must therefore forget her, that I may be revenged of her contempt.' To this he added several other things, which sufficiently discover'd the greatness of his discontent and indignation; and yet there was a dormant sparkle of love for Asteria, which made him sigh, when it was least expected from him. Emerida desirous to see him quite disengaged from a passion, of which he would never make any advantage, represented to him that for his better continuance in the sentiments he was then of, his best course would be to address himself to some other Beauty, who should do his Merit more Justice. 'Were I to engage my self any where else, replies Eurimantes in a more calm accent, it should be with Eurimonda, rather than any other. She has so favourably hearkned to my reasons, that I have had the glory and satisfaction of having in some measure comforted her for the loss she has sustained; and at my departure, she so obligingly intreated me not to deprive her long of the consolation I gave her, that I could a little quarrel with my self, for being so constant to Asteria. And yet, continued he, not able to forbear sighing, that ungrateful Lady has still so great an influence over my heart, that I cannot so easily banish her thence, as I could wish; and since it concerns me not to come as much as into her sight, lest I should corroborate a passion, which would be disadvantageous to me, I think it absolutely necessary, that I should remove to some distance from her, and not return till I have clearly forgot her.' Emerida much satisfied to see Eurimantes in that disposition, urged all the arguments, likely to confirm him in a resolution which was yet but very weak. But it hapned afterwards, that what was told him of Asteria's violent Passion for Tazander, wholly convinced him of the necessity of that Removal. Besides, the remembrance of Eurimonda was a powerful attraction, though he found not himself highly disposed to love her, and that that Passion had been check'd by another of greater strength and standing, which now growing weaker, gave way to the latter to bud forth and appear. Emerida was extreamly pleased with him at his departure, hoping, that being disengag'd from Asteria, and well entertain'd by Eurimonda, he would admit of a change of Sentiments, and in time, be more happy. Tazander, in the mean time, was in the most distracted condition imaginable, not knowing what Resolution to fix upon, nor what would prove most advantagious to him. Sometimes, exasperated by his jealousie, he would vent his indignation by these, or the like complaints. 'What, shall I suffer Eliciana to be at the disposal of Oxaris, and not dispute the felicity of that Rival? No, I must either see him ruin'd, or not be a Spectator of his happiness.' Then, incens'd against that Beauty, who was the innocent occasion of his Affliction, he would thus expostulate. 'To what purpose should I persist in a Love for her, who has so long abus'd me, and made me commit so many Miscarriages?' But after all, coming to reflect on the greatness of Asteria's Affection, 'Unfortunate Man that I am! said he, why was I not so happy, as to know, at the beginning, what I now only see in a Conjuncture, wherein I am uncapable of doing any thing correspondent to so high an esteem? Ah, wretched Tazander, how sad is thy destiny! Thou art reduc'd to this extremity, that thou lov'st an insensible Person, who slights thy Addresses; and thou canst not submit to those Charms which are more favourable to thee.' At last, after several other Considerations, which exasperated him against Eliciana, and rais'd in him a tenderness for Asteria, he continu'd in that perplexity for the space of two days, not stirring out of his own House, or seeing any but his most intimate Friends, who all advis'd him, either to remove to some distance from Eliciana, or comply with the Affection of Asteria. He thereupon made a fresh reflection upon all that might induce him to fix upon the latter Resolution. And when ever there occurr'd to his Memory any Action of Asteria's, wherein he was satisfi'd of her Love towards him, he found his thoughts more and more inclining to her; nay so far had he receded from his former Sentiments, that looking on all she had done against him, as so many Marks of a Passion, which nothing could abate, he came insensibly to Love her; or rather, he discover'd that fire, which the apparent severity of Asteria had, till then, in a manner smother'd. Being thus persuaded, he began to entertain a great Tranquility of mind, and not doubting but that Asteria would give a him favourable reception, he confidently went to her House. Where, though he found Emerida in her Company, yet he forbore not casting himself at her feet, and thus address'd to her. 'I wait on you now, Madam, in a disposition much different from that which I had heretofore; I do not only quit all pretensions to the honour of being Eliciana's, but I further make it my humble suit to you, that you would consummate the felicity of Oxaris in the enjoyment of her. I had made this request to you, at the very beginning, had I presum'd, to aspire to the Glory of not displeasing you: But, Madam, since my neglect in offering you a Heart, which, questionless, was born only for you, proceeded wholly from a certain severity I found in you, whereby I was diverted and discourag'd from the doing of it, I could not think it any injury to your Attractions, that I fixt my Love on the most accomplish'd Idea of them. And what I now express, Madam, is so real, and sincere, that ever since I have assum'd the confidence, of flattering my self, with the thoughts of my not having been indifferent to you, my Love has been, and is still wholly bent upon you, and I cannot disobey you in any thing, unless you should command me not to Love you any longer.' Asteria, who was incens'd at the long continu'd discoveries of Tazander's indifference, and of an humour too scornful to be wheedled by such Protestations, made this Reply. ''Tis not the way, Tazander, to gain my Love, to tell me that the only motive of your loving Eliciana was her resemblance to me, and her being my Daughter: For what superstructure of any advantage to my self can I make upon your words, if the inclinations you had for her were the products of the love and esteem you had for me: You would have prevail'd much more with me, if you had made a sincere acknowledgment of your Love to Eliciana, and that since your hopes were blasted there, you knew how to accomodate your passion to your interest: Nay, you may add, if you please, that though it was your unavoidable destiny to love Eliciana; yet since she is design'd for the Embraces of another, and that all in this World cannot obtain their desires, you have a strong fancy that you may prove more successful in the Conquest of another Lady, than you have been in that of her. Whether that fancy may not have somewhat of arrogance and delusion. time will discover, by the success of your Addresses to me, for whom you affirm that your heart was born; and consequently, that I cannot in Civility refuse it. That the Fates have ordain'd will come to pass; but you will find that you have to do with an humour, which as it is extreamly capricious, intractable, and not easily cajol'd by the most insinuating Complements you can use; so it will be expected, that you should be the less startled at the disappointment of your hopes, when you consider that you have had so fair a preadvertisement of it before hand.' Tazander was extreamly surpriz'd at this Answer, because it was at so great a distance from the treatment which he expected; and it may be said, that the very difficulty he fancied to himself, there would be in the Conquest of Asteria, so fix'd the Mercury of his Love to her, that he could not think of any other. According to the inspirations of that Sentiment, he gave her all the assurances that could be made by words of the sincerity of his Protestations; but perceiving that he could not at that time prevail with her, and Asteria not being willing to give him any further Audience, out of a fear of making him a discovery, what ground those signal demonstrations of a passion which she had so long wish'd, had gain'd upon her heart, he return'd home, encourag'd in his pretensions, by the promises of Emerida, to endeavour what she could the removal of those scruples which Asteria made against him. This prudent Directress of their Amours, who had no other concern than that of being advantagiously and amicably serviceable to both parties, spoke to Asteria on the behalf of Tazander, and though she found her not absolutely dispos'd to entertain the vows of that Lover, yet did she conclude her so far inducible thereto, as to tell Tazander when he came to examine what progress she had made in the Negotiation, that if he persisted in the Sentiments he had express'd, he had reason to promise himself a happy issue of his Addresses. Upon which encouragement being much heightned in his expectations, he bethought himself that it would be his best course to engage Oxaris to go along with him to Asteria's to make her an absolute discovery of his quitting all pretensions to Eliciana. In order thereto, he also entreated the presence of Emerida, who was so to manage the interview, as that Eliciana her self should hear what he had to say. Oxaris, who had no reason to be an Enemy to Tazander, was very ready to serve him; and the next day being come along with him to Asteria's, where, according to her promise, they found Emerida; Tazander casts himself at the feet of Asteria, and thus address'd to her. 'I shall never grow weary, Madam, of making you the same Protestations which I have already made, of the violent passion I have for you; and now I am come to give you the greatest assurance and demonstration you your self can exact of it, since I wait on you, accompanied by Oxaris, before whom I now declare, that I transfer to him all the right and pretensions which you were pleas'd I should have to Eliciana, and that I protest, in the presence of that adorable Lady, that I have sincerely lov'd her, and that I shall ever love her, not only upon the score of her own merit, but also because she has your very Charms and Attractions. Be therefore overcome, Madam, by the earnest entreaties I make to you, that you would accept of my vows, which if you do, I shall henceforth account my self the happiest Man in the world. And I summon you, Madam, said he, turning to Emerida, who are so well acquainted with what passes in my heart, to be my witness to Asteria, that it is so full of her, that there is no place for any other Object.' Upon this, Emerida took occasion to speak afresh on the behalf of Tazander, and Oxaris having done the like, Asteria was convinc'd that she had made a sufficient tryal of that Lover's Constancy, and had carried her vigorous treatment of him as far as was convenient. However, not thinking it consistent with her reservedness to make him happy all of a sudden, she gave him this answer. 'I am content, Tazander, to forget what is past, but I must tell you withall, that I do not conceive my self oblig'd, so inconsiderately to admit of your Vows, since there has been no appearance of them, 'till such time as Eliciana had rejected those which you had made to her. If you can afford us your presence at the Solemnities of her Nuptials, without discovering any jealousie or alteration of Sentiments, I promise you that for the future I will examine your passion after a more favourable manner than possibly you may think I do at the present.' Tazander was a person of greater apprehension and ingenuity than to forbear making his advantage of this answer; and having made all: the acknowledgments imaginable of his submissions to whatever Asteria should impose upon him; he spoke to her so often, while they were preparing all things for the marriage of Eliciana, and Oxaris, and so far satisfied her of her having delay'd his happiness long enough, that at last she consented the same day should consummate his felicity with her, and that of Oxaris with Eliciana. Things being thus settled, there was a general exultation amongst those who were any way concern'd therein; and it was the acknowledgment of all, that if they had not been acquainted with those two Beautiful Persons, they would have found but very little difference between the Mother and the Daughter. The Solemnities of this double Marriage were not quite consummated, e're certain intelligence came, that Eurimantes had prevail'd with Eurimonda, to put a period to her pensiveness and affliction, for the death of Elicidor, and withall to admit him to the same station in her affections, which the unexpected death of that friend had caus'd him to relinquish. And so in process of time, these six Persons, whom so many cross occurrences had threatned with a continuance of their misfortunes, are now arriv'd to such a state of satisfaction and tranquility, as in all appearance will be of equal extent with their lives.
