 of the Countess of Arran, will not doubt for which side you will determine; a Lady, so perfectly accomplish'd ---but I dare not attempt to praise her, whose Name ought to be celebrated by all the noblest Pens, if her own Vertues did not give her a more certain Immortality. And now, my Lord, our Expectations are on your Lordship, all wishing with Impatience that you wou'd make a second choice, one worthy to succeed that excellent and pious Princess, the present Dutchess of Hamilton, from whom we might hope for a young Inheritor of the Glory and Dignity of his great Ancestors, and of those Noble Vertues, which give your Lordship a more venerable Greatness than that which you derive from your illustrious Birth. Were I capable, my Lord, of doing Justice to your Merit, with what delight cou'd I dwell upon this glorious Theam, whilst I need not fear the Imputation of Flattery from any, since all Parties amidst their hottest Dissentions, agree in their value of your Lordship, those eminent Vertues, which their Interest wou'd make them Enemies to, forcing their Admiration. This Contemplation draws me to a consideration of my Presumption in this Address, and makes me hasten to retire from so great a Presence, which I ought to stand more in awe of, than all the vain Censures of the Town, which I have shelter'd my self from with so much Care, being known by no Name but that which will be my Protection, the Title of, My Lord, Your Lordship's most Oblig'd, Most Humble Servant. MARRIAGE. point of Marriage, than he run to his Lodging, where he found him alone, with the Abbot Sophin. Your Friends (said he to him) will, without doubt, come to Rejoyce with you, for what you are going about; and I am come to tell you, that it distracts me. Unhappy Wretch! into what Abyss of Pains and Disquiets are you going to throw your self? Marry! (continued he) what Sin have you committed to be punish'd with so many Miseries as are going to overwhelm you, to engage your self all your Life to one Person, without being able to change? Let her become Sullen, Ugly, Old, or Unfaithful, you must Die Chain'd to her, or else proceed to scandalous Extremities. But you who talk at this rate, (answer'd Philocrates, with an Air cold and pensive) have not you been Marry'd, and sensibly afflicted at the Death of your Wife? 'Tis very true, (reply'd Alcander ) and yet I never suffer'd so much as in the two years I pass'd with her. How is that possible (said Philocrates ) you lov'd her, and she you? She was young and handsom, had Wit, Quality, and Fortune, what then could hinder you from being Happy? I don't know what to say to you, (return'd Alcander ) but I am perswaded, that let a Woman be never so Amiable, or what ever tenderness one may have for her, when one is become her Husband, the Heart passes very soon from Love to Indifference, and from Indifference to a Disgust. How comes that (reply'd Philocrates )? I have a great deal [illeg.]f difficulty (interrupted Alcander ) to penetrate into the true reason of it; it may be, that in seeing a Woman very often, and more nearly, we find no more in her that Merit, and those Charms, by which we were attracted. It may be, the Heart does not agree with such a calm possession; or, it may be, in fine, that the frequent commerce of the Senses, extinguishes their vivacity. You drive things much too far, (interrupted Philocrates ) a Man of Prudence, and Judgment, will not Marry a Woman without knowing her to have Virtue, and Merit; so that the more he sees her, the more he discovers her good Qualities, and is the more satisfy'd with his Choice. He makes a duty, and a soft habitude of loving her; she gives him a thousand innocent Pleasures, she keeps him from Debauchery, with voluptuous Lawful Joys; she brings him fine Children, which she educates with tender Care; she follows him in his Adversity, as well as in his highest Fortune. In fine, she is a faithful Companion, who never abandons him till Death. How shall one know a Woman before one Marries her? (interrupted Alcander in a rallying tone.) Women are incomprehensible; the cunningest, and most penetrating, are deceiv'd in 'em; they never speak or act sincerely; there's nothing but Disguise and Artifice in all they do; they change without reason; have no solidity in their Wit, or in their Heart; their Beauty is not proof against a little Fever, nor their Virtue against the smallest Interest, or Pleasure. When they Marry, they have only, for the most part, a certain blind, and irregular Love for their Husbands, which ceases in a little time, by changing its Object; an insupportable Vanity, and Ambition, or a low. a sordid Interest, is what takes up all their Thoughts. In the mean while, you wou'd have a Husband frame in himself, a soft habitude of loving a Woman with these faults, because he has Marry'd her; believe me, the Heart is too great a Libertine, to subject it self to such sort of Laws; to pretend that a Woman can retain her Husband by the Pleasures of the Senses, what probability? For him, she has only dull, and insipid Pleasures; if the Husband has a Penchant to Incontinence, she serves, at most, to nourish Fires, which he generally extinguishes in other places. 'Tis a fine satisfaction to have a Woman eternally by one's side, for whom one feels nothing but a disgust, or, at least, an indifference; a covetous or an imperious Woman, who Criticizes even upon your least actions; or, a Fool, who fatigues you with her false Reasonings; a Coquet, an ambitious Woman, or a Gamester, who torments you with her extravagant Expences; don't deceive your self, there are few Women who have not that defect. For Children, what pains, what trouble, is not one at in bringing them up? To how many Infirmities and Sicknesses are they subject? And when they are grown up, what disquietudes to settle them in the World? Sometimes they happen to be False, Debauchees, Unnatural, Prodigal, Imprudent, Gamesters; in fine, they are Inhumane Creditors, who take away your Fortune, and put you out of a condition to bestow it on your Pleasures. Why then (reply'd Philocrates ) does all the World Marry, if that State is so uneasie? Some (answer'd Alcander ) out of a motive of Religion, others of Interest, some for Policy, and others because the rest of the World Marry, without examining any further. You deceive your self (reply'd Philocrates ) the effects of Marriage are not so uneasie as you say, nor all Women so terrible as you would have us believe, the Person with whom I engage my self, is of a humour very opposite to those Women you have describ'd. Yes, Fraudelisa is nothing but Sincerity and Virtue, a thousand Charms shine in her Soul, a thousand Beauties in her Person, which are not to be seen in any other. Philabell lov'd her to madness, and tho' he is a Man of Quality, very handsom, with a great deal of Wit, Gallant, and naturally belov'd by Women, yet she cou'd not endure him, and refus'd to let him continue his Visits to her, because of the Liberties he took, and his Discourses with double meanings: The poor Child told me, that in one Afternoon he made her blush twenty times. She is not like the Women of the Age, she loves retirement, and solitude; her Clothes, and all her Behaviour, is extreamly modest; she never lays out any thing extraordinary, but, with regret, hardly knows the Cards; and is so far from all Coquettry, that t'other day, I could not perswade her that any Women could be unfaithful to their Husbands. I may say, she loves me tenderly, and yet, whenever her inclination moves her to give me some marks of it, her reservedness, and modesty, retains her. Ah! how happy are we going to be (continued he) by our Marriage? Absolute Masters of one another's Hearts, and Persons. We may, without scruple, and without Partners, satisfie, every day, our tender, Amorous Transports. Tender and Amorous Transports (reply'd Alcander ) are not Messes for married People. And for whom then, (interrupted Philocrates, raising his voice) for your Lesbia? for you? Believe me, (continued he) unless we esteem a Woman for her Virtue, and her Fidelity, she can give us none of the real joys of Love; those are but Debaucheries, in which the Senses alone find any Pleasures, without the Souls partaking of 'em, which is the reason that they are generally follow'd with nothing but regret, despisings, and disgusts. How can one esteem a Woman (continued he) and rely upon her Fidelity, at the very time when she betrays her Duty, her Honour, and her Religion, to abandon her self to her Passion? Ah! (reply'd Alcander ) if you knew Lesbia as well as I do, how differently wou'd you talk? Oh, there is not a Maid in France less Interested, or more Generous; she keeps two thousand Lewis d'Ores for me, with the last Fidelity; what Wives can be so trusted? Lesbia love Libertinism Ah, how far is she from it? She hates all Men; she loves nothing but me; and if she relishes any Pleasure, 'tis but with reference to me. And as far as I am sensible of it, I have heard her say a thousand times, That she wou'd place her greatest felicity in seeing her self with me alone, in some remote corner of the World. I gave her the fine Ruby you have seen me wear; she wou'd not have taken it, and I had the greatest difficulty imaginable to oblige her to it. It drop'd off of the Ring and was lost; what tears she shed! She wou'd have giv'n all she had in the World to have found it, not that she regretted it for the value, but because she fansy'd it an Omen of my ceasing to love her. This Ruby, said she to me, which seem'd so fix'd, thus fall'n from the Ring, can be no other than a sign, and a presage, that I shall lose your love; but, be assur'd, I never shall survive it. Can you, in Marriage, find these Niceties, and such a tender Passion? Marry'd People are certain that they can never leave one another, and that assurance is the Poyson of tenderness; Love cannot live without desires, without some fears, and some difficulties. Softly, softly, (interrupted the Abbot Sophin ) no comparisons with Marriage, bear it respect. I don't speak (reply'd Alcander, with a serious Air) of those sort of Marry'd People who are entirely loosned from their Senses, and only animated with a Spirit of Sanctity, and Purity, but of those who engage in Marriage only to satisfy their Sensuality; and who, not changing their Manners in so holy a State as that of Marriage, are guilty of abominable Adulteries, and so make themselves a thousand times more criminal. Philocrates (interrupting Alcander ) ask'd the Abbot which side he wou'd take; adding. That he had known several Abbots who wou'd have been very well pleas'd to have had it in their power to Marry. Alcander maintain'd on his side, That there were many Marry'd People who wou'd gladly change their Wives for Benifices. The Abbot represented to them, That none are ever contented with their own condition, that therefore they ought not to decide their dispute by that; but that, to judge of it solidly, they shou'd examine, with application, the Pleasures and Disquietudes of Marriage; that Paris was a great Theatre; that they need only hear the general Discourse; and, with the least Address, to turn their Conversation upon that Subject, it wou'd be easie to Instruct themselves very much in it in a little time. This Proposition seem'd very reasonable, both to Philocrates and Alcander; they intreated the Abbot not to leave them, telling him, They chose him for Judge; which he accepted. Alcander told them, that he must go first to a Bankers, about a business of consequence, whose Wife was of a singular, and pleasant humour, and that if they wou'd go with him, he cou'd promise them some diversion. They agreed to it, and together they went; the Banker had just Din'd, and was in his Wives Chamber with her; but Alcander had no sooner begun to talk with him, than one came to ask for him; he went out of the Chamber, and left the Company with his Wife. Philocrates finding her young and sprightly, ask'd her what Book she had in her Hand; 'tis the Princess of Cleves (said she.) What think you of it, Madam, (answer'd Alcander? ) I think her very foolish, (reply'd she) what Impertinence, for a Woman to tell her Husband that she loves another Man? Where had the Author left his Judgment when he writ that Part, for he manages the rest of his Subject well enough? For my part, (reply'd Philocrates ) I can't condemn that, since Madam de Cleves had a violent inclination for the Duke of Nemours, which nothing but Absence cou'd Cure, and that she had no other way to remove her self from him. Seriously (continued he) if I had a Wife in Madam de Cleves condition, who shou'd make me such a confidence, 'twou'd give me a great esteem for her. Ah, Sir, (reply'd the Lady smiling) what a Treasure are you for a Wife! let but those Sentiments be known in Paris, and you may choose where you will. But, Madam, (interrupted the Abbot) what wou'd you have had the Princess of Cleves do? Since she cou'd not (reply'd the Lady) forbear loving Monsieur de Nemours, she had nothing to do but take a method for the satisfaction of all three, which was to discover her Affection to him, to take secret Measures with him, that the Intrigue might make no noise, and to Caress the Prince of Cleves more than she had done before, that he might not suspect her. How many cruel torments had she sav'd her self this way? What ravishing Pleasures had she given her Lover and her self? And, to conclude, she had not occasion'd Monsieur de Cleves's Death, like a Fool. Philocrates, and Alcander, thought her reasoning so pleasant, that they fell a laughing, and highly commending what she had said, which so extreamly pleas'd her, that she went on, saying, You must own, Gentlemen, that many Authors stray very far from Probability, and good Sence; witness the Author of the Disorders of the Basse[illeg.]t. The Marquis de Roziers loves Madam de Landroza passionately; she has not the Character of a very scrupulous Woman, she is ruin'd by play; he gives her twelve hundred Louis d'Ores, she keeps the Money, and refuses him the Merchandize: Was ever any thing so ridiculous and impertinent as this Story? The Author has certainly very little knowledge of the World, to be ignorant of what a Woman in necessity is capable of doing for twelve hundred Louis d'Ores. As she was talking thus, her Husband return'd from the Person whom he had gone out to speak with, and having heard what she had said, he gave her a severe reprehension for it, telling her, She ought not to spend her time in reading those sort of Books, but mind her Huswifery and her House; which nettled her to that degree, that she said all she cou'd imagine of most injurious to him. She complain'd, that he was of a humour Chagrin and Bizarre, that he lov'd Gaming, Drinking, and all Licentiousness, that she had never had a Chamber-maid, Old or Young, Handsom or Ugly, but he had endeavour'd to corrupt them; and, in fine, to hear her speak, one wou'd have thought him the worst of Men, and her the wretchedst of Women. The Husband, on the other hand, reproach'd her with the expence she put him to, in Jewels, and other Ornaments, the little Fortune she had brought him, the difficulty of being paid it, her Gallantries, her making Balls, her Masquerading, the Musick, and Collations, she gave her self at his Charge, the number of People, of all sorts, which she receiv'd at her House to play; made her a hundred other reproaches, and said so many severe things to her, that they had like to have come to blows; but a Footman, whom she knew, coming into the Chamber, made her forbear proceeding in her resentments, to go speak to him in private; he gave her a Letter, and went presently away, and for all the care she took to conceal it, Philocrates and Alcander perceiv'd it. Immediately she went into another Chamber, with an Air full of Chagrin and Anger, and a moment after out of the House. Alcander, after having talk'd with the Banker of the business he came for, went away too, with Philocrates and the Abbot, and going down, Alcander found upon the Stairs a Letter, in these words:  the Caresses of your Jealous Tormenter last Night, I dare believe, how pressing soever he may have been, it being the beginning of the Spring, that you have kept your Word with me. How much am I oblig'd to you for it, my Dear! How sensible am I of it! And how impatient to give you my Acknowledgments at the Place you know of!  As soon as they had read the Billet, they imagin'd it to be the same which they had seen the Footman give the Banker's Wife; that it came from her Gallant; that the Tormenter was her Husband; and that the precipitation wherewith she had gone to the Rendezvous, had made her slip the Billet on one side, instead of putting it in her Pocket; or that she had drop'd it in taking out her Handkerchief. Alcander thinking this example might be of use to his design, very coolly represented the unhappiness of this Man; his Wife (said he) consumes the fruit of his Labours in wild Expences, she despises him, she makes an Academy of his House, she dishonours him, deceives him, and refuses him what a Wife owes her Husband, to make a sacrifice of it to her Gallant! After this, be sure you Marry. Sincerely, had it not been a great happiness for this Banker to have had a Friend like me, that wou'd have represented to him what Marriage was, and have kept him from it? Really (said Philocrates laughing) 'tis very pleasant in you, to draw a consequence from the conduct of Persons like these, in whom we see neither Prudence, nor good Manners; what brutalities has not this Man been guilty of before us? He knew his Wife to be of a violent Nature, why then did he provoke her? Ought he not to have staid till he was alone with her, and she in a calmer temper, and then have told her what he had to say to her? Expose his lewdness in his own House! rare Example of Virtue for a young Wife! Faith (continued he) if she is unfaithful to him, he contributes very much to it: Believe me, a Man of Honour, who loves his Wife, who is assiduous, and careful of her, makes himself belov'd by her, makes her at once be happy, kind, and faithful. What then, (reply'd Alcander ) you imagine there needs no more to make a Wife be happy, and faithful, than to love her, to have some complaisance, and assiduities for her; but you deceive your self, (continued he) those marks of tenderness, those assiduities, only make a Wife the more Imperious, and often gives her a disgust, and scorn of her Husband; witness the Marchioness of Seligny, who is now Suing for a Divorce from her Husband. I have heard her say, she should never have had such a thought if he had lov'd her less, and had been less assiduous about her. A very pleasant cause of Separation (reply'd Philocrates. ) She is young, very handsom, and finely shap'd, (said Alcander interrupting him;) some Gown men, of the first Quality, are her Lovers, by whose Interest she obtains what she pleases; and, in fine, she has manag'd so adroitly, that 'tis above two years since she liv'd with her Husband, and that she has been diverting her self in Paris. If you will (continued he) I'll carry you to see her. Philocrates and the Abbot, found the Ladies Character too singular, not to have that curiosity. She receiv'd them with a great deal of civility; there was with her, when they came, one of the long Robe call'd Berly, and the Chevalier ---As she has always an extraordinary desire to talk of her Affair, Alcander had not much difficulty to bring her to it. Of all the Women (says she) that ever desir'd to be parted from their Husbands, none ever had more cause than I, nor so much patience: Ah, miserable Creature that I am, (pursu'd she) to what strange Destiny am I Born! Other Women complain of their Husbands, and wou'd be separated from them, because they are so far from loving them, and being often with them, that they continually shun and fly from them; but my cruel Stars have fix'd my misfortune in the troublesom Assiduities, and the excessive Love, my Husband had for me. As soon as he saw me at Rheims, he became desperately in love; his Person, his Estate, and Quality, charm'd my Mother, and me by consequence, so that the Marriage was soon concluded. Presently after he took me from that engaging City, and carry'd me to a place in the Country, which belong'd to him, to give himself (said he) entirely to me. What I suffer'd in that curs'd place! He did not live with me freely, and without ceremony, as Husbands do with their Wives, there was nothing but ridiculous Precautions, and impertinent Cares, for what concern'd me; I must not think of rising before Noon, my health wou'd be in danger. I had not the liberty to lie upon my Left Side, for (said he) the Liver is in danger; and, upon your Back, the Milt. What Visions are these to torment a Wife with? I love Fruit extreamly, but yet I was not suffer'd to eat any, my stomach was too weak. Walking I must never think of; in the Day time the Sun spoils the Complexion; the Evening, and Night, makes one take Cold, and brings Fluxions; so that I was condemn'd to stay all Day in my Chamber, working upon Tapestry. Nay, for the most part, he wou'd murmur against my Work too. For him, he wou'd pass the whole Day with his Eyes fix'd upon me, sometimes complaining, and sometimes sighing. How charming are your Eyes, Madam, (cry'd he?) Ah, that lovely Mouth! Then, with a furious Transport, he brought his great Lips upon my Eyes, and kiss'd them so hard, that I was afraid he wou'd blind me. After these first Extasies, he threw himself at my Feet; forgive me Madam, oh forgive (cry'd he) an insolent, audacious Man, who ought to confine his Passion within the bounds of respect and adoration! He press'd my Knees till he made me cry out, and then falling into a profound Melancholy, he gaz'd upon me with fiery languishing Eyes, and fetching deep sighs, how much am I to be lamented (said he) my cruel Fair one? You do not love me, my company fatigues you, and you never see me without being uneasie; alas, in Marrying you, I thought my self the most fortunate of Men, but now I find I am only the more unhappy. 'Tis true, I am Master of your Person, but your Heart won't render it self: Ah, ungrateful Charmer, take back your Person, or give me that cruel Heart! He did not end with these first Transports: Well, Inhumane Creature, (added he) since thou see'st the violent Passion I have for thee, with indifference, and scorn, here, (said he to me drawing his Sword, and giving it to me) pierce, with a thousand Wounds, this Heart which thou dost so much torment, and end a Life which thou mak'st so insupportable to me. This, Gentlemen, was his Behaviour when ever we were together; won't you own then, that never any Woman endur'd so much as I? or had more reason to covet a Separation? Did he torment you, Madam, (said Alcander ) as much in the Night as in the Day? You have a mind to laugh, Sir, (answer'd she) but methinks I have made you understand enough. This Saying was taken in a pleasant sence, that made all the Company laugh; then the Abbot taking up the Discourse, said to her, Give me leave, Madam, to tell you, that he well deserv'd to be pardon'd all his Transports, since they proceeded from his extraordinary love for you, and his regrets for not being belov'd by you. If he wou'd have made himself be lov'd, (reply'd the Lady) he shou'd have observ'd what wou'd please me most, done all he cou'd to appear amiable in my Eyes, and not have tir'd me with being eternally in my company, and his insupportable way of behaviour. I love company, he ought not then to have taken me from Rheims, but to have stay'd, and entertain'd in his House all the Beaux monde there, to divert me. I can pass away some hours agreeably enough at Cards, so that he shou'd never have let me want Money, nor Company for play: Being well dress'd affects me, shou'd not he then have furnish'd me every Month with all that was finest, and most fashionable? In fine, I love Diversions, his chief business shou'd have been to procure 'em for me; and that was the course he shou'd have taken to arrive at my Heart. Pray, Madam, (said Alcander ) how cou'd you contrive to free your self from this Tyrant? The most pleasantly in the World (answer'd she): Near the Castle where I lived there was a little Wood, in which was found abundance of Cantharides, I got some of them, had them dry'd, and apply'd them to my Neck; in a little time they made a great Excoriation, as I design'd. I feign'd my self Sick, and acted so well, that sometimes the Marquis found me sighing, sometimes looking up to Heaven as in despair; and, at other times, in Tears, or a Praying. I spoke to him of nothing but what was dismal; of Death, of Paradise, of Hell. In fine, I plaid my part so well, that I gave him a great curiosity to know from whence this change proceeded; I foresaw well enough, that he wou'd attribute it to some violent Passion I had conceiv'd for another; and that he had too great a disposition for Jealousie to be free from it upon such an occasion: And I was not mistaken, he left no Artifice unattempted to discover the truth. And one day, when he was condemning my Conduct, with a great deal of sharpness, and complaining that I lov'd another, I threw my self at his Feet, and told him, That if my Life only was concern'd, I wou'd not make him a discovery, which, perhaps, wou'd give him a loathing for my Person; but my Honour being in danger, by the injurious suspicions he had of me, I was constrain'd to tell him, That my Grandmother had dy'd of a Cancer which had been neglected, that all our Family was subject to that Distemper, and that I had a long time felt some Symptoms of it, which was the cause of my appearing so cold, and so out of humour. In fine, that it had broke out, and was so extreamly painful to me, that I believ'd I had nothing to do but to prepare my self for Death. He wou'd needs see the Sore, which, after a little refusal, I suffer'd: The Cantharides had had such an effect, that he was deceiv'd; he had never seen a Cancer, so that it was no difficult matter. Then I threw my self about his Neck, with tears in my Eyes I embrac'd him, gave him those sort of moving Adieus, which are usual with dying Persons, and conjur'd him never to Marry another after my Death. I spoke to him of a Will, and of Feoffment in trust for him. Good God! how naturally I feign'd when I think of it; if he was troubled at my pretended Distemper, he was as much rejoyc'd to find himself, as he imagin'd, so well belov'd. Immediately he sent for the Chirurgeon of his Village, who had heard of Cancers, but had never seen any no more than he; so that you may believe, it was easie for me to perswade him that I had one. Monsieur de Seligny charg'd him to take care of me, threatning, That his Life should answer for mine; which seeing, he was extreamly frighted at. I profited of that conjuncture, and, with a little Money, perswaded him to tell the Marquis, that there was never a Man in Provence, that knew how to Cure those sort of Diseases; and that only one Physician in Paris had that secret. I seem'd averse to the Journey, or, rather, I conceal'd the eager desire I had to make it, telling him, I had rather stay where I was, and dye in his Arms. But I knew his kindness too great to take me at my word; he rais'd a considerable Sum of Money, and conducted me hither, where I took Advice, seiz'd upon the Money, and left him taking my Woman, and a Footman with me. For the Form, my Counsel told me I must give in a Complaint, wherein I shou'd declare, That he had often drawn his Sword against me: Which I did. I forgot to tell you, that at the time when he play'd those Fooleries I spoke of to you, when he drew his Sword in my Chamber, I cry'd out, pretending to be frighted, which occasion'd my Woman, and Footman, to run in, and find him in that posture, so that I made them both Depose, that they had seen him with his naked Sword against me. There needs no more in Justice to condemn him; and my Counsellor assures me, that I shall infallibly gain my Cause. How much were you to be lamented, Madam, (reply'd Alcander? ) but you must own, that Monsieur de Seligny is no less unfortunate, and that it wou'd have been more for the repose of both, that you had never married. Don't you perceive (said Philocrates addressing himself to Alcander ) that the misfortune proceeds only from the Marchioness's never having had any inclination for the Marquis? and that if she had lov'd him, their marriage had been accompany'd with tenderness and pleasure? It is not Love, (interrupted Alcander ) that makes a Husband happy; how many are there who suffer by the excess of love their Wives have for them? That's a thing extraordinary enough, (reply'd Philocrates ) and which it will be hard for you to prove. I my self (reply'd Berly ) know many examples of it, and I am perswaded that the Husband of a Coquet, who cares not at all for him, is less to be pity'd than one whose Wife dotes upon him extravagantly. How can that be (interrupted Philocrates )? A Coquet Wife (answer'd Berly ) never contradicts her Husband, but is always of the same opinion with him, always gay, always endeavouring to divert him, and has every moment something new and pleasant to tell him. When he brings any of his Friends home, she receives them in the most obliging manner, she entertains them, and diverts her self with them; if he caresses her she returns it; if he seems cold, she neither frets, nor complains of it; she has none of those delicacies of heart which serve only to make both unhappy, never any Jealousie, no uneasie humours; if she has a Chamber-maid that her Husband likes, she won't turn her away for that: Let her defend her self, if she will, says she, let him attack well if he can, 'tis not my business; whereas a Woman that loves her Husband extreamly, tires him Night and Day, one while with her protestations of love and tenderness made out of season, by and by with suspicions and reproaches, and even sometimes with railings. Valoury has often told me, that there is nothing so insupportable as these sort of Discourses from a Wife, for whom the Heart is no longer sensible, and that he had but too much experienc'd it with his; she is always a crying, said he, and can hardly be made to take any nourishment; if I fail of coming home to Dinner, or to Bed, she won't eat, and will sit up all Night to wait for me; she was once very handsome, but with this fine way of living she is become very frightful. After this (said Valoury to me) must not you allow that I am the unhappiest Man alive in a Wife, and that the Husband of a Coquet is much less to be pity'd? I have heard (reply'd the Chevalier) of Valoury's conduct with his Wife, 'tis so highly ingrateful that he is not excusable in it; she was a Maid when he fell in love with her, his Passion made an impression upon her, and she receiv'd his Addresses, but being an only Child, and her Birth and Fortune above his, her Father was against it; she lov'd him to that degree, that she pretended to be with Child by him; there is nothing to be imagin'd beyond the rigorous treatment her Father gave her, yet she remain'd firm and constant. In fine, the Father thinking there was no remedy, to repair the honour of the Family, consented to their Marriage. This base Man had not liv'd a Fortnight with her, (amiable as she was, and tho' she had the last tenderness for him) before he took a disgust for her, and apply'd himself to another, much less deserving than she. My God! how sottish you are, Madam de Valoury, (interrupted briskly Madam de Seligny? ) Ah! if your Husband had had to do with me, how well wou'd I have reduc'd him! What wou'd you have done (reply'd Alcander? ) When a Man (replyed she) believes himself entirely possess'd of his Wife, and that he has nothing to fear, nor to wish beyond, he quickly falls into an indifference for her; 'tis that which made Valoury cease to love his, seeing that he alone possess'd her without a sharer. For my part, I wou'd have acted more prudently than she did; as soon as I had perceiv'd my Husband's first fondness for me abated, I wou'd have made my self some Lovers, whom I wou'd have brought to the House that he might see them; Jealousie wou'd immediately have awakened his sleeping Passion, and restor'd him to me. What pleasure shou'd I have had in affecting a little cruelty, and rebuking him at first? I shou'd have made my self a second good Fortune for him; and thence it is (continued she) that Women who are adroit, and gallant, are more belov'd by their Husbands than others, because, not finding themselves in that tranquil possession which leads to indifference, they wish, they fear, they hope, despair, and consolate themselves. And 'tis in these different agitations that Love nourishes it self; whereas the Husbands of Wives, of Madam de Valoury's humour, and character, hardly return to their affection, because they don't feel that diversity of movements, their possession being calm, peaceable, and without trouble. Women (reply'd the Chevalier) never want address in the management of their amours; and after, what Madam de Valoury has done, one may say, with reason, that nothing is impossible for them, to have had the secret of becoming a second good Fortune to her Husband, to have made him meet her often, two or three hours after Midnight, upon assignations, to have rais'd in him the highest transports which a most passionate Lover is capable of: And, in fine, by that means, to have brought him one of the finest Children in the World. Tell me, is not that an argument of it? That's extreamly pleasant, (answer'd the Marchioness) but pray, Sir, oblige me in explaining your self. Madam de Valoury (reply'd the Chevalier) lov'd her Husband infinitely, whilst he had nothing but an aversion for her, so far that he cou'd not endure her company, but wou'd have a separate Bed, which was a most sensible affliction to so tender, so fond a Wife. As she was one day endeavouring to guess at what cou'd be the cause of his behaviour, it came into her thoughts that it must needs be the love of some other, and, in a little time, she discover'd that he was much taken up with a young Widow who was her Neighbour; she made an acquaintance with her, and manag'd her with so much Wit and Address, that in a little time she became her most intimate Friend. This Widow was at Law with her Husband's Relations for her own Jointure, and her Childrens Fortune; she was none of the richest, and the extraordinary expence of her Law-Suit streightned her very much. Madam de Valoury made use of this occasion, she solicited the Judges for her, lent her Money; and, in fine, did her so many other services, that she engag'd her entirely to her Interests; which was so much the easier for her to do, the Widow's heart being preposses'd in favour of another. That oblig'd her to make Madam de Valoury a confidence of the passion her Husband had for her, what discourse he had had with her, the Presents he wou'd have made her; and, in fine, with how much spirit and vigour he continually press'd her. Madam de Valoury desir'd her not to refuse his Money, nor his Presents, proffering to deliver the Merchandise for her; and thus, by confederacy, they manag'd the Affair. The Widow receiv'd his Presents, and pretended to yield; but that which seem'd the most difficult, as she said to Vaboury, was to contrive a place for the rendezvous, because she was much observ'd by those about her; that her Woman never left her all the day, whom she durst not trust; that she had a little Daughter extreamly sharp, who observ'd all things very narrowly, and talk'd very much, and that between the two, she had a great deal of circumspection to keep, unless she wou'd ruine her self. Valoury seeing what difficulties there wou'd be in the day time, offer'd to come in the night, when they were all in Bed. He told her, she need only give him the Key that open'd all the Doors, and there being but one Hall to go through, to come to her, in which no body lay, he cou'd be there without being seen, or making any noise; and that he wou'd be gone before day. The Widow told him, that her Woman, and her little Daughter, lay in a Closet within her Chamber, and that therefore he must not speak, nor make the least noise. She gave him the Key, and he did not fail of keeping the assignation. Madam de Valoury supply'd the Widows place, who had retired to another Room. Our Gallant came, and laid himself very softly down by his Wife, without being perceiv'd by any body in the House; she did not speak, and it was too dark for him to see her, so that it was no hard matter for her to pass for the Widow, in a place where he cou'd not imagine any other Woman wou'd be. Never Man was more charm'd with his good Fortune, nor in greater ecstasies of Pleasure! In fine, the poor Lady was afraid her Husband's Life, or at least his Health, was in danger. Day approaching he went away, and continu'd this little Commerce for some time; but the pleasantest part of the Adventure was, the Conversations he had in the day time with the Widow, expressing the dear Raptures of the Night, which he exaggerated to such a heighth, that she cou'd not refrain from laughing excessively. The better to divert her self with it, she ask'd him, coldly, the difference of those he tasted with his Wife. With my Wife! (reply'd he) I never have any, 'tis but by Duty, or rather by necessity, I ever converse with her; and if I had not need of her to raise my Money, (which I can't do without her) I shou'd never submit to it. Her Flesh (continued he) is loose, her Skin rough, she has no Neck, no moisture, her Lips are cold and icy; can any thing be more nauseous? We must own, (said Madam de Seligny ) lifting her hands and eyes to Heaven, that there are strange unaccountable things in Love! Valoury has an aversion for his Wife when he knows her; her flesh is loose, her skin rough, she has no Neck, no moisture, and her Lips are without fire: And yet, when he takes her for another, she has none of those faults, and he has all the tenderness and passion for her imaginable. But whence comes this? (continued she) who can give me a good reason for it? He took her (reply'd the Chevalier) for another than his Wife; change of Diet whets the Appetite. That argument is not just (return'd Madam de Seligny ) since 'tis the same object he finds sometimes disagreeable and distastful, and sometimes agreeable and charming. May be it is (reply'd Berly ) that the Pleasures of Marry'd People being permitted, they don't so lively affect the Senses; Laws and Prohibitions, make all Enjoyments the more relishing. And I remember a wild Expression upon this Subject, which I have often heard in Italy, to exaggerate the most sensible Pleasure, Quale gusto si fosse peccato. Neither have you reason'd justly, (reply'd the Marchioness;) Madam de Valoury loves her Husband passionately, which, according to you, she wou'd not do, since 'tis no Sin in her to love him. I see (continued she) the true reason is that which I gave you just now, which is, That Love expires as soon as it is without agitation. Valoury had nothing to wish from his Wife, she was all his, he dispos'd as he pleas'd of her Person, and her Heart; and that is it which stifles Love. For his Mistress, he went to her but at certain hours in the Night; no doubt there was danger in it, he had often fears, and apprehensions, which nourish'd his Love, and redoubled his Transports, and inclination for his Wife, when he thought her his Mistress. This puts me in mind (continued she) of a Lady of my acquaintance, who is above forty years old, and yet her Husband is as fond of her as he was the first day he Marry'd her. And in this manner she preserves him so: She is in a continual reservedness with him, haughty, and never suffers any familiarity; her Bed is a-part, and if her Husband wou'd pass a Night with her, she puts on an affected shiness, and anger, makes him buy her favours, and give her every time a Jewel. The End of the First Part. her know, that the Baronness of Chardonnay, and the Co[illeg.]ss of Reall, with the Viscount du Pin, and the Commander of Fuissez, was come to wait upon her. Ah! Gentlemen, (cry'd the Marchioness) what Pleasure are you going to have, in hearing this company talk upon the Subject of your Conversation! These two Ladies, besides that they are as beautiful as any in Paris, they have Wit like Angels. As she spoke thus the Company came in, and after the first Civilities, when they were all seated, the Abbot Sophin, taking up the discourse, said to them, You are come very opportunely, Ladies, to decide a difficulty which is between Philocrates and Alcander, about Marriage: Philocrates maintains, That there is much more satisfaction, and less uneasiness, in the Life of a married Man, than of one who is not so; and Alcander is of a contrary Sentiment. What think you of it, Ladies? (interrupted the Marchioness.) That depends upon the choice of the Person (reply'd the Baronness of Chardonnay ) 'Tis almost impossible (answer'd Alcander ) to choose well, in a time when a Woman disguises her self, and appears quite contrary to what she is, or what she will be; whether that be done by a natural temper, or by dissimulation, one does not suffer the less by it. Whatever pains a Woman takes, (continued the Baronness) she can't dissemble so well, as not to be discover'd by the clear-sighted. Well, Madam, (said Alcander ) what quality do you require in a Woman to make a good Wife? That she be (reply'd the Baronness) Discreet, Devout, have Wit, and love her Husband. I have seen some (return'd Alcander ) who had the Character in the World of possessing all those qualities, and yet their Husbands were not the more happy: What chagrin, what constraint, has not a Husband to suffer from a Wife who passes for Discreet? She is presumptuous, proud, full of her self; her Husband does nothing well; at every moment she opposes his Sentiments and his Conduct; she will dispose of all, rule all, and imagines that (because she does not live in the Irregularity of other Women) her Husband ought to have the last Obligations to her for a Vertue, to which her Vanity is alone indebted. Nor will the Husband of a religious Wife have a better Bargain; she'll let her self be govern'd by interested Persons, of false Judgments, who will distract her Brain, mismanage her Actions, furnish her Alcove with Deaths-heads, make her dress her self in an antick and singular manner; and who, under a pretence of Devotion, will engage her to make her Family fast, almost killing her Husband, Children, and Domesticks with Hunger, and by her Whimseys and Chagrins make a Hell of her House. A witty Wife is no less to be fear'd; she is insolent, opinionate, and ill-natur'd; she despises her Husband, looks upon him as an ignorant; nothing is well thought, but what she imagines; and, instead of minding her Domestick Affairs, she thinks of nothing but filling up ends of Rhimes, making Verses, and seeking every month a good Place in the Mercure Galant. Tho' the Wife, who loves her Husband, seems to be the best Lot, she is not the least incommode, nor the least burthen: as soon as the Husband is arriv'd at a certain Point, he has no more Passion, no more Tenderness for his Wife; mean while when his Wife loves him, she soon perceives his indifference; that creates Jealousie, and night and day he hears nothing but reproaches; to hear her speak, he is Perfidious, a Traytor, a Villain; how innocent soever his Actions are, she interprets them criminally, and, upon the lightest suspicions, writes to a Husband, or a Gallant, that his Wife, or his Mistress betrays him; if her Husband laughs, or rallies with her, or caresses her, that's, says she, to conceal some new Treachery: If he is thoughtful or chagrin, 'tis for being with her, or his impatience to be with his Mistress. You have heard of her, who upon a suspicion that a magnificent Suit of Cloaths which her Husband had made, was to please a Lady who had a Suit of Ribbands of the same Colour, threw the Cloaths in the Fire before her Husband rise: Of another, who, disguis'd like a Footman, follow'd her Husband every where, to discover his Intrigues; and of that other, who, transported with her Jealousie, met her Husband's Mistress upon the high way, and, to give him a horror and disgust for her Person, made her be shamefully abused by her Moor, and her other Footmen, and treated like an infamous Prostitute: Own, after this, that a Man who is thus belov'd by his Wife has not a little to endure. You take all your Characters in their Extreams (reply'd Philocrates ) a Woman may be discreet and devout, without being chagrin and troublesome; witty, without being fantastick and proud; and may love her Husband, without being jealous. There are few Women (reply'd Alcander ) who can keep the golden Medium; all they do is in excess. For my part (said the Commander of Fuissez ) if I were to chuse a Wife, she should be handsome, witty and gay; I would have her love all manner of Pleasure, Gaming, Balls, Walks, Plays, and Treats; in a word, that she shou'd think of nothing but diverting her self. You reason like a Soldier, (answer'd Alcander ) that is, one of a Profession for changing Wives; but a Husband has not that advantage after six months enjoyment of his handsome Wife, this witty, gay Wife, when he has seen her rising from her Bed, with yellow Complexion, pale Lips, heavy Eyes, disorder'd Head cloaths, and has heard her talk in her negligent hours, when she does not observe her self, or is out of humour, adieu Tenderness and Respect, adieu Esteem; he takes his Purse from her, refuses her what Money she would have for her Cloaths, her Ornaments, and for Play; he repines at her, complains, won't bed with her; she soon perceives the change: It must be reveng'd, says she, Necklace, Rings, Crochet, Jewels, all is dispos'd of to get Money; that does not suffice, a separation must be made, he's an extravagant unthrift, cries she, to the Judges, he keeps Mistresses in Town, and has attempted against my Life; in fine, Suppositions, Lyes, Artifices, all is in season for her: In this Interval the officious Lover proffers his assistance, she accepts it: He, like the Husband, is tir'd of her, despises her, and leaves her: She takes another, and then another; and strowing thus her Favours from Gallant to Gallant, she quickly loses her Honour and Reputation in the World: Her Husband knows all this, but dares not complain of it in Justice; he can get no Witnesses, and her bare Accusation will suffice to cast him, and make him be condemned to a Restitution of his Wife's Portion, which she has consum'd the best part of. Judge, after this, if it be advantageous to marry a handsome Wife. Well then, marry her foolish and ugly, (return'd the Commander.) I shou'd not love (reply'd Alcander ) to blush in Company at the Folly and Impertinence of my Wife. And for ugly (assumed the Chevalier) I don't advise him; she must paint, and that's a vast Expence to a Man. You appear very difficult and cantious (interrupted the Countess of Reall, addressing her self to Alcander ) but 'tis such as you that are the soonest ensnar'd; and to give my Sentiments upon the Matter, 'tis more honourable and advantageous for a Man to marry, than to renounce it all his life: Yes (pursu'd she) after having seen the life and end of Singamis and Agamis, I shall always be of that Opinion. All the Company, who were divided upon Philocrates and Alcander's Dispute, had a Curiosity to know their Story, and begg'd the Countess to give them a recital of it; which she did in these Words. and had both very considerable Fortunes: My Mother was the dearest Friend their Mother had in the World; who in dying commanded them to be govern'd by her; they obey'd her so well at first, that they did nothing of consequence without communicating it to her. When they were arriv'd to an Age which they might think of Marriage, my Mother spoke to them of it: Her Advice was, that they should both marry; Religion, and the fine Estates they had, serv'd her for a Reason; but neither of them would hearken to it: Agamis, who was the eldest, had an invincible repugnancy to it, which she could not surmount; but for Singamis, tho' he seem'd very averse to it, yet she reduc'd him, and undertook to provide him a suitable Match; and in this manner she design'd it; she would have her of some Fortune, but did not stand for a little more, or a little less; above all things she requir'd, that she should be one born of a discreet and vertuous Mother, who had given her a good Education, perswaded that the Daughter would have the same Inclinations; she was so prepossest with that Belief, and had observ'd it so often, that when she heard of the Loosness or Gallantry of any young Woman, she never fail'd of raising her dead Mother, to show that the Daughter had done nothing but by her Example: She did not desire an extraordinary Beauty, saying, that its consequences were dangerous; and provided that a Woman had a gentile Air, and nothing shocking in her Face or Shape, she cou'd bear with the rest; because, said she, how destitute soever a Woman is of Beauty, if she have Modesty and Discretion, she always pleases: She believ'd the je ne scay quoy. Then (interrupted the Viscount du Pin. ) It was very necessary to interrupt me, (reply'd the Countess of Real briskly:) I declare if you do it again, I shall think my Story Fatigues, and will break it off: Yes, Monsieur the Viscount, (continu'd she smiling, and returning from her sharpness) she was so far perswaded, that we feel for one another a certain je ne scay quoy, of Love or Hate, that before she could determine in her choice of Sophronia, (in whom she found all the Qualities she look'd for to form a prudent Wife,) she would know whether the je ne scay quoy was not contrary to her Designs; and thus pursu'd her Resolutions. One day, having contriv'd that Singamis and Sophronia should meet at a publick Place without knowing one another, and without having the least knowledge of her Intentions; she set her self to railly Sophronia, to jear her very sharply, and even to turn her into ridicule; 'twas easie to know in observing Singamis, what he would feel for Sophronia; in that moment the je ne scay quoy appear'd. The Youth suffer'd more than she; he did his best to defend her; and in going out he own'd sincerely to my Mother, that he had been vex'd at her for using the poor young Lady so ill. My Mother, without discovering her self, made him some little reproaches for it; and telling him she had nothing of agreeable in her, drew a confession from him, that she wou'd please him better than another; that was what my Mother wish'd; she made no longer a mystery of her Designs; and, after having given him a Reason for all she had done, she made him consent to marry Sophronia. What is most singular and remarkable in this Adventure is, that tho' many young People had taken Sophronia's part against my Mother, she had no Acknowledgments, and was only sensible of what Singamis had done for her: so much, that she cou'd not forbear boasting of it incessantly, as my Mother was afterwards informed; nor did she delay to conclude the Marriage. Ah, Alcander, (cry'd the Countess of Reall here,) how intirely will you alter your Opinion, when you have seen the different Conditions of these two Brothers in the course of their Lives, and in their Deaths! There was nothing but Sweetness, Satisfaction, Consolations, Peace of Conscience, and Glory, for Singamis, nothing but Shame, Scorn, Chagrin, Despair, and Remorse for Agamis, as you are going to see. Sophronia was officious, humble, and discreet with her Husband; and in her Family she kept a charming mildness, mingled with a little severity, with which she made her self belov'd, and engag'd all that belong'd to her to do their Duty, without ever brawling or quarrelling; and if any thing was out of order, with the justest Reasons, handsomely inspired, she informed their Judgments, and brought them first to condemn their own Errors themselves; it was not possible but so engaging a Conduct must touch the heart of Singamis: But, in the mean time, his being married did not hinder him from having some little remainder of his former Inclinations, either for Entertainments, Gaming, or his old Mistresses. Singamis lov'd to treat his Friends; Sophronia receiv'd them in the best manner in the World; she had always an open and smiling Countenance; said a hundred pretty things; and all things were so well order'd at her House, that he was better pleas'd there than in any other Place. When Singamis return'd from Play very late, she wou'd open the Door to him her self, with an Air of Gaiety and Kindness; and if he chid her for not being in Bed, she answer'd him that her Servants had wak'd several nights before; and that she wou'd sit up in her turn, that they might be the better able to serve him the next day; that she cou'd sleep in the morning; and that, in sine, she had a mind to drink with him of the Liquor that was [illeg.] to have ready against his coming home. If she observ'd in her Husband's Face any regret for his Losses at Play, without seeming to perceive it, she wou'd speak to him of People who were to bring him money very shortly, and always turn'd the state of their Affairs on the best side: What she had the most pain to disgest, was his correspondence with his former Mistresses; however she did not complain of it, nor show the least discontent in her Face: but when she had made any new Discovery upon it, she wou'd retire into her Closet, to vent her Grief in Tears: If her Husband surpriz'd her in that condition, immediately wiping her Eyes, and concealing her Sadness, she recover'd her former Looks, and liv'd evenly with him: If he prevented her, and unaccus'd, offer'd to justifie himself, she receiv'd all he said with a mild and submissive Air, letting him understand that she did not think her self deserving enough to possess him intirely, and that she was not born for so great a Happiness. Tho' so discreet and charming a Behaviour, as Sophronia's, was capable of withdrawing Singamis from all his youthful Extravagancies, a Son and Daughter which she had by him, and to whom she had given an extraordinary good Education, were no little helps to her; [illeg.]they sung, danc'd, and play'd spannish[illeg.] Guittarr to perfection, and understood Heraldry, Geography, Chronology and History. Admire what Power a wise and vertuous Wife, assisted by amiable and well educated Children, has over her Husband's Mind, to bring him to his Duty. This Man, who lov'd nothing but Gaming, Feasting, Women, and Drinking, plays now no more but with his Children, will eat no where but in his own House, and can endure no other Company but his Wife's. I can't (said he often to my Mother,) I can't enough admire my change, I us'd all my Endeavours before I was marry'd to cure my self of my passion for Play; I was incessantly in the Tavern, and among Women, notwithstanding the many reproaches I made my self for it, and the remorse I suffer'd; but now I have so great a horror and disgust for those sort of things, that I cannot conceive what satisfaction I found in 'ern then: My only Pleasure is in being with my Wife and Children: I pass my days the most agreeably imaginable in seeing them play together and caress one another; and all my ambition is bounded in giving them a good Education, and making them a considerable Fortune. As the Countess of Reall spoke thus, the Baronness of Chardonnay interrupting her, said, Madam, 'tis impossible to be better pleas'd than we are with hearing you; and we are resolv'd not to leave you till you have finished your Relation, th o Play time approaches, and that we have engag'd our selves to be there as you know. I understand you, reply'd the Countess; you would have me make an end, I will obey you, Madam; besides Alcander suffers too much by the recital of what Pleasures Singamis enjoy'd in Marriage; but let him not deceive himself, he will be yet worse entertain'd with all I have to say to him of Agamis. To conclude. (continu'd the Countess) Singamis and Sophronia, having made it their whole business and pleasure to form the Minds and Hearts of their Children, and to give them great Fortunes, they made them the most finish'd Persons, and the most desir'd Matches in Paris, and marry'd them into the Families of some of the chief Ministers of State; which gave them a great elevation in the World, and being the occasion of making Singamis's Merit known, the King gave him a considerable Employment, in which he grew old with Honour, and dy'd with Firmness and Constancy in the Arms of his Wife, who softned his last moments, by telling him, that they cou'd not be said to dye, who left such Children as his behind them. After his Death, Sophronia dispos'd of what he had left, and retir'd into a Convent, where she dy'd with a lasting Fame of Sanctity. You have seen, (pursu'd the Countess,) the Life and Death of Singamis, who marry'd by my Mother's Advice; and I am going to tell you, that of Agamis his Brother, who wou'd never hear of it; after which you shall judge if I have not reason to advise for Marriage. Agamis, young, handsome, rich, of quality, gallant, unmarried, and designing never to marry, did not fail of finding those sort of lucky Adventures, after which young People run with so much avidity; however passing whole hours hid in a Closet, and sometimes in a Chest, scarcely daring to breathe; getting hastily down upon Linen ty'd together, from a Chamber-window into the street, by the Favour of the Night, and in fear of being surpriz'd by the Watch; hearing, as he was retiring home, Musquet-balls about his Ears; being attack'd by Assassinates; Ingratitude and Infidelity of Mistresses, Doctors, Chyrurgeons, almost always at his Heels, were Inconveniences which dishearten'd Agamis from aiming at these imaginary good Fortunes, and made him take the resolution of fixing himself to one Person, with whom he fansied he might lead [illeg.]d [illeg.]agreeable Life. He cast his Eyes [illeg.] upon Scortina, who was a Maid under the Conduct of a Mother, uneasie in her Fortune, and of a humour to suffer all things for a good Entertainment, or the smallest Profit: Scortina plaid her part to admiration; she was no great Beauty, but had in her Air, and in her Carriage, I know not what of tender, and moving, which charm'd, and with which she engag'd Agamis very far. To have seen her, you wou'd have thought her the discreetest, most reserv'd young Woman in France; and she had already deceiv'd many, who had look'd upon her as a Prize; but Agamis fell deeper in the snare than all the rest; Bislets- doux, Verses, Declarations of Love, Plays, Opera's, Rings, Crochet of Diamonds, Pearl-necklaces; in fine, all ways were try'd before he cou'd be heard; and then he must believe, she yielded but to the violent Passion she had for him. One day as he importun'd her, (judge of the Character of this cunning Creature,) she threw her self at his Feet, protested she had never lov'd any Man so much as she lov'd him; and bursting into Tears, conjur'd him not to ruine her, in making an ill use of the tenderness she had for him. This Discourse stopp'd Agamis, who was an Enemy to all Violence. You will love me no more my Dear, (continu'd she,) and then arising triumphantly, she went and threw her self upon a Couch, from whence she look'd upon Agamis with insulting Eyes: The poor Youth has own'd to me since, that he was upon the Point of going to ask her Pardon, when she rowling her dying Eyes pretended to swound away: Agamis run to her assistance, and insensibly forgetting his Vertue, he gave himself up to the transport of his Love; not Lucretia ravish'd show'd such lively, or such ardent Sentiments of Grief and Vengeance; twenty times she leap'd to Agamis's Sword, and as often offer'd to kill her self. Dissembling Jilt! 'twas only to give him the greater Idea of her: You imagine well enough, that having begun with this artifice, she made use of many others. To have judged by Appearances, she had an affection for Agamis beyond all that can be conceiv'd; upon the least disorder or chagrin he had, she was inconsolable; never Woman appear'd so disinterested; for him (she said) she wou'd have sacrific'd her Fortune, Life, and Honour; she had had a general aversion for all Men, and cou'd not conceive how she was capable of so violent a Passion for Agamis; mean while this was all meer cunning and dissimulation, in which her Interest only was concern'd; and it was nothing for her to entertain two or three Men at once; but the poor credulous Agamis gave up his Faith entirely to all she said, and believ'd himself the happiest of Men, in having found a Person so sensible, so vertuous, and one who lov'd him so tenderly; which made him free himself from all other Engagements, that he might be wholly hers; as soon as she perceiv'd it, she begun with making her self Mistress of his House; she chang'd all his Servants; wou'd have the Purse in pretence of good Huswifery; and influenc'd him in such a manner, as to make him quarrel with his Relations, and break withall his former Friends. In fine, all his Affairs were manag'd by Scortina's Orer: She had a Son, upon which the wretched Agamis madly doted, and thought of nothing but deceiving the Laws, to make him Heir of all his Estate after his Death. Scortina, taking hold of that occasion, prevail'd with him in a Sickness which he had, to enter into many Obligations to her advantage, and some of her Gallants; by which he thought he cou'd hazard nothing, having them in his possession. To conclude, Scortina's Son gave Agamis a thousand disturbances; he wou'd be all the day in Taverns and ill Houses, and frequented none but Robbers; by and by they bring him home drunk, and without sense; at other times dangerously wounded; another day he must be hid, because he has kill'd or wounded some body; and many times he was in Prisons, and upon the Point of receiving a shameful and ignominious Sentence: In fine, his Brutality arriv'd to that heighth, that he offer'd several times to beat, and even kill both Agamis and Scortina: And, for her part, she liv'd no better than her Son at last; but gave her self to a thousand Rogues, with whom she drank, and committed a hundred other Infamies; which compleated the ruine of her Reputation and her Health: She communicated her Distemper to Agamis, who then began to know her, and wou'd have taken measures to get himself out of her hands; but she perceiv'd it, upon which she gave him a slow Poison; stole the Key of his Cabinet from him, and took his Money, and all the Obligations he had sign'd in the time of his Sickness; retir'd from his House, and by virtue of these Obligations made his Goods be seiz'd on, and despoil'd him of them all; so that the unhappy Agamis, abandon'd and despis'd by all the World, spoil'd and ruin'd by the Disease, and the Poison she had given him, dy'd in extreme Misery, and in the highest Desperation. The Countess of Reall had no sooner ceased to speak, than all the Company declar'd for Marriage, and was of Philocrates's Opinion: The Marchioness of Seligny declar'd her self with more violence than the rest; she said that a vertuous Wife has always certain Sentiments of Honour in her Heart, which gives incomparably more satisfaction, than the irregular Manners of a Miss; and that a legitimate Child finds in himself the Dignity of his Origin; whereas a natural Child expresses, for the most part, in his Actions, the shame of his Birth, and the irregularity of his Parents corrupted Manners; and ended, saying with a sharp and raillying Tone, that one must have a mind of a very uncommon and fantastick Character, to defend a contrary Opinion. However Alcander still persisted in his, and even maintain'd that they had never seen such Enormities committed by Misses, or Bastards, as had been acted by Wives, and legitimate Children. Have we not known, said he, a legitimate Daughter, harbour for three years, and put in execution the horrible Design of poisoning her own Father, who lov'd her tenderly, and from whom she had receiv'd a thousand Kindnesses? Was there ever any thing heard of to parallel that, done by a natural Child? Have not we lately seen a Wife, who had given Money to have her Husband be assassinated; another, who had rais'd a false accusation against hers, which wou'd have expos'd him to a most cruel and ignominious Death: Did ever such things enter into the Thoughts of a Mistress, or illegitimate Child; and yet they have been acted by lawful Wives and Children, and those of Quality. They say Scortina poison'd Agamis, how probable is that? His Death wou'd have made too great a noise in the World; and so black an Action cou'd not have escap'd the Rigours of la Chambre ardente: It may be indeed she robb'd him; but how many Wives have done as much, (continu'd he, looking with a malicious smile upon the Marchioness of Seligny, ) upon which she blush'd. The Baroness perceiv'd it; and, fearing the Conversation shou'd grow too hot, to prevent it, rose hastily; and, casting her Eyes upon her Watch, said she fear'd the Play was begun, and that they must not lose time, but go thither immediately; which she did with all the Company, except Philocrates, Alcander, and the Abbot of Sophin, who were more for walking. The Coach was scarce out of St. Germains, when Alcander taking up the Discourse, said, what shocking, extravagant Women are here?! ow does that Baroness of Chardonnay dare with an inch thick of red and white upon her face, to maintain that Air of Reservedness and Gravity? That confident Countess of Reall, ought not she to have dy'd with shame, in reciting such an imprudent Story as Scortina's; and for that Extravagance of Seligny, what think you of her, to rob her Husband, leave him, and sue him to a separation, because he loves her too well? How I pity (proceeded he) the unfortunate Men who are troubled with such Wives. Ah, how free is my Lesbia from those sort of defects? All the Women I see, serve only to make her appear the more agreeable to me; pure Water is all her Paint; but meeting a Man's Eyes makes her blush; she keeps two thousand Lowis' d'ores for me, which I think safer with her than in my own Cabinet; and is so disinterested, that I cou'd scarce oblige her to receive the Ruby which I gave her. All that Lesbia has done for you, (interrupted Philocrates, ) comes not near the Obligations I have to Fraudelisa; she had broke off with Philabell, was resolv'd to leave the World, and confine her self to a Convent, but for me alone has chang'd her resolution, and me alone she loves. As Philocrates spoke thus, the Sky had cover'd it self with a Cloud so thick and dark, that they cou'd hardly with the help of the Lights distinguish their way; which oblig'd their Coachman to drive as fast as he cou'd to the next Tavern. Philocrates, Alcander, and the Abbot Sophin, being come out of the Coach, went into the first Room in the Tavern, where they found two Gentlemen who contested together about the Value and Beauty of a Ruby; he that had it in his hand, and who was the Owner of it, said, that it was an Oriental Ruby, the other affirm'd that it was not: Alcander calling to mind, that tho' the Ruby which he had giv'n Lesbia was a very good one, many People had taken it for false, had a Curiosity to see that which the Gentlemen held; and stepping softly forward behind him, he saw it very near; it seem'd to him extremely to resemble that he had presented Lesbia with, which caus'd some disturbance in him: He who had the Ruby having turn'd his Head, and seen Alcander in that condition, hastily hid it; and notwithstanding the violent Rain, went presently out of the Tavern accompany'd with the Person with whom he was. I wou'd fain know (said Alcander ) who that Gentleman is to whom the Ruby belongs. I don't know him, (reply'd Philocrates; ) but for him that was with him, I can tell you his Name, (continu'd he;) 'tis Philabel, he that was desperately in love with Fraudelisa, whom she cou'd not endure, and whose Visits she refus'd, because of his too free and disrespectful carriage. 'Tis the Owner of the Ruby (interrupted Alcander ) that I would know; methinks his is very like that which I gave to Lesbia, and I wou'd fain find out from whence he had it. He is really jealous, (answer'd Philocrates, laughing,) and thinks Lesbia gave his Ruby to that Man. I am very far from it, (return'd Alcander, ) I know Lesbia too well to do her that Injustice, the poor Creature was like to dye for Grief when she lost it, and I had much ado to comfort her. Tho' Alcander was very confident of Lesbia's Fidelity, yet the quick and confus'd manner with which he had hid the Ruby, the precipitation with which he had gone out of the Tavern, tho' it rain'd violently, and the resemblance he found in his Ruby to that which he had giv'n Lesbia, disquieted him, and gave him a Chagrin; which was perceiv'd by the Abbot, and which oblig'd him to call one of his Servants, and command him to inform himself with address, of the Names of those two Gentlemen. The Fellow told him, that apparently he shou'd not have much difficulty in learning them; that they had sent a Footman back to the Tavern to stay for the Answer of a Letter which was to be brought thither; that he was a Country-Fellow whom it wou'd be easie to manage with a Bottle. One of the two, (said Alcander to the Servant,) has a Ruby; if thou canst learn from whom he had it, and how, what Obligation shall I have to thee, and how grateful shall I be? The Servant promis'd him to use all his Endeavours for his satisfaction, and so wert out of the room in order to it. In the mean time, Philocrates, Alcander, and the Abbot, fell to making Reflections upon what they had seen. Alcander said, that never any Ruby had more resembled that which he had giv'n Lesbia, and that in seeing them together one might be deceiv'd. Philocrates alledg'd that most Rubies were alike, and that it was very difficult to know their difference: The Abbot did not know what to think of the surprize and astonishment these two Men were in, and of their hasty retreat notwithstanding the Rain. Philocrates, with a disdainful and raillying Air, said, Philabell, affected with his being to marry Fraudelisa, cou'd not bear his sight, and therefore was retir'd: In fine, every one reason'd after his Fancy, till the Abbot's Servant came to inform them, that the Owner of the Ruby was call'd Cleanthus; that a Lady had presented him with it, who was very shortly to give him two thousand Lowis d'ore's, and to be marry'd to him; that that Footman, (who belong'd to Cleanthus, ) did not know the Lady's Name, but had only told him, that one day she and Cleanthus being in an Arbour in the Garden of St. Clous, and talking together, he had hid himself behind the Arbour, where he heard all that he told him. After the Servant had giv'n this Account, and was retir'd, Philocrates casting his Eyes upon the pensive Alcander; 'Tis then thy Lesbia, (said he to him,) that Maid so mov'd with the loss of the Ruby thou had'st giv'n her: Alas! that Accident seem'd to her a presage that thou woud'st cease to love her; she believ'd 'twou'd be her death, poor Girl: Dost thou observe how disinterested she is and how faithfully she keeps thy two thousand Lowis d' Ore's? That Maid so free from all Engagements, who hated for thy sake all other Men; that Heart which thou hast kept so well in breath, by the diversity of Exercise thou gav'st it, and by the fear of losing thee: In fine, that Heart which lov'd thee in a manner so nice, so delicate, and so unknown to marry'd People. Don't insult over the unhappy, (reply'd Alcander; ) In whom shou'd one confide! cry'd he; Lesbia give my Ruby to a Wretch, a Fellow without Name! Lesbia unfaithful to me! Lesbia treacherous! Lesbia resolv'd to rob me! In whom shou'd one confide, (interrupted Philocrates, ) in a Maid of Quality, well educated, and who looks upon you as her Husband; in fine, in Fraudelisa, in whom appears a thousand charming Qualities, a thousand Vertues? This Conversation was interrupted by the noise of a Footman, who had brought a Letter, and ask'd for Philabell in the Court. Philocrates looking out of the Window, saw that it was Fraudelisa's Footman, which made him colour: Alcander observing it, had a mind to see who it was, and he knew him too; so that without giving any hint of his Suspicion, that perhaps he had brought the Answer, which Cleanthus's Footman waited for, he went immediately down; and having found in a passage, through which the Fellow must needs pass, a corner so dark that one cou'd hardly discern any body in it, he plac'd himself there to wait for him; and as soon as he was near enough, ask'd him softly for Fraudelissa's Letter, at the same time putting a Crown in his hand: The Footman, who cou'd not see him that spoke to him by reason of the obscurity, did not go to imagine that it might be some other than Philabel, who ask'd for the Letter; and not being very sorry to have a Crown, he took it hastily, gave the Letter without making any farther reflection, and went his way. Alcander as soon return'd to the room where he had left his Friends; and after having unseal'd the Letter, he gave it Philocrates, asking him if he knew the hand; Philocrates answer'd that it seem'd to be Fraudelisa's: And then Alcander told him how he got it; which you may imagine gave both him and the Abbot an extreme impatience to read it: And in these Terms it was conceiv'd.  little know my Heart, when you imagine it capable of loving any Man but you; if I marry Philocrates, I submit to the cruel and terrible Commands of a Father, who will sacrifice me to that great Law-suit which has so long devour'd his Family. The Heart of the Victim will not then be found of the Sacrifice; 'tis destin'd for a cruel, for thee, ungrateful Man.  Alcander had no sooner read this Letter, than returning it to Philocrates, and looking upon him with a serious Air, he spoke to him in these Words: This Letter (said he to him) makes me change my Sentiments, converts me from my Errors, and reconciles me to Marriage. Ah, Philocrates, (continu'd he,) how happy are you, that can for your whole Life engage to your self a Maid of so much Honour, one who loves you so faithfully! See how she hates Philabel, that imprudent, unmannerly Man, who made the poor Girl blush so often; how regular and agreeable a Life are you going to live together; the more you see her, the more you will discover her extraordinary Qualities, and the more you will be satisfy'd with your choice; you will make of your Duty a soft habitude of loving one another; she will furnish you with a thousand innocent Pleasures, withdraw you from Debauchery, by an excess of lawful Joys; she will bring you the comfort of fine Children, and the Letter she has writ to Philabel assures you of it. Here Alcander, quitting his Gravity, cou'd not forbear laughing heartily; and, in that moment, the Coachman came in to advertise them, that the Rain was over, but that there remain'd so thick a Cloud in the Air, that it seem'd to threaten a more furious Storm than the first; and that he cou'd not answer for carrying them back, unless they set out presently; they order'd him to be ready. The Abbot Sophin, seeing Philocrates and Alcander, as it were out of themselves, spoke to them in this manner. You have no cause to laugh, nor one, nor t'other, and if any thing can disengage you from Women, it must be what you have now seen; not that you shou'd judge of all by Lesbia and Fraudelisa; there are still some Women of Honour and Fidelity. The business is not (interrupted Alcander ) to disengage us from Women, to condemn or to commend 'em; we know enough of them already: But now the Point is to judge between us, and to know if it is advantageous to marry, and if there is in Marriage more satisfaction than chagrin. The Question appears to me very difficult to decide, (reply'd the Abbot;) but if you will know what are the first Thoughts that present themselves to me upon the Matter, I think that the Constitution ought to be the only Rule in this difficulty: If you feel in your heart an indifference, or an aversion for a Wife, and for Children, don't marry; for Marriage then will certainly give you more chagrin than pleasure: If on the contrary, you find in your self a disposition, and an inclination for 'em, you will do much better to marry; not that you are to hope for a real and a solid Happiness, there is none in any Condition of this Life, and less in Marriage than in all others; but the lawful Pleasures of that State may serve to soften the chagrin and pains of Life; to hinder your Wife from falling into Disorders and Debauchees, and to temper her ill humour and uneasiness; you will receive Services from her; you'll have the pleasure of knowing your self again in your Children; they will be as Bonds to unite you more strongly together, and you will find your Mind and Conscience in another Seat, than with a Mistress interested and unfaithful. In a word, evil for evil, 'tis better to live with a Wife, who lets herself go but rarely, and that by weakness, to some Infidelity, than to be all your days expos'd to the Perils, which your Fortune, Life, and Reputation hazards, with a Woman, who having no lawful tie for you, and being without Honour or Religion, is capable of undertaking all things, to satisfie her Pleasure and her Passion. As Alcander was a going to answer, the Coachman came to them again, and oblig'd them for fear of a second Storm to take Coach, and return to their several Lodgings. Satisfaction than Uneasiness in Marriage; that Alcander affirm'd the contrary; and that both entreated the Abbot Sophin to be their Judge upon the Question, Whether it was more advantageous to marry than to live single: Lesbia, who had been Fraudelisa's Friend ever since they had been Pensioners together in the same Convent, came to visit her. 'Tis to wish you (said she, running to embrace her) all Happiness, a thousand Pleasures in your Marriage. Yes, my Dear (return'd Fraudelisa, pressing her in her Arms) I am going to be the happiest Woman in the World, since I am to marry Philocrates. I will believe it (reply'd Lesbia with a serious Tone, seating her self by her) but then your Destiny must have something in it very singular, and Philocrates must not be like other Men. How many Women (pursu'd she) lament night and day their having ever engag'd in Marriage? Can that be possible my Dear (answer'd Fraudelisa? ) 'Tis a dreadful thing (resum'd Lesbia ) to subject one's self for ever to the Will and Infirmities of a Man, whom one knows but through an interested Gallantry, and an infinite number of Artifices and Disguises: he is no sooner become your Husband, than he looks upon himself as a Master, who has an absolute Empire over you, he neglects you, despises you, and think 'tis against his Gravity, and he does you a great Favour, when he receives your Caresses. I apprehend nothing on that side (returned Fraudelisa ) Philocrates loves me with a Passion too tender and constant. You may find other Troubles in Marriage (continu'd Lesbia ) as, the Evils and Accidents that attend, the Breeding, Bearing, and Lying-in of Children and the Afflictions that their Sickness causes, or their Death. Well (reply'd Frandelisa ) the Pleasure of bringing a Husband that one loves, a Child which he desires, recompences the Pain; if they are sick, there are Servants to take care of them, and if they die (pursu'd she Smiling) for one lost two gain'd. Do you reckon for nothing (assum'd Lesbia ) the Cares, and Disquiets which is caus'd by the Desire and Ambition of raising your Children, and making them great, and the part you take in the Fatigues and Troubles the poor Husband endures, to make his Fortune, or to preserve that which he has? I shall know how to govern my Thoughts (answer'd Fraudelisa ) to bound my Fortune, and my Ambition, and apply my self intirely to please my Husband, by my Kindness, and good Humour; and with us I need not fear wanting, we shall have Estate enough, and our Parents have taken care to settle it well. How many Men (reply'd Lesbia ) have had greater Riches, and high Employments, who are now in Necessity, or whose Widows and Children live in Misery and Servitude? but I'll allow (continu'd she) that your Family remain in Honour and Opulency, who will assure you that this Husband's Heart who is pleas'd with himself, and seeks for every day new Relishes of Joy and Pleasure, shall always love you, with that yellow Complexion, those pale and livid Lips, and that lean Face which your many Children will without doubt bring you; whilst he who goes into the World, sees Women every day, as beautiful as Angels, who offer him their Favours? As Lesbia spoke thus, the Widow of a Merchant Jeweller came to see Fraudelisa; 'twas to fell her a Pearl Necklace. This Woman had let her have many Jewels at a very low rate, which occasion'd a great Intimacy betwixt them. See (said she to Fraudelisa turning the Necklace on all sides, and giving it to her) look upon this delicate Drop, of what Bigness and Roundness it is. I'll warrant it right Eastern, or I'll have nothing for it; 'tis to be sold for six hundred Lowis; and if the Lady whose it is, and who has made a false one like it to deceive her Husband, had not play'd unfortunately at Basset, you shou'd not have it at that price. Fraudelisa told the Woman she wou'd shew it to some that understood such thing, and then give her an Answer. Lesbia who knew this Woman, by having seen her often at her Mothers, and having bought some Jewels of her, and knowing that her Husband had not been long dead, ask'd her if she was marry'd again. She reply'd, That she was very far from it; that there was no Condition so happy as that of a Widow; that she is independant, lives as she pleases, and is safe from those Reproaches which are usually given to Old Maids. You may change your thoughts (return'd Lesbia. ) I marry again (Interrupted the Woman raising her Voice, and lifting up her Shoulders) God keep me from it; I have had too much of that already. Marriage was not made for such Wretches as I. Why so (answer'd Lesbia? ) Men of our Rank (reply'd the Widow) look upon their Wives as their Servants, upon the first Disquiet they scold at them, call 'em a hundred Names, and if they answer, threaten to break their Heads; they must have their Mistresses in Town, but if the poor Wife entertain a little Intrigue, and they happen to perceive it, they rage like Devils, and are ready to kill her, as if that ought not to be reciprocal. It is not so (continu'd she) with Women of Quality, their Husbands will see nothing, and whatever presents it self to their eyes, they turn 'em from it, to prevent the Noise and Scandal. Let me tell you, Ladies, what my Fate was with my late Husband, and you shall judge if I have reason to think of Marrying again. I brought him a great deal of Houshold Goods, and Money, and at the beginning of our Marriage, one would have thought, by what he said, he would always love me; I shou'd be Mistress of all, and shou'd never want any thing: but in a little time the Scene was changed, he became so surly, and so uneasie, that he cou'd not endure me; there was nothing but Grumbling and Quarreling perpetually; he car'd for nothing but playing at Bowls, being in Taverns, and with his Wenches, and never came home but late at night, stinking of Wine and Tobacco, furious as a Lion, swearing and railing at me and his Children. If he was sick, I was forc'd to spend the whole days and nights in serving him, and to sell my Merchandize at Under- Rates, for Money to defray the Expences of his Sickness; and for all my Recompence, he told me I was a wicked Slut, that already wish'd to see him bury'd. After his Death, the Charge of the Funeral, and his Debts, have consum'd the best part of what I had, and I have five Children left, and a Shop ill stock'd, upon which my Industry must maintain us. Judge now, fair Lesbia, if I can ever desire a second Marriage. As the Woman spoke thus, a Footman of Alcander's ask'd for Lesbia, and desir'd to speak with her in private. 'Twas one she had plac'd in his Service, that he might give her an Account of all his Master did, or said, when he was from her. He told her how the Rain had constrain'd Philocrates, Alcander, and the Abbot Sophin, to go into a Tavern, where they had found Cleanthus and Philabel disputing about the Value of a Ruby, which appertain'd to Cleanthus; in what manner Alcander had seen the Ruby, that he thought it extreamly resembled that which he had given her, and how he had made Cleanthus's Servant be examin'd upon it: he added, that the Foot-man had answer'd, that a young Lady, whose Name he did not know, had given it to his Master, and that she intended to present him with two thousand Lewis d'Ors more, and to be marry'd to him; that Alcander had believ'd her to be the Person of whom he spoke, and was sensibly touch'd with it; and how Philocrates jeer'd him when he perceiv'd it. After this he related to her, that at the same time a Footman of Fraudelisa's who had brought a Letter, ask'd for Philabel in the Court before the Tavern; that Alcander (knowing from the Window where he was, to whom the Footman belong'd) had suspected a Commerce of Gallantry betwixt Fraudelisa and Philabel, and to discover it, went to intercept the Letter; that he had plac'd himself in such an obscure Corner, that it was impossible to distinguish Persons; where as soon as the Footman came, Alcander ask'd him for Fraudelisa's Letter, giving him a Crown, which he took, and deliver'd the Letter; that Alcander open'd it, and gave it to Philocrates, who knew it to be Fraudelisa's hand; and that he had read it to Alcander, and the Abbot. This Footman added, that he cou'd not remember the Words of the Letter, but that he only knew the Sence to be, that she marry'd Philocrates against her Will, to obey her Father, and that she shou'd always love Philabel. He likewise told Lesbia, how Alcander had laugh'd in his turn at Philocrates, for having been so confident that Fraudelisa lov'd him alone; and in fine, all that had been said by the Abbot and them. And when Lesbia seem'd to wonder how he shou'd know so much, he told her, that he had hid himself in a Closet which join'd to the Room where they were, from whence he had heard all. When he had given Lesbia this Information, he left her, to return to his Master, from whom he had stole away to seek for her. This Relation affected Lesbia in such a manner, and made so violent an Impression upon her Face, that Fraudelisa perceiv'd it, and askt her what was the Cause of it? She reply'd, that it proceeded in part from the Concern she had for her Interests; and Fraudelisa pressing her to express her self more clearly, she askt her if she had not writ that day to Philabel, and what the Letter contain'd. This Discourse gave an Alarm to Fraudelisa's Heart, which made her entreat Lesbia to tell her quickly all she knew of it. Lesbia let her understand that she was unwilling to speak more plainly before the Woman who was there: the Widow perceiving it, told her, that a Woman of her Trade knew much of those Affairs; that she had learn'd a great deal in carrying Pearls and Diamonds to People of Quality's Houses; that they might confidently rely upon her Fidelity and Discretion; that she had admirable Talents for managing a Galantry; that she found a very great Pleasure in making Lovers happy; and that if Lesbia wou'd speak boldly, they should both see what a skilful Person she was. Lesbia, who was as uneasie, and as much perplex'd as Fraudelisa, was ravish'd to know the Widows Talent, that she might make use of it in her Turn if she found it as extraordinary as she promis'd: So that she continued telling Fraudelisa, that the Letter which she had writ that day to Philabel had been intercepted, and was in the hands of Philocrates, with all the manner of that Accident. Immediately Fraudelisa call'd her Footman, and askt him, to whom he had given her Letter: he answer'd (in a little Confusion) that he had given it to Philabel: but Lesbia pressing him to tell her whether he was certain that he had seen Philabel, he confest, that by reason of the Darkness of the place where he was when he gave him the Letter, he cou'd not discern his Face, but that he was sure 'twas Philabel, because he spoke first to him, and ask'd him for Fraudelisa's Letter. Fraudelisa having sent away the Servant, chiding him, and being perswaded that undoubtedly Philocrates had her Letter, was so sensibly touch'd with it, that she fell down upon a Couch, and lay for some time as immovable; then coming to her self, she spoke these Words, interrupted with many grievous Sighs: You look upon me then, Philocrates, as an ingrate, as an unfaithful Woman, that would have deceiv'd you with a false affected Tenderness: Ah wretched Fraudelisa! ah unhappy Philocrates! cry'd she; under what unlucky Planet are we born! Oh that you cou'd one moment see the Sentiments of Esteem and Love I have for you, and those of Hatred and Disdain which I have for Philabel! but no, I never can let you see it, and I have now no Choice to make but Death: What Consolation shou'd I find in that if I cou'd leave thee in thy Heart an eternal Reproach for thy unjust Opinion of me. But my Dear (interrupted Lesbia ) did you love Philocrates? Did he love you? Ha! Did I love him? return'd Fraudelisa; never was any Passion founded upon more Esteem or Inclination How modest, and respectful, was he! what charming, soft, what passionate things he said to me! he'll die with Grief (unhappy Man) as well as I. Why then (reply'd Lesbia ) loving him so much as you do, and being so well belov'd by him, do you entertain a Commerce of Galantry with Philabel? 'Tis a long Story my Dear (answer'd Fraudelisa ) which I am not in a Condition to tell you. The Widow represented to her, that the thing was not so desperate as she imagin'd; that if they knew her Story, they might give her some profitable Counsel; that we are blind in our own Concerns, and more capable of advising others than our selves: she added, that since she was belov'd by Philocrates, and did really love him, she hop'd to find some means to justifie her in his Thoughts, and to reconcile them together. This Discourse a little settled Fraudelisa, and made her begin her Relation thus. and I were, they took me home to them, and gave me a Governess; but in a little time it happen'd, that a great Law-Suit in which they contested for the best part of their Estate, was referr'd to the Parliament of Burgundy; thither they went, and left me with my Governess, under the Conduct of an Aunt, who dy'd presently after their Departure; so that my Governess had the sole Management of me. This Woman, instead of examining my Actions, to regulate them, applauded me in all, and was eternally commending me, telling me, I was the finest young Lady in Paris, and shou'd certainly make a World of Conquests: this is very taking with young People, and it gain'd her a great Ascendant over me, which was all her Aim, as you will see hereafter. One day seeing me more gay, and more exact than ordinary in dressing my self, she took her time to tell me, that if my Beauty gave me Pleasure, it as much tormented a very fine Gentleman, who lov'd me with a most violent Passion; but so submissive, and respectfull, that a Queen wou'd not be offended at it. I ask'd her his Name, but she conceal'd it; telling me, she wou'd let me guess who he was. Upon the Walks the same day, I saw a Man who never took his Eyes off me, but look'd on me with a passionate Air, and sometimes our Eyes met. Ah, my Dear, what Deceivers Men are in these Moments of Surprise, he cast down his Eyes in a manner so submiss, and so full of Modesty, that I would have given him for a Pattern to the most expert Novice in our Convent: Ah Cheat! Ah Traytor! 'twas only to ensnare me. Do you understand that 'twas Philabel of whom I speak? by the Sequel you will see how much my Governess was at his Disposal: She ask'd me after our walk, if I had found out my Lover; and I thought I had made a fine Discovery, when in describing him, she told me 'twas the same she had spoke of. He was a man according to her Character, that had not his equal for Nobleness, for Courage, and for Merit; truly 'twas an Honour for me, that he wou'd make me a Visit. How ridiculous one is when one does not know the World! I receiv'd him very well, and was proud of my Conquest. He gave me a pretty little Dog, and a young Parrot, that spoke every thing: I pass'd the days in kissing and caressing the little Dog, the Parrot talk'd all night, and twenty times repeated, Ingrateful Fraudelisa, pity me; cruel Fraudelisa, pity the unhappy Philabel. He carry'd me to two Plays, to Ariana and Andromache. At Ariana, he wou'd willingly have fought with Theseus, to punish him for his fidelity. At Andromache, in certain passionate and tender parts where Pyrrhus is ill us'd by her, pressing my Hand with Tears in his Eyes, he said to me, that he was a thousand times more unhappy than Pyrrhus, that Andromache had a Cause to hate Pyrrhus since he had been an Enemy to Hector her Husband; but that I hated him without having any reason for it. I laugh'd at this Discourse, as who wou'd not have done in my place. The next day I did not see him, he was sick; every day his Distemper encreas'd he wou'd take no more Nourishment, or Remedies and was resolv'd to die, as they told me. My charitable Governess undertook to make me sensible that I had committed a great Fault; and that with some Men of a tender Nature, there needed not so much to be their Deaths. Immediately with Pen in hand, I make him Satisfaction; I write two or three times to him, or rather I send in my hand Copies of Letters which my illustrious Governess composed. I was in good earnest, and imagin'd 'twas to save the life of a Man whom I believ'd I had some Obligations to: the Letter spoke of nothing but the violent Passion I had for him, the eager Desire I had to give him some Marks of it, and to do all things rather than see him any longer sick: Was not I a very discreet Girl? Was not I finely governanted? But you will judge better of it by the rest. The sick Man wou'd not mend, nor leave his Bed, but I must go to raise him; which I did, tho' with Reluctancy: I had no particular Inclination for his Person; he did not touch my Heart, the sight of him gave me neither Pleasure, nor Pain; his Studyed, and affected behaviour did not please me; in fine, I lik'd nothing of him but his Parrot and his little Dog. We found him in his Bed, decay'd and weak. They begun with telling us, that he had eat nothing in three days; then out of respect, as if I had been an able Physician, my Governess, and those who were in the Chamber with him, retir'd to another, and left me alone with my Patient, to talk with him in private of the State of his Sickness. The first thing he said to me was that he was resolv'd to die; that since I wou'd not love him, Life was but a burthen to him, and that he wish'd for nothing so much as to leave it. I confess to you, that I believ'd he spoke sincerely, and that I pity'd him; I called him back to life in the best manner I cou'd, and promis'd him, whatever he wou'd have, if he wou'd be careful of his Health, and eat something before me. Admire my Friend at my Simplicity; he eats part of a Chicken; I applaud my self for this great Cure, he gives me a thousand Thanks, and kisses my Arms a thousand times; which I took no care to hinder, for fear of a Relapse; my sottish Complaisance emboldned him. Ah insolence! Yes, against this sick, against this weak Man, I had occasion for my Teeth, my Nails, and all my Strength. Escap'd out of his hands, I made him a thousand outrageous Reproaches, charging him never to come any more into my Presence; then I call'd my Governess, who was very calmly in another Chamber; and went out of the House with her, more furious than a Lyon: What, said I to her, is Philabel then but an impudent Cheat, a Villain, that has neither Tenderness nor Respect for me, and who desires nothing but to triumph over my Weakness and my Honour! had not I been a pretty Creature, added I, if I had defended my self worse? durst I ever have appear'd in the World? and many other things I said, too long to recite. All the time of this Discourse my good Governess hearkned very patiently to me; and seeing me a little calmer she said I shou'd not alarm my self, and that a less Beauty wou'd not have produc'd such great effects; that she knew very understanding Women to whom the same thing had happen'd, who never made any Noise of it; and that, tho' they had pretended an Anger and Resentment against the Men, they esteem'd them the more for it in their Hearts; that I ought to do the same, that the like Adventure had befallen to other Maids of Quality besides me, who had not come off as I did, and yet they were not less esteem'd in the World. By this Discourse I preceiv'd all the wicked Designs she had against me, and her Intelligence with Philabel to ruine me: What Fury, what Indignation, did I conceive against her! notwithstanding which, I must dissemble, or lose all. As soon as I came home to my Lodging, I shut my self up alone in my Chamber, where reflecting upon the Softness, and tranquility of my Life, whilst I was in the Convent; upon the Agitations and Disquiets, I had felt since I came out of it; the Deceits and Infidelities I had met with; the small Duration of the Pleasures of this World; the Shortness of Life, my Aunt's sudden Death, and upon a thousand other such things, I took the Resolution of leaving the World, and becoming Religious, and I only waited for the Return of my Father and Mother, to put it in execution. Mean while I liv'd in this manner, the days I pass'd entirely in reading the Lives of Anchorets, and Fathers of the Desart: charm'd with what I read, and in a strong Desire to imitate them, I had renounced all forts of Ornaments: I never went out, but to Church; I had no Attach for any of the things of the World, and I tasted no other Pleasures but what my little Dog and Parrot gave me, nay even those I began to scruple, when I consider'd from what hand I had them, and resolv'd to send them back to Philabel, which I did. How my little Heart murmur'd and suffer'd when I saw them carry'd away! I fansy'd there was Sadness in the Eyes of the two poor little Animals as they left me; and I needed all my Reason, not to be overcome with Tenderness. The Person who carry'd them had not been gone a quarter of an Hour, when I saw Philabel enter my Chamber, and throw himself at my Feet, with a Complexion pale and wan, his Eyes bathed in Tears, Despair painted on his Face, and in a Condition so moving, and so pierc'd with Grief, that no Heart cou'd be hard enough to see him in it, without Emotion. He said he was a perfidious Villain, a Brute, unworthy to appear before me; that he came to beg my Pardon, and to wash off with his Blood the Injury and Offence he had done me. In that moment he drew his Sword, and was going to plunge it in his Breast, if I had not withheld him: in fine, I must or pardon him, or see him die. I did it; because, said I, to forgive Injuries is a great Virtue: and as a Mark that I forgave entirely, I was constrained to retake the little Dog and Parrot; which was without much Violence, you may imagine. I let him know my Resolution of leaving the World, and becoming Religious; I incited him to imitate me: he did what he cou'd to put me off my Design; but finding me fix'd, he told me he would take the same, since without me the World would be burthensome and insupportable to him. In fine, we parted with moving Adieus on both sides; I made him give me a Promise not to visit me any more, since his Presence was an Enemy to my Intentions; and he drew another from me, that in case I chang'd my Resolution, and remain'd in the World, I wou'd love no other than he, and be only his. My Resolution of being Religious appear'd to me so strong, that I believ'd I hazarded nothing by that Promise; but you will see by the Sequel, that this Day's Misfortune is occasion'd by that imprudent Word. I continu'd then to live in the manner I describ'd to you before, not stirring out, seeing no body, always alone, never dressing my self, solely employ'd in Reading, Meditating, and Praying in my Chamber, which I had so order'd, that it look'd like a Hermit's Cell. One day when I was in it, at my usual Occupation, my Mother who arriv'd from Dijon, with a Gentleman who led her, surpriz'd me there. What Astonishment was there on both sides! in me, for being found thus by her and that Man, at a time when I little expected her; and in her, to see me in that Condition: the poor [illeg.]man was sensibly touch'd with it; her first Thought was, that my Aunt's Death had produc'd that effect: she threw her Arms about my neck, and embrac'd me tenderly, without being able to speak; and I burst into Tears, scarce able to breath. After these first Movements, recollecting my self, I fell down at her feet, and embracing her knees, begg'd her Permission to go into a Convent, and become Religious. She has no Child but I, she loves me extreamly, judge of her Sentiments. She did not declare her self, and without shewing any Repugnance to my Designs, she rais'd me up, and keeping me in her Arms, she told me, that she wou'd not oppose my Resolution, if 'twas inspir'd by Heaven; but that we must first be sure of that, and not follow every sudden Motion; that sometimes our Youth, our Inconstancy, or some short-liv'd Dislike of the World, had the greatest share in them; but that those sort of Engagements were of extraordinary consequence, being for our whole Lives, and therefore should be well consider'd. She added, that I was yet too young to have a just Discernment of the World, or of Religion; that there was no haste; that I shou'd dress my self as became a Maid of my Age and Quality, and not make my self remarkable by such Singularity; that if hereafter I continu'd in the same Thoughts, she wou'd consent to their Execution, with all the Facility she cou'd: she presented that Person who came with her to me, telling me, he was our Family's best Friend, and very capable of giving me good Advice; then she retir'd with him, and left me alone in my Chamber, where I made many Reflections upon all that had befall'n, and all that had been said to me. But, my dear Lesbia, I must make an end; I find I shall let my self go to a Recital, that will not leave me in a Capacity of profiting by those Advices which I expect from your Freindship. In fine, the Person whom my Mother gave me for a Counsellor, was Philocrates. 'Twas against his Father that we pleaded; the Process had already cost above a hundred thousand Crowns; it concern'd the Legitimacy of my Grandfather, and of two Successions of my Unkles, which is to say, that this Process wou'd have ruin'd us, and never have been ended; By good fortune it was in the hands of one of the ablest and most disinterested. Counsellors of that Parliament; this Judge conferr'd about it with both Parties, made them sensible that neither their Fortunes nor Lives, cou'd terminate it; and by a Goodness which is not common to Judges, who will only judge, he wou'd inform himself of the State of the Families, of the two Antagonists; and understanding that Philocrates's Father, one of the Parties, had no Son nor Heir but him, and that my Father, the other Party, had only one Daughter and Heiress, and that our Age and Qualities were suitable, he propos'd (to put an end to the whole Difference) a Marriage betwixt Philocrates and me, which was agreed to: so that having made himself absolute Master of the Business, instead of an Arrest, he gave us Articles of Marriage, containing a Transaction and Donation, to our Advantage, of all that had been contested for, which was sign'd with Satisfaction on all sides. In fine, the Parties reconcil'd came to Paris, to conclude the Marriage, at that time when my Mother and Philocrates surpriz'd me, as I have told you; but they did not think it fit to tell me this News till my Mind was in another Disposition. Philocrates came often to see me in my Chamber; at first I look'd upon him as a Friend to our Family, and one my Mother had given me for a Counsellor. Ha Lesbia! how hard is it not to follow the Counsels of a Man made like Philocrates, when they have such an aim as his had! I know not if you ever saw him; he is the handsomest, and most agreeable Man in Paris; an air of Quality open and sincere; all his Behaviour Great, Genteel, and Charming; a delicate and engaging Wit; a Heart tender, passionate, and equally capable of receiving great Passions, as of giving them: I found it by Experience afterwards; my Heart and Mind was fill'd with nothing but him, I slept not Night nor Day, and employ'd my self wholly in endeavouring to discover his Sentiments for me: If he miss'd seeing me one Day, or came later, or went away sooner than usual, it gave me some Alarms. I persisted still in my Religious Designs, not so much out of a distaste for the World, as for the improbability I thought there was of my ever being Philocrates's. I was utterly ignorant of his Sentiments, at certain times I fansy'd he had a disposition to wish me well; at others, that he laugh'd at my Weaknesses and me; at others, that as a Friend to the Family he only serv'd my Mother, and endeavour'd to bring me to her Desires. One Day that he was more pensive than usual, and that I quarrel'd at him for it, he discover'd to me what I so much wish'd to know; and holding one of my Hands press'd in his, with a more tender and more passionate transport than ordinary, he confess'd to me, that I was engag'd to him by Articles of Marriage: He beg'd my pardon for having done it without my consent, and for having conceal'd it from me, told me, in what manner things were agreed on; and how by that our process had been finish'd; then he swore to me, that never Man had lov'd so well as he lov'd me; that I shou'd be always Mistress of his Destiny; that he had no design to force my Inclinations; and that he preferr'd the happiness of pleasing me before that of being my Husband. Never Daughter was more resign'd to her Parents Will, than I appear'd; I told him, that I was not sorry that Heaven had made choice of me to be an Instrument of finishing a Process so pernicious to both our Families, and that I would never bring any obstacle to it. Ha! Lesbia, what obliging reproaches did he make me in that Moment! he said, I had only Sentiments of esteem and acknowledgment for him; I was not touch'd with his Passion; I acted but by Consideration; and in fine, after the manner with which he lov'd me, if my Heart did not change, he shou'd not become the more happy by marrying me. This Conversation was interrupted by my Mother, who came into my Room, and found us both much discompos'd. Philocrates retir'd out of respect, and left us together: Then I gave my Mother an account of our Discourse, and what Philocrates had told me, which she confirm'd, and let me know, that if I desir'd to please her, I shou'd not deferr marrying him. I express'd a great deal of respect and submission to her Will, upon which she went away very well satisfied, and left me alone in my Chamber. 'Tis here, my dearest Lesbia, that I am not able to express the condition in which I found my self that moment: I form'd Idea's of imaginary Pleasures, representing to my self the advantage of putting an end to such a Process; the Glory and the happiness of being Philocrates's Wife, his Generosity in resigning all other Claims, and desiring only to obtain me from my self; his Submission in making me absolute Mistriss of his Destinies; the delicateness of his Sentiments, in wishing rather to be lov'd by me, than to become my Husband. Yes, yes, it is impossible to conceive the transports of Joy and Satisfaction which I felt; but Heaven always sells us very dear the Pleasures of this World, and above all to me, who am the most unhappy Maid alive, as you are going to see. At that very time, Philabel, who had heard of Philocrates's Attachment for me, and that he was upon the point of marrying me, guided by Fury and Despair, writ me a Letter, by which he beg'd me to remember, the Promise I had made him of never being any other Man's but his; and threaten'd, if I did not, to shew my Letters to Philocrates, to publish them in the World, and to ruine my Reputation; not thinking himself oblig'd to observe any Fidelity to a Person who had first broke her Faith with him. Ha! what a fall from Happiness at the reading of this Letter! what Sadness! what Disquiets! what shou'd I do; I fansy'd I already saw my Letters running through the World, and in the hands of Philocrates. How shou'd I prevent so fatal a Blow, to whom shou'd I have recourse? I found there was a necessity of addressing my self to my Governess, by reason of the intimacy that was betwixt her and Philabel: You have committed (said she to me) a very great fault in promising Philabel, not to marry any Man but him; and to justifie your self, you must pretend to him, that you love him, that you have no affection for Philocrates, that you only marry him in obedience to the Commands of a severe Father, and that you shall not be the less his. I did so by the Letter that I writ to Day, which is fall'n into the hands of Philocrates, and which renders me the most unhappy Person in the World unless you take pity of me, and assist me with your Counsels. Fraudelisa having ceas'd to speak, the Widow reassur'd her, and told her, 'twou'd not be so difficult as she imagin'd, for her to bring her self off; that she must arm her self with Resolution, and confidently affirm to Philocrates, that she was never capable of writing such Letters. How can I do that, (reply'd Fraudelisa ) since he knows my Hand, and has many of my Letters, which it will be easie for him to confront with this last, and to confute me? The Widow pray'd her to follow her Fancy, and let her self be guided; and ask'd her, if she had ever a Copy of the same Letter, she told her she had, and presently took it out of her Cabinet, then the Woman made her write it over upon just such Paper as that which she had sent, with the same Pen, and the same Ink: The Letter finish'd, she told Fraudelisa, that she wou'd have it imitated by a Man, who was so admirable at Counterfeiting Hands, that there was none but those who were very skilful, that wou'd not be deceiv'd: After which it wou'd not be difficult to impose upon Philocrates, if she play'd her part with the least address; that when he came to reproach her with her Infidelity, and for a proof against her, shou'd show her the true Letter, she must be sure to take it, and under pretence of going to the Window to examine the Character by the full Light, turn her self dexterously on one side, and when he could not see her Hands, slip the true Letter into her Pocket, and substitute the Counterfeit in its place; then return to Philocrates, give him the Counterfeit, firmly maintaining, that she did not write the Letter, and express a great deal of Anger and Indignation at this procedure. This Widow added, that if there still remain'd some Doubts and Suspicions in Philocrates, he wou'd undoubtedly conferr upon it with some that were expert in those things, who wou'd assure him that the Letter was false, and not hers, that then he cou'd think no otherwise, than that it was a Trick of Philabel's to hinder him from marrying her; and that if Philabel shou'd afterwards show her other Letters, they wou'd by this become suspected to Philocrates, and oblige him to hasten his Marriage, to come and beg her Pardon, make her a Confidence of all that had past, and render his first Esteem and Tenderness. This Widow had no sooner made an end, than Fraudelisa, apprehending with pleasure the Design, and relishing her Counsel, gave her a thousand Thanks, and promis'd to make her a Present. Lesbia who was no less embarass'd than Fraudelisa, being pleas'd with the Widow's Advice, was very desirous to make use of it in her turn; and after having told her, that she was engag'd in a more troublesome Affair than Fraudelisa's, she intreated her assistance in advising her, and then inform'd her, that she was belov'd by Alcander, that he had promis'd to marry her, that she had a Contract writ, and sign'd with his Blood, that now he refus'd to perform it; that out of resentment against him, she had resolv'd to abandon him, to take with her Two thousand Louis d' Or's, to repair, in part, the Injury his breach of Promise had done her, and to go with Cleanthus, who had lov'd her a long time, and wou'd marry her; that she had presented him with a Ruby which Alcander had given her; that to hinder Alcander from suspecting any thing, and to perswade him that it had drop'd from the Ring, and was lost, she had given Cleanthus only the Ruby, and had kept the Ring, but that unhappily Alcander had been inform'd of part of what had pass'd; and that her concern was to know, how she shou'd efface all those ill impressions which he had taken of her Conduct, and regain his Confidence and his Heart. Our Widow represented to her, that what she had told them was not circumstantial enough, and that she must give her a more particular relation of all that had past, if she expected any benefit by her Advice; to which Fraudelisa added, that after the sincere manner with which she had related her Life, Lesbia could have no reason to conceal any thing from them; which engag'd her to speak in this manner. The End of the Third Part. the King's Service, and just when he expected a recompence from the Court, was unhappily kill'd at the Battle of Senef. My Mother, for the management of her Fortune, retir'd into a a Religious House, to live there without Expence, upon a moderate Pension, and put me into that Convent, where our Acquaintance first began. 'Twas there, if ever, I tasted any sweetness in Life; the Religious who had the charge of our Education, took a particular Inclination for me, and had no greater pleasure than having me shut up in her Chamber, to give me Instructions, which her Heart dictated as much as her Wit. 'Twas to advertise me, (as if by a kind of Prophetick Knowledge of what was to befal me) that Men were deceitful, and unfaithful Creatures, in whom I ought not to confide; that if I were Discreet and Vertuous, Providence wou'd regard my Prayers, and take me into his Protection; that I shou'd be very careful not to fall into any Irregularity; and in case I shou'd be so unhappy, she made me understand, that I ought to come out of it with all diligence, if I would not draw upon my self the scorn of the World, and the Wrath of Heaven. I recite admirable Instructions to you, my dear Fraudelisa, but you will see hereafter how much I needed them. The tranquility and repose which my Mother and I enjoy'd was interrupted by a cruel Misfortune which oblig'd us to leave our Solitude: 'twas to go and solicit a Process before the Parliament at Rouen, in which all we had in the World was at stake. At our Arrival in that City, we made an Acquaintance with an old Gentleman nam'd Cleon, who was esteem'd of worth and quality. That which at first surpriz'd us, was the Passion and Zeal with which he acted in our Affair; but when we learn'd that our Adversary had just gain'd a Suit at Law against him, we judg'd that Revenge had at least as great a share in what he did for us, as his concern for our Interests: whatever it was, we receiv'd great Services by it. One Day as we were very Gay, and every Body flatter'd us with a happy Success in our Affairs, Cleon brought his Nephew Cleanthus to see us, out of pure Civility, as he told us: Ah! what pass'd in my Heart at that first sight! and what in that of Cleanthus! we blush'd, grew pale, and were so mov'd, and so out of our selves, that 'twas not possible for us to speak a word to one another. There are Hearts made for each other. The Vanity, Impudence, and Artifice of Men, their mean endeavours to please, to appear Beauish, Agreeable and Witty; their Debaucheries, and the Documents of my Religious, had given me such, a disgust for them, that I cou'd not endure them: But I was not the same for Cleanthus: I found none of those faults in him; he appear'd to me Humble, Modest, Sincere, his Wit natural, and without affectation; in fine, I observ'd as much Prudence and Vertue in all his Actions, as I saw Licentiousness and Irregularity in those of others. But admire this Conformity of Inclinations: Cleanthus cou'd not endure Women, for the same Reasons, and the same Faults that I hated Men; which made us conceive a violent Affection, for one another. It was not oppos'd either by his Unkle, who look'd upon him as his only Heir, or by my Mother, their Design being to marry us together, after we had gain'd our Process. Ah, that unlucky Process which we look'd upon as gain'd, this was its Destiny. Our Adversary brought in a Paper very late the Night before the Tryal; I think our Attorney call'd that a new Production: and the next Morning early it was try'd, and we cast, by that curst Paper deliver'd in the Evening; and what was yet more severe upon us, was, that my Mother was condemn'd to pay all the Charges, which amounted to a considerable Sum. You may imagine how sensibly my Mother and I resented this Loss, if you remember that 'twas our whole Fortune we contended for. That which augmented my Grief, was, the unhappy State in which I fansy'd I shou'd see Cleanthus; yes, he alone concern'd me more than all the rest together; and I thought of nothing but consoling him. But I did not yet know all my Misfortunes, I saw Cleanthus no more: I sent often to his Lodgings, and my Mother to Cleon's; but the Doors were so well kept, that we endeavour'd in vain to get in; so that we could not see them. My Mother began to mistrust Cleon; our Cause thus lost which he had warranted the Gain of, and his Care to shun us, were her Reasons. At first I justify'd them both to her, prepossess'd with a Belief that there was some Misunderstanding: but after having a long time flatter'd my self, I concluded that Cleanthus had only lov'd me for his Interest, and that the Loss of our Process, which left me without Fortune, was the Cause of his Behaviour and his Change. I conceiv'd at that time so great a Disdain and Indignation against Cleanthus, that I took a Resolution, not only of never seeing him in my Life, but ever not to stay any longer in a City where there was so great a Villain. I propos'd to my Mother to leave Rouen, and go to Paris, to get Counsel: she consented to it, and we set out in our Coach, our Minds fill'd with all that had befall'n us, and in a profound Chagrin. We had scarce rid an hour or two, when a Stag of prodigious Greatness coming out of a Castle, met our Horses, who growing wild and unruly, taking the Bit in their Teeth, without keeping the Road, they run into the middle of the Country, over-turn'd the Coach, and drew us so for some time. By good fortune, the Lady of the Castle, who came out of it, seeing our Mischance came to our Relief, with many of her Servants, and brought us out of that Danger. She found my Mother wounded in many places in her Head; for me, I was in a Swoon, and there was only some Scratches with Bryars and Thorns upon my Neck and my Arms. They put my Mother in one Chamber, and me in another; and I being still in a Swoon, they undrest me, and put me to Bed. They sent the Footmen all about to fetch Doctors and Chirurgeons, and left me one moment alone in the Chamber. In that same instant the Lady of the Castle's Son, who return'd from Hunting, and who had not heard of our Accident, came into the Chamber where I was laid, and found me in that Condition. After he was recover'd from his first Surprize, he took me by the Hand, and felt my Pulse. Just then I wak'd out of my Swoon; imagine what an Amazement and Fright I was in, to see my Neck and Arms nak'd, and one of my Hands in that of a Young-Man, whom I had never seen before; and to find my self in a Bed, and a Chamber, which I did not know; I who thought my self in a coach. I confess, I doubted for some time whether I was awake, or if it was a Dream; but at last coming to my self, I took my Hand from him who held it, and cover'd my self all over with the Bed-cloaths. The Gentleman was as much amaz'd as I, till his Mother coming into the Chamber, clear'd the matter, and inform'd us how we happened to find our selves in that manner. This Man was Alcander; who begun from that time to love me, and to persecute me with a Passion, which renders me the most unhappy Wretch alive. My Mother and I being perfectly recover'd, we thank'd our Benefactors, took Leave of them, and pursu'd the Road to Paris. We had not travell'd a League, when we saw Alcander Galloping towards us; 'twas to proffer us, by his Mother's order, an Apartment in a great House which she had at Paris. We accepted his Offer, he came into our Coach, sent back his Horses, and conducted us. I never saw a Man more Solicitous to please; he turn'd his Wit to a pretty Pleasantry; had little Stories upon all Occasions; and Songs, with a Voice sweet and clear; he talk'd of nothing but the Tenderness of his Heart, and the Delicateness of his Sentiments: In fine, I preceiv'd he had a mind to make himself be lov'd; a d'autre a d'autre, said I to my self; Cleanthus has taught me too well what Men are, ever to look upon them again but with Disdain. The Journey ended without any further Explication; Alcander lodg'd us in magnificent Apartments; I had a Chamber adorn'd with curious Italian Pictures; he left us at rest for some time, and we saw him very rarely. Shortly after, we learn'd that our Antagonists had rated the Expences, and bragg'd that they wou'd seize our Goods and imprison my Mother; which made us pass our Nights and Days in imploring the Justice of Heaven, and in Tears. But I was more firm and resolute than my Mother; I said to her that Providence was just; that we had never by our Actions deserv'd, Shame, or Infamy, and that having Recourse to, and Relying upon his Goodness, he wou'd not abandon us, but would bring us out of this unhappy State, and upon the Faith I had in what my Relegieuse had said to me, I spoke with so much assurance, and so perswasively, that I comforted my Mother, and made her leave her Melancholy and her Fears. One day (judge of my surprize) being alone in my Chamber, I saw Alcander come in, who throwing himself at my feet with Tears in his Eyes, conjur'd me to pity the unhappy Condition to which I had reduc'd him; and told me, that after the Death of his Wife he had made a Resolution never to marry again; that it cou'd not maintain it self against me, so amiable I appear'd to him; and that in fine he must either see me his wife, or I must see his Death. I confess to you, that I had some Joy at this News; not so much for Alcander's Quality, and Fortune, as because that Cleanthus hearing of this Marriage, would conceive the greater value for me, reproach himself with his Ingratitude, and be griev'd for having lost me. However, I referr'd Alcander to my Mother, without giving him any Answer. He spoke to her of it; she wou'd have his Mother's Consent: he told her, that she intended to have him marry a Daughter of one of her Friends, which wou'd make her against it; that by temporizing he might gain her Consent, or she might die, being very old, and always Sick. My Mother, who at the expence of her Life wou'd have marry'd me advantageously, entertain'd his Proposals, and insinuated to me, that considering my Circumstances, I ought not to lose that Occasion. I follow'd her Counsel, hearkning calmly to whatever he wou'd say to me; in conclusion, his Intention was to marry me secretly: we cou'd not get a Priest who wou'd do it; he told me that the Consent of the Persons only made a Marriage; he gave me a promise of marrying me sign'd with his Blood, brought me to the foot of the Altar, swore that he took me for his Wife; I made the Vow on my side too: Behold him the happiest of Mortals; but his happiness was interrupted when he offer'd to make use of the Privilege of Husbands; I repuls'd him, us'd him ill, was enrag'd at him; Quarrels between us, Reconcilements: Reasons on his part to establish his right of Husband, and to put himself in possession of it; Inflexibility on mine: Tears, Despair, refusing to Eat, resolving to Die; that was what I had my mind fatigue'd, and my ears stun'd with, at every Moment; however, I persisted still, in resolving first to have all the forms. At this time my Mother's Antagonist had made a Command be giv'n her, of paying the Charges: the next Day, for want of Money, she was to be put in Prison, and her Goods seiz'd. It seem'd to me, that this News did not touch Alcander enough: I complain'd of it to him; he made me Answer, that if I wou'd own him for my Husband, and live with him as a Wife, he shou'd have the Sentiments of a Son-in-law for my Mother, wou'd acknowledge her in that Quality, and find out the means to assist her in her Business; that I shou'd consult my self upon it; that he shou'd see on this Occasion if I had any Nature, that he wou'd return in a little time to receive my Answer, and went away thus. Ha! when I saw my self in this desperate Condition, how many different Thoughts had I, how many several Movements did I feel! on one hand I represented to my self my Mother shamefully dragg'd into Prison, and all her Goods seiz'd by my permission, and with my Consent: on the other hand, I saw that our intended Marriage cou'd not justifie my yielding to Alcander, what he ask'd, and that if I did, I shou'd lose all I had of most valuable, and fall into an Abyss of Misery and Infamy. I call'd to mind then how often I had heard my Religieuse say, That Heaven is acknowledging of what is done for him; that he does not refuse a discreet and vertuous Maid what she Implores of him; and, that he takes her under his Protection; which comforted me, and determin'd me to confide in that. On another side, the Refusal which that Providence had made me of the gaining our Process so just and so reasonable, and which I had beg'd with such ardent Prayers, with the unhappy Condition in which we were, and which I thought we had so little merited, gave me a Distrust of that same Providence; so that I wou'd not abandon my self intirely to his happy Care. In this restless and unhappy State, I cast my eyes upon some of the Pictures in my Chamber a fatal Curiosity mov'd me to draw a Curtain which hid one of them, 'twas a naked Piece, representing Venus, in the Arms of Mars, and their sporting at the time when Vulcan made them be surpriz'd by the Gods. What Charms! what Pleasures! what Beauties! struck my Sight! I did not look upon them as Pictures; they gave me the same Movements that real and substantial Beauties wou'd have done. In that instant I felt an Emotion, my heart sigh'd with it, a Languishment run through all my Veins, it shook me with a soft horror, which till then was unknown to me: Ha Fraudelisa! how unhappy are our Sex, not to be able to defend themselves at certain moments, from those sort of Weaknesses! Unfortunately, in that fatal Moment, Alcander came into my Chamber, to know my Resolution: he perceiv'd the Condition in which I was; he interpreted it to his Advantage; he made use of it, and prest me with so much Eagerness and Spirit, that I lost all Knowledge, and knew no longer what I did. I only remember that my Reason rais'd in my heart Motions of Indignation and Anger against Alcander; that afterwards the same Reason, surpriz'd and inchanted by my Senses, and in Conspiracy with them, to deceive me, represented to me, that I sav'd a Mother from Prison, and that by it I engag'd a Husband to my self. In this unlucky, in this fatal minute, Cleon, who arriv'd from Rouen, and was come to visit my Mother and me, finding a Key in the Lock of the Chamber where I was, with Alcander, open'd the Door without knocking, and enter'd suddenly: he was so terribly struck to see me in that manner, that he got out hastily, shut the door again, and went away: Ha! what did I not feel when I came to think, that Cleanthus hearing of my Conduct, wou'd applaud himself for having abandon'd me! No, I shou'd never have comforted my self, without the Thought that he wou'd afterwards know of my Marriage with Alcander. To solace my Chagrin, and the more to assure my self of him, I caress'd him, I call'd him twenty times, my dear Husband, my dear Heart, and begg'd him to think of his Mother-in-law, and to bring her out of this troublesome Business. Alcander was no more so sensible of my Caresses, he appear'd to me cold and indolent, and said, that a Minor, as he was, cou'd not command Money; that my Mother had nothing to do, but to make a Sale of her Goods, and to retire into a Convent. At this Discourse I was much afflicted, I wept and I complain'd of him; he went abruptly out of my Chamber, and left me; I run after him; he flies before me. Just then a Footman came and stopp'd me, to give me a Letter which I knew to be from Cleanthus: it imported, that he was at the heighth of Felicity, since he was shortly to be my Husband; that Cleon his Unkle was gone for Paris, to carry my Mother the Money to pay the Charges to which she had been condemn'd, and with a Design to bring me with her to Rouen, to conclude our Marriage; that the Reason why he had not seen us before our Departure, as to his particular, was because that the News of the Loss of our Cause had touch'd him in such a manner, that he fell sick upon it; that he had lost all Knowledge, and that the Physicians had charg'd his Servants not to let any body see him: and as for his Unkle's part, that animated by the Concern he took in our Interests, he had secretly taken Post for Calais, where he had been to seek for a Paper that wou'd prove the Falseness of that which had occasion'd the Loss of our Suit; that he had brought it; and that it wou'd be no Difficulty to recall the Sentence which had been given against us, and to regain our Process. This poor Man, tho' he was not quite recover'd, did all he cou'd in his Letter to let me see how well he lov'd me, and how impatient he was to make me his. Ha, with what a cruel Blow this Letter stabb'd my Heart! What said I within my self! Alcander is inconstant, ingrateful, and unfaithful, and I have done all for him: thou lov'st me still, unhappy Cleanthus, thou art faithful to me, and thou wilt marry me; yet I abandon thee, I shamefully betray thee; thy Unkle comes to take my Mother from Prison, thy Unkle wou'd have us marry: Tell me (continu'd I) can these Sentiments hold against what he has seen? and thou, canst thou resist against what he shall tell thee? canst thou yet love me? or rather, canst thou hinder thy self from looking on me as the vilest Wretch, and hating me mortally? 'Tis I at present (pursu'd I) unfortunate Mother, that keeps thee Prisoner, and am the Cause that thy Misfortunes shall never end. Just Heaven! cry'd I sighing, I wou'd not wait for Succour from that favourable hand which was ready to help me; I wou'd not trust to it; and now I am miserable for the rest of my Life. I thought and said many things which it wou'd be difficult to recite to you. In conclusion, the violent Agitation of my mind, and the profound Sadness which I felt, made so wonderful a Revolution upon my Senses, that I fell dangerously sick. My Mother cou'd not overcome this last Misfortune; she had retir'd into a Monastery, where she dy'd opprest with Sorrow[illeg.] Courage, Courage, (said I) Fortune redouble thy Blows. I form'd to my self a kind of Pleasure, to see my self at the highest point of Adversity, believing they must now end with my Death: but my hour was not yet come; I was recall'd to Life for other Miseries. Alcander put on Mourning a little after my Mother's Death; I imagin'd it was for his Mother-in-law, that is to say, that he look'd upon me as his Wife: I had not yet suffer'd enough for my Sins: now I was quite out of Danger; I know not if the secret Joy I had to see my self Alcander's Wife, did not very much contribute to it. However, the impressions of the Distemper were too strong to be so soon cur'd: I did not sleep at all, and was extraordinary restless; three or four times a day an Apothecary's Boy brought me Syrups ready prepar'd, and Juleps. One day when the Curtains of my Bed were drawn close, and that I believ'd my self alone in my Chamber, my Mind being fill'd with nothing but Cleanthus, these Words chanced to escape me; Ah, unhappy Cleanthus! Just in that instant I saw the Curtains open, and the Apothecary's Boy that brought my Syrups throw himself upon his Knees by my Bed-side, saying to me with Eyes bath'd in Tears, and a Heart full of bitter Sighs; Yes, lovely Lesbia, yes, he is more unhappy than you can conceive. I cast my eyes upon the Boy; but a Periwig which he wore, the Dress he was in, the Leanness and Decay which appear'd in his Face, embarrass'd me for some time; at last I knew him to be Cleanthus: we were both so discompos'd, that we remain'd a long time unable to speak to one another, but by Looks and Sighs. He told me, That his Unkle being return'd to Rouen, had spoke to him very disadvantageously of me; that he had said I was a Maid without Honour or Virtue, and had commanded him never to see me more, or think of me: he added, That knowing me, and the covetous, interested Temper of his Unkle, far from being capable of thinking such a thing, he had believ'd that his Unkle's Counsel at Paris, having judg'd our Cause not to be good, and that we cou'd not regain it, he had contriv'd this Artifice to give him a Disgust of me, and to hinder him from marrying me, having had no other Prospect in our Marriage, but the Gain of our Process, and to be reveng'd of his Adversary. Cleanthus told me likewise, that in that Opinion he had made some displeasing Reproaches to his Unkle, for breaking his Word with us; and had said, that he was a Man of Honour, that he wou'd keep his Faith inviolably, and have no Wife but me: that this Answer had irritated his Unkle so much, that he refus'd to see him, and that he had marry'd a young Woman, on whom he had settled all his Estate: that tho' he had reason to be sensibly touch'd with such a Loss, his Concern for not hearing from me had made him forget that Misfortune, and determin'd him to come to Paris, to enquire after me: that there he had heard of my Indisposition, with a great deal of Grief; and that not knowing how to see me otherwise, he had plac'd himself with the Apothecary who serv'd me, under pretence of learning the Trade; that he found himself well recompenc'd of this innocent Artifice, since he had been so happy as to render me some little Service in the time of my Sickness; that he might now protest to me his Passion (far from being lessen'd by Time or the injust Reports that had been made to him of me) was grown so violent, and rais'd to such an Excess, that he cou'd live no longer without seeing me; in fine, that he came to learn his Destiny from my Mouth, and that his Life was in my hands. Who wou'd not have been mov'd, dear Fraudelisa, with a Proceeding so tender, and so faithful? Indeed I was most sensibly; but that did not hinder me from representing to him, that tho' I shou'd think it my greatest Happiness to see my self his, yet we ought not to think of it; that we had neither of us any Fortune; and that it was indispensibly necessary in Marriage, if one wou'd not make themselves miserable: I confest to him, that I had believ'd him unfaithful, not hearing of him after the Loss of our Process; that I had been extreamly afflicted at it; and that a little time after, my Mother had promis'd me to Alcander; that because of his imagin'd Infidelity, I had consented to it; that Alcander waited only for the Death of his Mother (who was very infirm) to marry me; and that he had exprest his Sentiments, by having put on Mourning for my Mother? He reply'd to me, with Tears in his Eyes, that the Passion he had for me was so disinterested, and so wholly fix'd to my Interests, that he wou'd willingly become a Galley-slave to make me a Queen, for no other Reward, than that I shou'd be pleas'd with him in my Heart for it: but that I ought to be perswaded, that Alcander wou'd not marry me; that his Sentiments were too far opposite to Marriage; that he only desir'd to deceive me; and that the Mourning he wore was for his own Mother, deceased a few days after mine. As he spoke thus to me, we heard my Nurse upon the stairs, who was comming to me, and talking with the Doctor; which made Cleanthus rise and leave me hastily, for fear of discovering something, by the Trouble and Confusion we were in. The Consolation I felt by seeing him, and finding him tender, and faithful, work'd such a sudden Effect upon my Senses, and Spirits that in a little time I saw my self recover'd; they flattered me that I grew handsomer after my Sickness; and I believ'd it a little, when I saw Alcander's Passion for me much augmented: never so much Assiduity, such Complaisance! his only Care was to bring me the finest Ornaments, and Jewels and to give me all sorts of Diversions; he wou'd have me keep his Purse; he had giv'n me two thousand Lowis d' Ors to keep; I was Mistress of all, he never call'd me otherwise than his dear Wife. To conclude, I liv'd with him as with a Husband, flatter'd with hopes, that as soon as the Year of Mourning for his Mother was out, he wou'd marry me publickly, and own me to be his Wife: but you cannot conceive what I suffer'd in the time of that Expectation. Ah! how different from others are those Pleasures which are not lawful! and how wretched is a Maid when she is fall'n into that shameful Extremity! She dares not appear in the World; she thinks they speak of nothing but of her, and of her Infamy; every thing makes her fear, nothing gives her Consolation; her Life passes in Disquiets and continual Remorses; her Lover only loves in her his own Salacity and Pleasure, without considering whether he pleases or displeases; she soon perceives it: tho' she hates Tobacco, tho' she dreads the Smell of Wine, tho' his wild and debauch'd Behaviour, or his ill Humour, fatigues and torments her, he daigns not to take notice of it; she must suffer, she must dissemble, and to preserve him, must feign Ecstasies and Ravishments of Love and Pleasure. A Wife makes a Vertue of these sort of things for her Husband: the honorable Figure she makes in the World, her orderly Family, her fine Children, that indispensable necessity of Living and Dying with her Husband, their common Interests, the Satisfaction of doing her Duty, the Repose of Conscience; all joyn'd together, take off those sort of Distasts, and furnishes a marry'd Woman with new Pleasures, which are unknown to one who does not live within the Rules. For these Reasons, I resolv'd to make Alcander declare himself as soon as the Year of Mourning was over; and in case he wou'd not marry me, to abandon him, as a perfidious Traytor. Cleanthus had left the Apothecary's House; and after having often sought, in vain, Occasion to speak to me in private, he at last found one: 'twas to tell me, that Alcander, in the Mind and Humour he was of, wou'd never marry me; that he came to offer me his Assistance to be reveng'd of him; that tho' the greatest Misfortune which cou'd befall him in the World, was to see me in another's Arms, the Pleasure of my Fortune, of my Elevation, and the Acknowledgment I wou'd have for him in the depth of my heart, wou'd much asswage his Grief. What Sighs, what Tears, did this Conversation cost us! in fine, it ended by a Promise which I made him, that in case Alcander (after the Year of Mourning for his Mother) wou'd not marry me, I wou'd be guided by his Advice. No, I cannot express to you the diversity of Movements which appear'd in him that moment. It grows late, let us advance, my Dear. The Year of Mourning for Alcander's Mother being ended, he wou'd not marry me; and these were his fine Reasons: That we were already marry'd, and might continue and live in the same manner with Safety of Conscience, since Consent alone made a Marriage, which we had given one another; that a publick Marriage, and in all the forms, is not so agreeable, nor so voluptuous; that 'tis opposite, and contrary to Love; that the Heart does not agree with it; it loves Liberty, and cannot act by Duty; and that as he design'd to love me all his Life with the same Fervour and Tenderness, he wou'd not marry me otherwise. I answer'd on my side, that 'twas to deceive our selves, to think our Marriage good, when our Religion and our Laws condemn'd it; that a Marriage after the Forms, was not attended with Contempt and Infamy; that it was without Fears, and without Remorse; that one was not shamefully oblig'd to hide the Fruits of it, but might behold them with Joy; that the Children, in whom their Parents have the Pleasure of finding one another, were Bonds which united them more strictly in Inclination and Interests; that these Ties were much stronger than those of a flitting Passion; that a generous and well dispos'd Heart found its Pleasure in its Duty, and form'd it self to a soft habitude of following it: in fine I concluded that I saw very well he did not love me, since he cou'd see my Disquiet and my Shame, without being touch'd with it, and refus'd to submit to a Law which oblig'd him to love me all his Life. This Refusal afflicted me the more sensibly, when I found he had deceiv'd me by his Promise writ and sign'd with his Blood, which he cou'd release himself from, because of his Minority. 'Twas then that I reflected very seriously upon the little Profit I had made of the Instructions my Religieuse had given me: what Sorrow and Repentance had I for it! I had not forgot to have heard her say, That when a Maid unhappily had fall'n into that Precipice, she shou'd not lose the time of withdrawing her self from it, unless she wou'd abandon her self to the last Disgrace and Infamy. That Thought made me take the Resolution of leaving Alcander, and marrying Cleanthus: But oh, what sharp Reproaches did I not make my self! what did I not suffer when I came to think, that I had now no more to bring into the Arms of a sincere and faithful Lover, than the shameful Leavings of a perfidious Traytor, and how little I deserv'd Cleanthus's Esteem! No, 'tis impossible to express to you all that pass'd in my sad Heart. In fine, I advertis'd Cleanthus, that I wou'd speak with him; he came to the Rendezvouz, and there I inform'd him that Alcander wou'd not marry me. Our last Resolution was, that I should take my time to leave Alcander's Lodgings, and to carry with me the two thousand Lowis d' Ores which he had given me to keep, with all I had of my own: that at the same time following the Advice which had been given me by a Lawyer, I shou'd retire into a Convent; that I should sue Alcander for the Performance of his Promise; and that after the Decree, which cou'd go no farther than to Interest and Damages, because of his Minority, Cleanthus should marry me. As a Pledge of my Faith, I took a Ring of Value which Alcander had given me, from my Finger, and gave it to Cleanthus; but both of us considering, that Alcander missing the Ring, might have some Suspicions of my Conduct, I took the Ruby out to give Cleanthus, and kept the Ring upon my Finger to shew Alcander, and to make him believe the Ruby was lost. That which made me most uneasie, was the Infidelity I was guilty of to Alcander, in violating the Trust he had repos'd in me of the Lowis d'ores; but Cleanthus convinc'd me by so many good Reasons, that we are not oblig'd to keep our Faith with Villains and Traytors that I yielded to his Perswasions. Afterwards Lesbia recounted to Fraudelisa and the Widow, that when she expected Alcander to go to a Hunting, by which he wou'd give her a favourable Opportunity of leaving him, and executing the Design she had form'd, he unhappily return'd; that the same day the ill Weather had oblig'd him to go into a Room of an Inn in [illeg.] [illeg.]bel, about the quality and price of the Ruby, which she had given him, and which Alcander had presented her with: that Alcander having advanc'd softly behind Cleanthus, whilst he had the Ruby in his hand, he had seen it, and thought it much resembled that which he had given her, and that Cleanthus perceiving it, in spight of the Rain had gone immediately out of the House; that this Proceeding had given Alcander violent Suspicions against her; that to clear them, he had made a Footman of Cleanthus who stayed behind in the Tavern, be cunningly examin'd; that this Footman had answer'd, that a Lady whose name he did not know, had presented his Master with the Ruby, and that she was to give him two thousand Lowis d'Ores, and to marry him. In fine, she added, that Alcander had believ'd it to be her, of whom the Fellow spoke; and therefore she cou'd not doubt but that he was in a furious Rage against her: that she did not know how to retrieve his good Opinion, and make him believe it was some other Person of whom the Footman had told that Story; and concluding, she said to Fraudelisa, and the Widow, that she shou'd have the last Obligations to them, if they cou'd give her any Counsel, and Means to recover this unlucky Step. Lesbia having ended her Discourse, the Widow told her, she had reason indeed to say, that her Affair was more troublesome and embarrassing than Fraudelisa's; and then after having Study'd a little, she ask'd her whether Alcander knew her Story with Cleanthus, or at least to her Knowledge: to which Lesbia answer'd, that she had govern'd her self so well in that, that not only he had not known any thing of it, but that he believ'd she had no Acquaintance with any Man but himself. Can't you (continu'd the Widow) get the Ruby again which you gave Cleanthus? Yes indeed. How, (interrupted Fraudelisa ) how, wou'd you have her to ask him to give her her Ruby again? We must buy another just like it then reply'd the Woman, and Alvarez has them of so many Fashions, that in his shop we shall easily find what we seek. Well (return'd Fraudelisa ) when Lesbia has such a Ruby, what shall she do with it; what will be the Consequence? She shall make it be found in the House, (answer'd the Widow) by one of Alcander's Servants who will carry it to him: Alcander (continu'd she) not knowing of your Acquaintance with Cleanthus, and not imagining that you can have heard of what has past, that he saw Cleanthus have a Ruby, and suspected it to be that which he had given you, will without doubt believe that he was mistaken, that it was not that which he gave you, but some other, and that the Account the Footman, gave, was of some other Person than you; and between our selves (concluded she smiling) if you play your part well, Alcander loving you, you may perswade him what you please; for 'tis easy for a fair Lady to make a Man who loves her, believe that she is faithful to him. As the Widow spoke thus, Lesbia thought upon a place that wou'd be convenient to make the Ruby be found in; so returning a thousand Thanks to her, and to Fraudelisa, she told them, that she hop'd to make successful Use of their Advice: and it growing late, they went presently all three together out of Fraudelisa's House, and first to the Copyist, to make him imitate exactly Fraudelisa's Letter to Philabel; and whilst he was busie at that, they went to look for a Ruby like that which Alcander had given Lesbia. They found one Perfectly resembling it. Lesbia bought it: then they came back to the Copyist, who had imitated Fraudelisa's Letter so well, that her self was deceiv'd in it; and after having embrac'd, and kiss'd one another, they parted, Lesbia and Fraudelisa, going to dispose all things for the next Day's Expedition. Fraudelisa folded up, and seal'd the Letter, in the same manner as the true one was, then broke the seal, put it in a little Apron pocket which she had, and went to Bed, meditating all night how she shou'd bring about her Designs. Lesbia on her side, retir'd too, but took, at an Apothecary's by the way, a dose of strong Physick; and being come home to her Lodging, having a Key to Alcanders Closet, which she had made without his Knowledge, she put the Ruby which she had bought, in that place where he kept his Letters, hiding it under some of them; because that a few days before she had given the Ruby to Cleanthus, she had offer'd, whilst Alcander was by, to take from thence a Letter seal'd with silk, which she had a mind to see, but he had hindred her, and squeezing her fingers had forc'd her to lay it down in that place, Lesbia intending to make him think, that the Ruby had drop'd at that time, and so continu'd there; then she lock'd the Closet, and went to bed, her mind being solely employ'd on what she was to execute the day following. The next day Philocrates rise earlier than usual, impatient to express himself with Fraudelisa; he found her at her Toylet, in a part of the Room that was a lettle obscure; and seated himself by her with a chagrin, and pensive air; she feign'd to be surpriz'd with it, and ask'd him the Cause. You shall see it, ingrate, said he, in this Letter, giving her that which she had writ to Philabel: she took it, and then aproaching the Window, and turning aside, she slipt it into her Apron-pocket, and took from thence the Copy which she had caus'd to be writ the night before; but so dexterously, that Philocrates had not the least suspicion of it: then she examin'd the Letter in his Presence with a seeming Attention, and looking often upon it, express'd a great deal of Surprise, and Astonishment. See, faithless Creature, (continu'd Philocrates ) in what Stile you writ to Philabel, that Man whom you called so impudent, so insolent, whom you hated so much, and whom you told me you had forbid to see you: he is worthy of you (pursu'd he) and I will never be an Obstacle to your Passion. Thats to say (interrupted Fraudelisa sharply) that you believe this Letter to be my hand, and that I writ it to Philabel: you know but ill (continu'd she with a cold, disdainful Air) my Hand or my Heart; you that offer to tax me with Ingratitude, and Infidelity. After this she writ the same Letter over before Philocrates, and having finish'd the Copy, she threw it to him with that which she had suppos'd, saying, Now see how you deceive your self, but don't think (pursu'd she haughtily) that I do this for any Pretension that I have to your Heart; no, I renounce it all my Life, and what I have done now, is but for my own Satisfaction and Honour. Thus she left him, and went into her Mothers Chamber, without deigning to hear him speak. Philocrates took the two Copies of the Letter, examin'd, and confronted them; one while he believes them both to be Fraudelisa's Hand, then again he thinks 'em different; what shou'd he do? to whom address himself? to the Writing-Masters; in their, Opinion the Letters are of different Hands, and Fraudelisa's innocent: the Abbot Sophin is not absolutely of the same Mind; they dispute together, they consult, they wander in their reasonings, and know not what to determine certainly upon it. As for Lesbia, as soon as Day appear'd, she secretly took the Physick which she had prepar'd and waited it's Effects; when it begun to operate violently, she sent a Footman to tell Alcander from her, that she was dying, and desir'd to speak with him. I dye with Willingness, said she to him, seeing him approach her Bed, and I have no Regrets for Life, since you are false to me, and that I cannot be your Wife. Then she feign'd a Convulsion Fit, the strength of the Physick, and the alteration it had made upon her Face, contributed much to hide her Deceit, and to perswade Alcander that she was really dying. After some time, pretending to recover from her Fit, she continu'd to speak thus: Hear me, Alcander, I have but little time to live, and my minutes are precious: Take, said she sighing, the Keys of my Trunk, the Money you gave me to keep, which is in it, and all I have of Value in the World, I give you all I have, and I wish I had a Scepter, and a Crown, to offer you in dying; after my Death, you'll see the Difference betwixt Lesbia's Fidelity, and that of your other Mistresses; and I shall then be at the bottom of your Heart, to make you feel the Torments which are due to the perjur'd and unfaithful. Alcander was in a Surprise and Amazement, which cannot be conceiv'd, and his Resentment cou'd not hold against the Condition in which he saw Lesbia; nor against the Marks she made appear to him of Tenderness, and Love. He would know the Cause from whence such sudden and extraordinary Effects cou'd proceed, and instantly begg'd of Lesbia to tell it him. She begun (pretending to take new Forces) with telling him, that she had not slept all that Night; that when it was almost Day she had fall'n into a little Slumber, but had scarce tasted the first Sweetnesses of it, when a frightful monstrous Woman had appear'd to her, the very Remembrance of whom made her tremble still. She describ'd her to him, saying, she had hollow Cheeks, a wide Mouth, black and thick Lips, a flat Nose, large Nostrils, her Skin yellow, and mark'd with spots of Blood, her Eyes half our of her Head, from which Fire incessantly sparkled, her Head erect, and Serpents twisted round it, instead of Hair. She continu'd saying that she seem'd to her to disappear a moment after, snatching a Serpent from her Head which she flung at her; that this Serpent slipping upon her hand, had fastned on the ring which Alcander gave her, and pull'd out the Ruby with his Teeth; then went and hid it in that place where he laid his Letters, after which she disappear'd: that at the same time abundance of Ravens, Owls, and Bats, assembled upon her Head, in the form of a Canopy, and made a fearful noise with their Cries; when a tall Woman, handsome, and with an Air extreamly sweet, carrying an Olive branch in her hand, had chas'd them away; and vanishing, had thrown upon her Bed a Leaf of her Branch; that she wak'd immediately so perswaded that she shou'd find the Olive-leaf, that she had look'd a long time for it; and in fine, that she had fall'n into such violent Convulsions, that she plainly saw, she ought to think of nothing but dying: that these Ominous Birds came to advertise her of it, and the weakness in which she found her self made her see she had but few hours to live; after which, she gave as the Last Adieu's to Alcander intreating him to remember her always, and to keep the Resolution he had taken of never marrying; then without hearkening to what he wou'd, say, she turn'd to t' other side; begging him to leave her the little time she had, to think upon her self. Never Man beheld himself so much embarrass'd as Alcander was, he knew not what to do, nor what to think: Solitude pleas'd him, he retir'd to his Closet, he cast his eyes upon his Letters, and seeing some of them remov'd in that place where Lesbia dream'd the Serpent hid the Ruby, he had the Curiosity (as he was laying them in their Order) to search the place: Ha! how was he surpriz'd when he found a Ruby there! he knew not who, or where he was, and fancy'd all he had seen was an Illusion. In this Condition he run to the Abbot Sophin's, where he found Philocrates, who told him, that the letter was not from Fraudelisa, that she was innocent that he had been convinc'd of it; and in general, all that he knew, upon that Subject. Alcander on his side, recounted to them both, all that had pass'd in his Adventure; and after many Reflections, the Opinions of Philocrates and Alcander were, that Lesbia was innocent, as well as Fraudelisa; but the Abbot suspected some Artifice in it. That which amaz'd Alcander and Philocrates to the last degree, was Lesbia's Dream; nothing was so diverting, as the Explications they gave it, and the Stories, and Reflections they made upon the Significancy of Dreams: That great hideous Woman who flung the Serpents was Discord; the other, soft and beautiful, was the Goddess of Peace, who with her Olive branch, had chas'd the Ominous Birds away. They maintain'd to the Abbot Sophin, that there are Genius's and Spirits which advertise us in Dreams, of what is to befall us; and instanc'd in Calphurnia's which had foreshown the Death of her Husband Julius C aesar; that of Cr[illeg.]sus, which told him his Son Atys shou'd be kill'd with a Dart, that of Astyages King of Media, which advertis'd him that the Son which shou'd be born of his Daughter Mandana, was to be Master of Asia. In fine, they told many more, and their Conversation ended with a Reflection they made, that one ought never to judge of any thing, since such strong and violent Presumptions as these were deceitful. After all this Discourse, they told the Abbot Sophin, that they wou'd not leave him till he had decided their Question, whether it was most advantageous
