 a Trifle at the Feet of Your Royal Highness . But as with Heaven, a devoted Heart attones for a worthless Offering; so Most Excellent Princess , let the fervent Zeal, which inclines me towards your Service, excuse this too too bold an Undertaking. You are a Princess whose Presence creates an Universal Joy and Veneration in all your pleas'd Beholders. We view in your Majestick Lineaments, the August Air of your Royal Ancestors: Whilst with this becoming Majesty, something so agreeably affable is join'd, that your humble Creatures find their Access both easy and delightful: And those who have the Honour and Happyness to attend your Royal Person , plainly discover those Moral and Princely Virtues, refin'd with sincere Christian Piety, which Beautify and Reign in your Heroick Soul: and the unequal'd Character they give, raises the love of Virtue in the Breast of the most stupid. 'Tis said Example goes before Precept; and that of all Examples we are fondest of those our Princes set before us. How incorrigible then are these polluted Times, when You, Illustrious Madam , stand a Pattern most Excellently Glorious? The Prayers of all good Men daily importune Heaven on your behalf, nor are their Prayers in vain; nor do the bounteous Powers barely behold such worth, without reward; Blessings crowd around, and leave (I hope) no wish unsatisfied. Blest in the Royal Partner of your Bed, that Great Good Man; words that but seldom truly join; Blest your Self, and blessing all, in that Lovely Blooming Prince, the Duke of Glocester ; whose forward Youth Wings the breath of Fame; and were her Tongues innumerable, when she reports of him, some wonder must be left untold. Joy of the Present Age, and Darling hopes, on which the future one depends. Oh may he Inherit the Extracted Virtues of all our Brittish Kings ; the Courage of our Present Soveraign; but a Fortune peculiarly Great, peculiarly his own; Conspicuous, and far above whatever went before: that Succeeding Worlds, may to his Glorious Name, justly add the Epithet of Happy. I ought now to say something, in reference to the following Sheets; but my ravish'd Pen hath been entertain'd upon so sublime a Theme, that it disdains to descend; and my heart full of Rapture, that is, full of your Royal Highness , will only give me leave to endeavour the expressing, how much I am, Madam, Your Royal Highness's Devoted humble Servant, Mary Pix. OR Innocence Betray'd. Donna Olimpia held in the Court of Rome , during the Papacy of Innocent the Tenth. The Fiction of Hercules's changing Cloaths with his beloved Mistress, ought here to have been practis'd; for that Pope gave himself wholly up to Laziness and Effeminacy, whilst Olimpia govern'd both in Church and State. If any person wanted Ecclesiastical preferment, Donna Olimpia receiv'd their Presents and Address; if an Ambassador was earnest for dispatch, her Interest alone could obtain it. Thus she remain'd courted, adored by all; Caressing few, unless it were the Cardinals. Those she was very fond of making her Creatures, that her Power might rule in all their Councils. And amongst that Scarlet Fraternity, Antonio Barbarino was the Man she most affected. He was wicked, as her vilest Wishes; and cunning as her subtlest Thoughts, when they formed Revenge; Revenge which was her darling Pleasure; Witness the Rage she, for years, maintain'd against her own Son, only because his Wife was great and beautiful. But to return to our matter: This Cardinal Antonio was something cold, and did not follow her Measures so exactly as she desired; much she would have done, to have obtained the absolute Ascendant over him; and Fortune, at last, became obliging to her Wish: She had observ'd the Cardinal, in some of his late Visits, to appear very sad and thoughtful; she often press'd him to know the Cause, whilst he for some time continued to evade her Importunity; at length, being alone with her, and she becoming again inquisitive, he ushering his Discourse with a Sigh, began thus. 'Madam, the fear that I shall stand wholly corrected, and condemned, by your severer Vertue, has thus long deterr'd me from disclosing my Tortures. I know, Madam, you have Designs which you would give the World to effect; prove but then indulgent to those dear guilty Wishes I am going to discover: and here I solemnly swear to assist you with my utmost power, in all your Commands, of what nature soever.' This Promise was too kind, not to gain the like Assurance from Donna Olimpia ; and the Cardinal proceeded. 'Ambition only fired my Youth, and led me on to Greatness; but now a gentler Flame hath filled my Heart, yet more tormenting. I am in Love, O Olimpia ; raging mad with Love, to that degree possess'd, that if I enjoy not the Object of these violent Desires, life it self will become a burthen insupportable.' Though Olimpia was declining in Age, and never any exact Beauty, yet so vain is Woman; that she began to hope for a declaration of Love; sets her Face in the best order; puts on affected Looks; turns her Eyes from Antonio's : and seems in great expectation. But he quickly undeceiv'd her, by adding: 'It is the beautiful Melora , Daughter to the Marquess of Coure , now Ambassador from France . Fair, charming as an Angel; her Eyes shoot amorous Fire, yet are repleat with Modesty; and much I fear, no Temptation though dress'd with alluring Pleasure, or dazling Wealth, will o'recome her. The vicious, answer'd wicked Olimpia , yield of themselves; nor were it worth your care or mine, were she not virtuous. Leave this business, added she, to my conduct; and, provided you spoil not my Design with unseasonable Frugality, I'le ingage to bring Melora to your Arms.' The passionate Priest was transported, fell at her Feet, embraced her Knees, and promised her inestimable Treasures, if she made good her Word. She asked him, if Melora knew him: he assur'd her, No; for there had been a misunderstanding betwixt her Father and him; and he was the only Person of his Rank, that did not frequent the Ambassador's House, nor had ever seen her but at Church; where, added he, those lovely unheeding Eyes have never mark'd me with a fixt regard; the brighter Stars that now alone must rule my Fate. After other Discourses to the same purpose, the Cardinal took his leave, and that night sent Olimpia a Dressing-table cover'd with Plate, valu'd at eight Thousand Crowns; for he knew that Woman avaricious, and took the right way to hasten her Endeavours for his satisfaction. Soon after, this bribed Designer did the French Ambassador a signal piece of Service, in a business of importance; and when he would have made her a Present for that Favour: she refus'd it, saying, all she desired in return, was: That he would send his Daughter, the fair Melora , to see her; for though a Woman, that Lady's Face had so charm'd her: she even long'd to contract a Friendship with her. The good Marquess was transported to hear what an Honour was design'd his dear lov'd Daughter; and delay'd not sending her to wait upon Olimpia , who caress'd her at an unusual rate; discover'd all her little insinuating Arts of Fondness, whilst the deluded Maid was, beyond expression, pleased to hear her talk so kindly; to see all her rich Cabinets, and those Millions of Curiosities she was Mistress of. Many pretty Presents, (at the first Visit) Olimpia forc'd Melora to accept; nor would she part with her without a firm Promise of her coming every day to see her; which this innocent Virgin most willingly agreed to, and perform'd. Nothing now was more talk'd of, or envy'd amongst the Ladies, then this new Friendship: they appear'd at every publick place together; and Melora having a Garb suitable to that Greatness, quickly added to the number of her Adorers: but that was the only Restriction Olimpia gave her, not to entertain the Addresses of any, still hinting at some wonderful Design she had for her; and always saying to her, That Heaven had sure ordain'd that lovely Face, that august Mien, for Soveraignty. Nor could Olimpia (as much as she was inclin'd to it) flatter, in commending her, for she was really amiable to a Miracle. She was of stature tall, shap'd beyond the Art of a Description, and mov'd with a Majestick Air. Her Eyes were black and shining; and aw'd the trembling Lover from gazing long. Her Hair seem'd to vie with them for Charms and Lustre; then her Skin was of that amazing whiteness, 'twould raise emotions in the most retired Recluse. In fine, her Hands, Arms, and every agreeable Lineament of that exact Frame, her Body, forc'd from the most envious of her own Sex, the Appellation of a perfect Beauty. Nor did the bounteous Powers stop with these Graces; but gave also a Mind composed of Harmony: wise, as experienced Age; witty, as Youth, inspired with Poetry: and innocent, as harmless Childhood. Oh Melora! after-Ages shall with pity read, even to the end of Time, that such an Angel should be given to the Guardianship of a Devil; for so curst Olimpia prov'd. Olimpia us'd a most ingaging way to all Persons, where her Interest was concern'd; and though to the indifferent World, and those beneath her, she seem'd haughty, and full of pride; yet her inward Conversation was affable, and to a wonder pleasing; the highest Charms of which she had even industriously bestow'd upon Melora ; and so perfectly was that young Creature indear'd to her, that she would as soon have dy'd, and as willingly, as disoblig'd her. The impatient Cardinal complained, and told Olimpia , she mov'd not half so fast as his Desires. But this cunning Artificer resolv'd to lay a sure Foundation before she began so difficult a work. And the first step towards it, was the desiring Melora to let a famous Florentine Painter take her Picture in Miniature; which was granted, as soon as asked. The Piece was exquisitely done, and presented to Olimpia . All seem'd now to favour her Designs; and she only wanted an obliging Opportunity to introduce her well-laid Story to Melora . Which thus happen'd: Olimpia coming from the Pope's Palace, call'd for her dear Companion (as she term'd Melora ) who was at her Father's House, entertaining Donna Brandina , a Roman Lady of Quality; but of a fantastick Humor: the chief Business of her Life, being to find out all the loving Affairs amongst the great Ones, either in Court or City. Nay, so eager was she at this insignificant Curiosity, that she kept a Correspondency even with Chamber-maids. After Olimpia came in, Brandina began again to tell over all the impertinent amorous Adventures she had lately heard; but perceiving them not much delighted with her foolish Relations: she, at length, took her leave, to the wish'd desire of the two friendly Ladies, who long'd to enjoy themselves privately. For the accomplishment of which Donna Olimpia propos'd taking the Air a few miles out of Town: Melora being her perfect Devotee, with chearfulness agreed. As soon as their Coach was disengag'd from the Hurry of Rome , that sweet French Woman, looking upon Olimpia with a Smile: Madam, said she, Donna Brandina came to me to day with important News; and hath told me a Story, which hath extreamly diverted me. What is't, for Heavens sake, answer'd Olimpia , that talkative Creature could say to please thee, my Dear? It seems, reply'd the fair one, your Highness, out of your immense Goodness, setting a value upon the Trifle you commanded (my Picture) has order'd a Lapidary to set it in Diamonds; which this inquisitive Lady finding out, concludes a piece of Gallantry done by some Lover; and has plac'd me amongst her Virgins, that are concern'd in Heroick Amours, as yet to her undiscover'd. For (continu'd Melora laughing) she keeps a daily Journal of all the Intrigues that pass, and is now almost distracted to know my humble Servant. 'It is strange, said Olimpia, that empty Creature should guess at hidden Truths; for since Chance hath broke the Ice, I will own to thee, my dearest Girl, 'tis an illustrious Lover, is giving that deserved Ornament to thy charming Picture.' 'How, Madam, said Melora ! nay, if you resolve to rally your Servant, I must remain dumb, and only answer with confusion and Blushes.' 'No, reply'd Olimpia , in a grave Tone, this is as true as you are fair and good; there is a Person in the World is in Love with you. In Love with you! Oh weak Expression! added she vehemently; is dying for you; suffers all the violent pangs, Poetry e're feigned, or man e're felt.' His Quality is Supream; yet his Ambition terminates in being your Slave; then be not angry that I have given him your Picture: For though you are bright as an Angel, and Mistress of unequal'd Charms; yet he deserves, my Fairest, even you, ended Olimpia , embracing her. 'Whatsoever is acted by my Divinest Patroness, said Melora , bowing low, by me, with strictest Obedience and highest Pleasure shall be observed; and when you, my ever honoured Friend, grow weary of my faithful Heart: dispose of it as you please, your Commands must needs be easie. Be assured, Charmer (answer'd this designing Lady) I will never part with that inestimable Jewel, but upon Terms that shall wholly redound to your Advantage.' She paus'd upon this, and left the Subject for Melora to consider some few days without farther explaining her self. Then seeming in a very pleasant Humor, she takes Melora into her Cabinet, and ask'd her smiling, if since their last private Conference, she had not dream'd of an accomplish'd Cavalier sighing at her Feet, and dying for her Love? 'My Thoughts, reply'd that modest Maid, so seldom frame an Idea of Mankind, that it is almost impossible that they should disturb my Dreams.' 'But methinks, said Olimpia , one recommended by me, should make a little deeper impression on that frigid Heart of yours. Behold here, added she, (taking out a gold Box, and opening it) your Picture which with much ado I obtain'd from the Amorous Prince for an hour or two.' Melora took it in her hand, and view'd it with wonder; nor could she chuse; for it was a dazling Object, being set Oval fashion in large Diamonds: Round the fairest, which was uppermost, these words were ingraven; 'Now, Madam, cry'd Melora eagerly, you must forgive my Curiosity, and permit me, like my Sex, to be wondrous inquisitive: For the Title of Prince, which you have given this unknown , and the brightness of these Jewels, strike me into amazement; I cannot believe your Goodness would abuse my Credulity with fictitious Stories; nor can I have Pride enough to imagine a Prince my Lover. What I told you before, I solemnly confirm, says Olimpia , he is not only your Lover, but Slave; yet over part of the World an Absolute Soveraign: All this is truth; but 'tis a Truth of such a consequence, that I must lay upon you wonderful Injunctions e're I venture to unravel it, your faithful Breast must lock this Secret up as safe as if my Life depended upon disclosing it; or if there is any thing you hold dearer, by that I conjure you, let not your own Father know the least Circumstance of this Discovery; and if you dare trust me wholly with the Management of your Fortune, which 'twould break my Heart to doubt; in earnest you shall suddenly appear the most glorious, as well as the most beautiful Princess in Europe .' So perfectly did Melora confide in Olimpia , that she made no scruple to rely upon her Conduct, and promis'd even with Imprecations, a most sincere and exact Secrecy, to whatsoever she would relate. Olimpia gave order not to be disturb'd, and began thus: 'You must arm your self with Patience to hear a Story, that will be of a long continuance before it points at you. Melora , by a graceful bow, and continuing silent, let Olimpia know her Expectation, and Attention; when that cruel Princess, seeming a while to recollect her self, dress'd up a true Story in the following words.' Otho Duke of Ferrara and Modena had an only Son nam'd Alphonsus , who was above what I am able to describe; all the World acknowledging him accomplish'd to the highest Degree. His Father was yet lusty, and stirring in State-affairs, which gave Alphonsus liberty to follow many youthful Adventures. Amongst the rest, he propos'd to a Favourite of his, call'd Don Castro (the beginning of a glorious Summer) taking a Ramble in the adjacent Countries under borrow'd Names: the Prince was very young and very brisk, when this was mention'd, and his Companion being suitable for years and Temper, they soon agreed, and put their Design into Action. Alphonsus calling himself Don Pedro ; and Castro, Philippo . The morning they began their Frolick, Alphonsus left a Letter upon his Table for his Father, the Contents of which, only wished him long life, health, and happiness, begging his Pardon for a youthful Excursion; which should tend neither to his own, nor any persons prejudice, & c. The Court was at first mightily alarm'd; but Otho recollecting the Humors of his own Youth, was at length content to hope this was only an innocent Folly. These noble Rovers had past some weeks, and were got a great distance from Ferrara , before any extraordinary Occurrence happen'd to them. They had visited some Cities; but were now retir'd into the Country, where Don Pedro (for by that Name you must understand the Prince) began to complain to his Friend of the dulness of their Ramble, and inveigh against the fair Sex, for their Civility in sparing them their Hearts and Liberty. 'It was such melancholy Reflections as these, reply'd Philippo , caus'd me, at break of day, to fetch a pensive Walk some distance from hence, where I met with a small Intrigue that gave me a proportionable Diversion. Oh Churl, cry'd out Don Pedro , how could you conceal it one moment; Be not so impatient, answers the other; for I think it scarce worth your hearing: however thus it was, I enter'd a large Forest, and after I had walk'd some time, listning only to the Harmony of the Birds, and viewing the Verdure of those pleasant Shades, I saw through the Trees, walking a swift pace, a Cavalier well dress'd. After I had a while observ'd him, I fancy'd by his haste, and the time of the day, he was upon some private Design; therefore not to interrupt him, I left the path that led me after him, and wandred into another. But Fortune resolv'd that should not be my last interview; for in a quarter of an hour's space, I was come to a high Wall where I perceiv'd my Spark some yards from me, waiting in a disconsolate posture, and seeming to expect something from thence. I found he had not discover'd me; and my curiosity was such, I could not forbear observing the Event. To that end I conceal'd my self behind a Shrub, where I could with ease view what pass'd. The Gentleman began to grow very impatient, as I perceiv'd by his Gestures: sometimes he whistled, which I guess'd to be the sign; then walk'd with a perturbed pace. At length, quite tyr'd, he cry'd out: Perfidious Creature! false as thou art foolish! to squander away thy Patrimony only to satisfie thy curst curiosity! After he had rav'd thus, and vex'd himself above an hour: away he walks, still cursing his unauspicious Stars, and those greater Plagues, deceitful Women. I laughed, and hug'd my self, for being free from all the Snares of that insinuating Sex. Entertain'd with these pleasing Thoughts I hasten'd homewards; but e're I was got half way, a Fancy seiz'd my Noddle to return back, and visit the afore mention'd Wall again, making such a sign as I had already heard. The Whim pleas'd me; and methought I was assur'd, I should finish the Adventure which this too hasty Gallant had left. Accordingly I turn'd my steps, and having reach'd the place, I had no sooner whistl'd, but my expectation was answer'd; for over the Wall came a Key ty'd to this Billet, which he gave to the Prince who read these words.'  Bounty and long Waiting; come before day, and creep close along the thick Arbours; if through any sinister accident, you should be discovered: rather say, you scal'd the Walls, or dropt from the Clouds, than own a Correspondency with Your humble Servant Lusetta.  There was a Postcript to this effect:  you the little door, whereof this is the Key, is on the West side.  'Well, said Don Pedro smiling, and what Advantage do you intend to reap by this pretty Mistake? Truly, answer'd Philippo , I heartily wish the Gentleman, it belongs to had it; for I have no mind to hazard my Life in our Italian Families to see novel Sights. Nay, if you are so indifferent, reply'd the Prince you shall quit your Right in this Adventure to me; for I am confident there is a fair Lady in the Case, and am resolv'd, if you desist, to see her.' In vain Philippo us'd a thousand Arguments, and talk'd till the Prince commanded his silence. He was obstinate, nor could a fond Bridegroom long more for the night's approach, than this rash Noble Youth did for the morning. As soon as ever the first streaks of day appear'd, he begins his Walk. Poor Philippo parts with much reluctancy and fear, resolving to follow him, and watch thereabouts, till his Return. Don Pedro carefully observ'd the Directions he had forc'd from his Friend, whom he would not suffer to go with him; his Fate seeming to whisper the Prize he was to gain, would admit no Sharers. When he had found the place, he foftly unlocks the door, which he perceiv'd was left unbar'd on purpose, and enters a lovely place, beholding both to Art and Nature for its beauty. He takes the first close Walk, which brought him to the pleasantest Grotto, your Fancy can possibly represent. It was exactly four square; and in every corner the knots of Trees were thick, mingling their Boughs over delicate Marble Seats, whose backs were painted with several Histories. Long Walks, with leavy Screens, that shut out the Sun's fierce Beams, conducted you from every of these delightful Seats to the other. In the midst was a large space adorn'd with a curious Fountain; that which made this Fountain so admirable, was the Statue of Venus : at the head of it there was the Goddess figur'd in Marble, with Adonis slain at her Feet, whilst from her Eyes streams incessantly ran down, bath'd the lov'd Youth, and seem'd to fill the vast Cistern underneath, which with an agreeable murmur still receiv'd them. Beyond all this was an exquisite Garden enamel'd with choisest Flowers and Fruits. The Prince had entertain'd himself a considerable time in this Charming place; and began to fear the Sight the Letter promis'd, was only these Rarities; though, to comfort him, he could at a great distance espy a fair well built House; and hop'd a fairer issue from it. Nor was he disappointed; for e're he had waited much longer, he through the Trees, discovers a Woman bringing four crimson Velvet Cushions, which she lays, two upon the ground, and two upon one of the Marble Seats. After she was gone, our Hero seeks out a place, as near this Arbour as he could that would conceal him. There was no possibility of looking into it, without being seen; so that he is forc'd to go behind, and be a Hearer only of what the Persons would say, that were to possess those Seats. He had scarce time to fix himself before he heard the rusling of Silks, and sweet small Voices: which made him conclude his Neighbours, Ladies. After general Discourses, not material, one of them said: 'I cannot but wonder, my charming Cousin, that the wise Sulpitia should take delight to bury so much Beauty as yours in obscurity, and confine your Youth to these melancholy Shades; when but appearing at Court with you, would soon raise your ancient Noble Family to its pristine Splendour. For I am convinc'd no Prince, of what Rank soever, could look upon so lovely a Creature, without laying his Heart and Crown at her Feet. Fy, Cousin, said the other, with a charming Voice, I must needs chide you for your flattery, and condemn your blaming my Mother's conduct. You are sensible, the riotous living of some of my Ancestors has so impaired our Fortunes, that this Seat and a small Revenue, is all remains. In this deprav'd Age, without Gold, what can I expect by this little stock of Beauty, which you talk so much of but vicious Adorers? Would you have my Mother then expose me to Courts? The thought shocks my Virgin Soul, and makes me start when no danger's near. Oh! rather, let Cordelia's Name pass obscurely to the Grave, forgotten, than be remembred, and Dishonour affix'd to it.' A noble Resolution, thought our Listener, who now long'd to see her Face. Some time after, they rose to walk, the Prince then crept near as possible, and putting the leaves aside, beheld the brightest Beauty upon Earth. He stood immoveable, and if the Ladies had look'd that way, with half his Attention, they must have discover'd him. Cordelia was dress'd in a Gown of green Damask; the Sleeves were becomingly tucked up to her Shoulders; and trim'd round with white and red Knots, like Roses. Her shining Hair, in careless Curls, partly cover'd her lovely Neck; the rest exactly puff'd: adorn'd with many pretty Ribons, and some Jewels. 'I have describ'd her Garb (said Olimpia smiling, and pointing to a large Looking-glass that hung in the Closet) but you must look in yonder Mirrour to see her Person. Melora blush'd, and Olimpia went on.' The Prince, at this moment, banish'd from his Breast the Idea of all the Court-Beauties he had ever seen, and gaz'd on this Master-piece of Nature so long, till he had imprinted Cordelia's Image too deep for time ever to deface. Whilst the Ladies, far from guessing at an Observer, finish'd their Walk, and went in, leaving Alphonsus like one who had seen a Vision, all surpriz'd. When he began to think, he summons his rambling Humour to his aid, and the improbability of obtaining his desires. This, and much more, he thought, but all in vain; her Shape, her Mien, her charming Face; then her noble Mind surpassing all, secured him her Slave for ever. He resolv'd a thousand Projects in his working Brain, which way to obtain access to her. Sometimes he tormented himself, because he had not spoke to her when she was there; now pleas'd with the hopes she would return. In these restless Cogitations he spent most part of the day. As the Evening began to approach, Don Castro who had often visited the outside of the Wall, was in a great Consternation; he fear'd some mischief had befaln the Prince; and knew not what Method to take to be satisfy'd. At last not being able to remain longer in suspence of his safety, he went boldly to the Front of the House, and knock'd at the Gate: the Porter came, and when he had open'd it, says Don Castro ; 'Pray, Friend, what is become of a Gentleman that came this morning into your Garden? If your have done mischief to him, all your Lives, even to the highest of your Family, must answer it.' The Fellow all amaz'd, cry'd out; 'I suppose, Sir, you are either mad, or have mistook the House; for we have no Gentlemen ever come within these Walls, since my Honour'd Lord is gone to Heaven (at the mention of whom, the Lowt began to make a Face, as though Tears would follow). Don Castro , whose Fears were augmented by this Fellow's, as he thought, pretended ignorance: charged him in a furious Tone, to be his Conductor to his Friend, or he would send him to a place just contrary to that he said his Master was in. At this Noise the other Servants came about them. One discreeter than the rest, ran and acquainted Sulpitia with this strange story. Sulpitia , whose Daughter was the dearest Jewel she had on Earth, hearkned to it with an emotion of Spirit, and desir'd the Gentleman might be brought to her. When Castro came, he told the whole matter, just as I have before related, as much as possible, excusing the Curiosity of his youthful Friend. Lusetta was instantly call'd, who when she had heard her Accusation, trembling confess'd, That she was seduc'd by a Kinswoman for a Summ of Money, to let one Don Ferado see the beautiful Cordelia: Sulpitia only bid her retire, deferring her punishment to another time, and hastened into the Garden.' Now whilst this had been acting in the House, the Ladies who were gone to take their evening Walk, were not free from their surprize; for Alphonsus seeing them return, resolv'd to appear and say, what his fierce Love should dictate. Accordingly he walk'd towards them, Cordelia lifting up her Eyes at the noise he made in walking, and seeing so brave a Cavalier in that prohibited place, shriek'd aloud, and would have fled: but he putting one Knee to the Ground, took hold of her Garment, viewing her with a piercing Air: 'Divinest Creature, said he, Heaven e're made, or Man e're worshipp'd! Fly not; your Guardian Angel as soon will hurt you as your kneeling Slave. Fate, prodigious Fate, brought me hither, and now a greater Power tyes me at your Feet for ever.' As he would have proceeded, they heard people talking, and Cordelia saw Sulpitia just by her: 'Oh Heavens, cry'd that lovely Maid, my Mother will think me culpable, and that with consent I have entertained Discourse with this Intruder.' Alphonsus rose astonish'd to see his Friend there, and turning his Eyes with anger upon him, was about to speak, when Sulpitia interrupted him, in saying: 'Whatever your Designs were, this Gentleman (pointing to Castro ) hath told such a plausible story, that I am content to dismiss you without farther Examination, provided you instantly retire, and trouble our Repose no more.' 'Though you were a Goddess, answer'd Alphonsus , as being Mother to this Lady, I esteem you little less (bowing to Cordelia ) I would not stir till this bright Fair commanded; let her but speak; let her but say my Presence is an Offence, and I'le fly fast as I would do, if Honour call'd; swift, as Cowards fly, when Death pursues, else I am footed here.' Cordelia blush'd; but the curious might perceive it was not with anger. Her Mother bid her command him thence, and she obeyed; yet not quite so readily as was expected. He respectfully took his leave, told Cordelia , with his Eyes that he had left his Heart; turn'd back, and seem'd to wish she would use it kindly. 'Oh, Castro , said the Prince, when they were disengag'd, and walking homewards, Thou hast undone me. Thy officious Love hath prov'd my ruine; rob'd me of the only happy moments my life will ever know: now I must wander o're the World the veriest Wretch that eye of time e'er saw, whilst this bright Image I have thus transitorily view'd, wracks my captivated Heart, and takes repose for ever from my Soul.' 'I hope, says Castro , this Romantick speech is only to show your Highness's Parts, and amuse me; for certainly no Idea, how beautiful soever, can ruffle the calmness of your Royal Temper. Dull Creature, reply'd the Prince, couldst thou behold the Miracle, and after that remain so stupid, to believe I am in Jest? No, I swear it is unalterably fix'd by Fate. I must neglect Interest, Ambition, Glory, and all the noisy Pomp the World affords, since now the study and business of my life is only to obtain the ador'd Cordelia .' Castro seeing him in this Rapture, thought 'twas to no purpose to interrupt him; and desired to hear the story of the day, which the Prince related, and concluding with new Protestations of his endless Love, they went to their Lodgings. But no Rest had the amorous Alphonsus , plainly telling his Friend, if he did not contrive some means, that lie might see her again, he must expect to see him dead. Castro at last began to believe it; for he scarce eat or slept, nor ever seem'd pleas'd, but when he was talking of Cordelia . In vain did his faithful Servant remonstrate the necessity of returning to Court: nay, he could not mention it without putting the Prince in a passion; who solemnly vow'd he would never see that , or his Father more, till he had again blest his longing Eyes with the sight of the beloved charming Cordelia . When Castro saw all Arguments, all Endeavours to reduce his Reason, fruitless: he thought the only Expedient must be, to procure this much desir'd Happiness; and in order to it, made inquiry very strictly about the Village, what Persons resorted to Sulpitia's House. But could hear of none, except a Fryar who was a constant Guest there. He then examin'd into the Temper of that Holy man; heard it was jolly, free from care; that he liv'd the life of Sense himself, how severe soever his Doctrine was; though before Sulpitia he carry'd himself with a becoming Gravity. This Man Castro resolves to get acquainted with; and understood the way was easie, only two or three good Treats, and he was yours for ever: he soon effects his first design; grows wondrous intimate with the Fryar, his only Favourite; and taking his opportunity, cunningly interweaves his Discourse with many particular Questions: amongst the rest, becoming inquisitive about Sulpitia's Family, asking what her Resolutions were, concerning her beauteous Daughter the fair Cordelia ; At which the Fryar blest himself, wondring how he had so much as learnt that Lady's name; in such secure Retirement her Mother kept her; nay even he, whose Tongue sometimes run of all things, seldom mention'd them. However this was too dear a Friend to be deny'd any satisfaction his Knowledge would afford; and he immediately, at large, acquaints Castro , how nicely vertuous; and withal, how high Sulpitia's Temper was; that she rather chose to keep the unimitable Maid immur'd in the most secret privacy, than marry her below her Birth, though equal to her scanty Fortunes. Next that, she carefully avoided Courts and publick Places, fearing the censorious World, which always fixes its fascinating Eyes on the most lovely Faces. This Information Castro communicates to the Prince; yet both their industry could imagine no advantage by it. At these difficulties Alphonsus abandons himself to Despair; threatens to be rid of life, since no fairer Prospect was in view to ease his Heart of Love's tormenting Fires. The young compassionate Lord, distracted with his Master's griefs, propos'd the Fryar's making the motion of a Marriage, under the borrow'd Name of Don Pedro . But the Heroick Prince declin'd that Offer; resolving first to endeavour the ingaging Cordelia's Heart, and not force the gentle Maid to Bonds, she might think uneasie. He told Castro he discover'd small incouragement from his Acquaintance with the Fryar; unless his Interest could prevail so far, as to ingage the sociable Gownman to introduce him in some Disguise into the Family: then he might hope to sound Cordelia's Inclinations, and also tell his own, in Terms moving enough to touch her. Castro promis'd to undertake it, though he fear'd the Task would prove hard to accomplish. In order to this Design, he desires privacy with that Fryar, and in the first place genteely forces a considerable Summ of Gold upon him, beginning his Discourse with the Merit, Riches, and an invented Title of Quality for his Friend; adding his desperate Condition assures him, unless he inclines to pity, and assist, Death must certainly be the Catastrophe of his Misery. The Fryar consider'd all these Reasons, and chiefly the Present; yet shrug'd, and said, 'Twas difficult, 'twas dangerously difficult, desiring time for his Answer; which Castro allow'd. When they met next, the Priest tells him, there was but one possibility of obtaining the Freedom of the House, and that did neither agree with the good Man's Conscience, nor was consistent with his Friend's safety. Castro starts at this; however was eager to know the dangerous Contrivance. You must understand then (the obliging Fryar goes on) I have often mention'd, at Sulpitia's , that I expected a Relation of the Dominican Order very suddenly. Now if Don Pedro could personate him, which is Death by the Law, if discover'd, he may have admittance with me as often as I please; and I think it is impossible, they, having had so short an Interview, as you speak of, can ever remember him in the disguise of a Hood. Castro agreed to that; but could give no further Answer, till he had acquainted the Prince, who seems to swallow his words, and with swiftest haste returns with him to the Fryar: gives the Priest more Gold to mollifie his Scruple of Conscience: and instantly prepares for his Disguise. 'In my Opinion (said Melora , interrupting Olimpia ) a religious Habit is both unhandsom and unfit to carry on an amorous Intrigue. It is so, my pious Maid (answers that Dissembler) and, for ought I know, the many Troubles that are inflicted on their Posterity, may be punishments for this first mockery of the Divinity.' However the Design succeeded to their Wish; for Don Pedro was with the Fryar, receiv'd free from all suspicion, and enjoy'd often the agreeable Conversation of the amiable Cordelia . Their Discourse was of various Subjects; he never having had opportunity to speak to her alone. All Occasions he watches, which may in the least advance his desires: and Love being mention'd by chance, our disguis'd Prince falls into a Rapture, calling it, if a vertuous Flame, the highest Perfection humane Nature is capable of; a resemblance of Heaven; adding a thousand Fineries on that delightful Theme. 'You always speak with much Rhetorick (says the fair Cordelia smiling) but on this Subject seem inspir'd, and I should guess, did not your Habit contradict it, Love has been no Stranger to your Heart; 'tis so familiar on your Tongue.' He only fetch'd a deep sigh, and stole an amorous Glance towards her; which she not observing, went on. 'Pray, since you understand this passion so well, oblige me with a description of it; tell me in what manner people are, when possess'd with the Frenzy: for the grave and wise give it no better Title.' 'The Task you enjoyn (Madam) said the Prince, is none of the easiest; for divers ineffectually, tho' they felt its Torments, have essayed. I have the greatest Reason then to fear falling amongst that number, being the most incompetent. However I will venture, rather than disobey your Commands. It is an Inclination, which being throughly fix'd in the Heart, gets predominant over all others. 'Tis the whole Employment of our Thoughts; for the passionate Lover has not one intervening moment; his breast is for ever fill'd with the beloved Idea. If they are asunder, a violent desire is join'd to this Inclination to be with the charming Object. These eager Wishes render nights and days insupportable. If they are together, a trembling Fear, lest any word or action should displease is ever present. Then too often Jealousie steps in. Thus absent or present, still in fears. Such uneasiness attends the most happy Lovers. But what Wrecks, what Tortures unexpressible seize the Wretch who loves, and yet despairs! Who doats, yet has no room for hope. Cordelia sighed, and cry'd, Alas! that's sad indeed.' 'Why, Madam, said the Prince, hastily; I hope such Misery hath no relation to your softer hours: Not much, she answer'd, with a Blush that increas'd our Lover's fears to distraction.' He was eager to pursue the Discourse, though it might discover what he most dreaded; but she prevented him, by going to the Company. His Resentment and Grief was too great not to be perceiv'd; therefore he took his leave somewhat abruptly; and when he had shifted his Disguise (which he always did at the Fryar's) he hastens to his dear Confident Castro , immediately tells him his Misfortune, how Cordelia was prepossess'd, had given that inestimable Jewel her Heart to a Rival, a Rival belov'd: there was the wound! This obliging Friend said all that might asswage his Sorrows; yet nothing could allay them: he pass'd that night in terrible Inquietudes, goes the next day, without resolving any thing, to Sulpitia's : his inward vexations had made a visible alteration in his Countenance, and he appear'd with an Air of melancholy disorder. Cordelia , who was allowed but little Conversation, finding the Prince very ingenious, took great delight in it. She immediately observ'd this alteration, and ask'd him the occasion. 'Herein, Madam, said he with a Sigh, forgive the forfeiture of my devoir, and permit me to disobey you. I will, reply'd Cordelia pleasantly, provided you quickly reassume your good Humor, and thereby give me cause to think, that this fit of Dulness proceeds from some slight Affliction of small moment. Of far less moment is my Life, return'd the Prince passionately, observing none near them, nor, if my fears be true, can Time obliterate these Sentiments of woe, though it were possible that I were forc'd to live ten Thousand years. Since nothing can mitigate your sorrows, reply'd that Charmer, the best Wish your Friends can make is, your fears may prove false.' Alphonsus had neither courage nor opportunity to say more; for the Fryar and Aminda came up to them. Aminda was of a facetious humour; Cordelia's Relation left to Sulpitia's care; The same Lady that was in the Garden, when the Prince first saw the lovely Idol of his fond Desires. Aminda briskly challenges the Fryar, and bid him maintain his Opinion, if he could. 'What novel Dispute is it, for Heaven's sake, cryes Cordelia , you two are ingag'd in? I aver, answers her Cousin, that no where but in Romances, Persons fall in Love at the first sight; and only Conversation and a long Acquaintance can produce a violent Affection. I grant you, replies the Fryar, that Love increases, and grows to a height by continual Conversation but still I say, a beautiful Idea seen once, may make an impression either in Man or Woman, sufficient to take away their Repose. Ay take their Hearts away also, to my knowledge, said the Prince earnestly.' The Ladies both laughed at that; and Cordelia told Aminda , she must now acquiesce, since the Gentleman declar'd against her Argument, upon his own knowledge. The Fryar hastened the Prince to take his leave, seeming impatient to talk with him. When they were walking homewards, his Introducer told him, that the time he had limited for his Kinsman's stay, was almost expir'd; and ask'd what progress he had made with this desir'd Freedom, which his Industry had procur'd? 'Alas! said the Prince sighing, Love hath made a far greater progress in my Heart, than I in my Designs.' Adding his Reasons, to believe Cordelia was already in Love with another, which was a Thought oppress'd him more than he could express. 'I believe you are mistaken, reply'd the Fryar; for I have this day heard from Aminda the whole story of the Garden- Rencounter. She tells me her beauteous Cousin hath often sigh'd since, and mention'd the Cavalier, she there saw, with advantageous commendations.' This Discourse occasion'd the beginning of that Dispute you heard part of, of loving at first sight. No News ever surpriz'd, and pleas'd Alphonsus like this. Kind hope, which, like its contrary, despair, is a Lover's attendant; began now to give him great assurances. He embrac'd, caress'd, and bounteously rewards the Fryar; then flies to communicate his Joyes to his Friend. When Castro had heard him out, and discover'd there would be no great obstructions to a Marriage: he began to consider the weight of the Concern, and take the freedom his friendship allow'd to tell the Prince, that though, when he saw him so passionate, that his life seem'd to be at stake, he had foolishly enough talk'd of a Marriage; yet now, in cooler thoughts, reflecting upon Otho's Temper, who was ambitious beyond measure: it must needs involve him in endless troubles. Besides, his long absence from Court would give nourishment to such Factions, whose growth might entangle him, past his best skill to disengage himself. But Alphonsus's heart was too deeply prepossess'd by Love, for such saving Counsel to enter; and if the loss of one must be ventured, the Dukedom would be in danger of running the hazard before Cordelia . However to sooth his Favourite, he alledged some State-Reasons for his absence, minding him of his Father's jealous Nature, who abhorr'd his Subjects should make their Court to his Son, whilst himself was so well able to wield the Reins of Government. 'This you know (went the Prince on) broke the heart of my elder Brother, whose Actions still our Royal Parent frown'd on, because the people admir'd them too much. Then it follows; whilst I am absent from Otho , I am nearer in his Affection; Therefore, dear Friend, says the Prince, embracing him tenderly, assist me to obtain my Mistress; and I will return time enough to my Father.' Princes easily perswade, though their Reasons are weak; because all are willing to oblige them. He found it hard to speak alone with Cordelia , so that he resolves to write, and get the Fryar to deliver it. The way was easie to purchase his consent; Gold and noble. Entertainments did all things with him. After a thousand alterations, Alphonsus , under the borrow'd Name of Pedro , sent these words.  forgive the Effects of the most violent Passion Mortal ever felt! If I have took a Disguise, which becomes me not, ador'd Cordelia, impute it to Love's boundless force; and wonder only at the Influence of your Eyes; that with their first Glances, could wound so sure, as to fix me your Slave for ever. The same person who beheld you in the Garden, longed to gaze nearer at that resplendent Light; and now, like the Moth, my liberty is lost, to fly. Since then my lovely Captivator, you have laid me in such fast Fetters, make them easie with your Smiles; lest your Rigour destroy one, who only lives to approve himself the Faithfullest of your Servants, Pedro .  The Fryar takes charge of it; and as soon as he comes to Sulpitia: Cordelia ask'd him, if his Kinsman was return'd to the Monastery? He answer'd her only with a sign to speak with her unobserv'd: she understanding what he meant, goes to a bay Window, and beckon'd to him to follow her, examining what he had to say. 'That Kinsman is not the Person you take him for, nor indeed any Kin to me, begins the Fryar, though in you he reposes a mighty Trust, when he ventures his Life in your hands. 'Tis true, he has prevailed with me, to connive at things which neither ought to have been done; nor, when done, reveal'd; as I suppose this Paper will inform you, giving her the Letter.' She paus'd at first, and was about not to receive it, till considering her Ghostly Father was the Deliverer: she condescended, and with an amazing Look retir'd into her Closet to peruse it. When she came back, she told the Fryar, with a compos'd Countenance, he was culpable in a high degree, and that his guilt transcended the Gentleman's; for the severest part of the World sometimes winks at youthful Extravagance: but that He , whose business it ought to have been to deterr men from folly, should incourage them in it, was unpardonable. Then she urg'd his Infidelity, in so horribly betraying that great Trust her Mother repos'd in him. When the poor Priest had patiently heard his Charge; for his Excuse he alledged the danger the Cavalier was in, of making some desperate Attempt upon his Life; how assured he was of the Honour of his Intentions, and the sincerity of his Affection. Then he fell to extolling the Nobleness of his Temper, the sweetness of his Nature; not forgetting the greatness of his Estate: and in conclusion, press'd hard for a favourable Answer. But Cordelia , whose Wisdom far exceeded her years, would return none; only said, she was content to conceal their Crime, because they had made Love of Her , the pretext for it. With this cold Comfort, the Fryar returns to the impatient Prince; who with a Diamond had just wrote this Distich in the Window.  How slowly do the tedious minutes pass, That drop through expectation's narrow glass! Our Messenger out of breath with haste, and heart-broken, his News was no better, in a sorrowful Tone delivers his story. But the Prince, who receiv'd it more contentedly than the Fryar durst hope for; since his Mistress neither banish'd him her sight for ever, nor was inrag'd to excess, did not wholly despair of kinder moments. Then in his Arms he hug'd the dear Procurer of his Happiness, and told him he long'd again to view that fair one's Eyes, now she knew their Power. 'That Longing shall soon be satisfy'd, answers the pleas'd Fryar, consult your Pillow what to say, and to morrow we will be sure to attend her.' When they came the next day, the young Ladies were both in the Garden, and they, being priviledg'd Persons, went both to them. Cordelia blush'd at the sight of the Prince, yet in her heart could scarce harbour wrath, when she saw his Countenance turn pale, and the visible pangs his fears put him into; so that in spight of all his Courage, he had like to have fallen. There was a silent Meeting; every one being busily entertain'd within. The obliging Fryar call'd Aminda aside, to behold the growth of a young Orange- tree they had planted some time before. She observ'd the hint, having understood the story from her Cousin: and knowing that, however she dissembled, she had an inclination to hear him. Alphonsus took this opportunity to cast himself at her feet, and tell her with what a zeal he worshipp'd her; that she was the perpetual Image of his thoughts, the Object of his dearest Wishes, the Center of all his earthly Happiness. Whilst he spoke, Love trembl'd in his Eyes, and falter'd on his Tongue, giving greater power to his broken Language, than choisest Eloquence. Cordelia forc'd him to rise; then told him he had already been an Impostor, and that in the most serious matter in the World; therefore he must give her leave to doubt him long; and also be very cautious of ingaging in an Amour, which she could hardly ever think would be fortunate: it being begun with prophaning a Habit that ought only to be wore by sacred Persons. Besides, she added, she gave up her Will and Actions in a perfect resignation to her Mother, and without her approbation should never proceed in so weighty a matter, having no other Friend she durst rely upon. In his Excuse for his Habit, he said; he hop'd the purity of his Affection, which came near to Religion, would in some measure extenuate his Crime; and for her Mother's content, Heaven had so largely endow'd him with the Goods of Fortune, he had great reason not to despair of it: But her Love was what he beg'd to obtain, since without that, even injoying the World of Beauty she possess'd, would prove unsatisfactory; and though no thoughts were so terrible, as those which represented living without her; yet he would sooner undergo that exquisite Torment, than endeavour to procure Sulpitia's consent without first knowing, whether her gentle Breast was compassionate enough to receive sentiments of Kindness for him. Cordelia gave him a Look, which severely check'd him, for prying so narrowly into her secret Thoughts and told him, she had already impair'd her Duty in listening to such stories from a Stranger; nor could she, under much time, digest this odd beginning, if ever perswade her self to proceed further. At the end of these words she went to the Company, not giving Alphonsus time to answer. All the day after, the Prince could not perceive one favourable Regard, which terrify'd him to a high degree; and returning to Castro , he unloads his Bosome with Complaint. Tells him how cold that Sun of Beauty shone upon his hopes, and such Romantick stuff, as Lovers talk. Castro , the raising of whose Fortunes depended upon the favour of his Prince, seeing he was too positively bent to be perswaded, resolv'd to concur with him, and contrive all means possible for the obtaining his desires. The first Advice in order thereunto (because the Prince would not discover himself even to Cordelia ; so fearful was he, lest his Greatness should tempt her, without Love, to be his Wife) was the buying an Estate some miles distant, to satisfie the Mother. This Alphonsus approv'd of; and he also thought it convenient the Fryar should go alone, to give Cordelia opportunity to examine him, whilst his Instructions were often repeated to him, That he should say Don Pedro (as the Prince call'd himself) was of a noble Family in Ferrara ; had an honourable Place in the Duke's Court, and came into that Country to view an Estate he had lately purchas'd. All this for much lov'd Gold, the Fryar went and affirm'd with the greatest confidence imaginable. Cordelia listen'd to it with much attention, and, blushing, said, the Stranger had the Aspect of a Gentleman, and must make his Address like one, if his Desires were so violent as he express'd: that being the only way to obtain them. Great were the Assurances the Fryar gave Alphonsus , at his Return, of the good Inclinations Cordelia had for him. But 'twas impossible at present the Prince should follow her Advice, in appearing undisguis'd at Sulpitia's , both for want of Money to purchase an Estate, as also his returning to Court, which was now grown absolutely necessary. Therefore he resolves to leave Castro with Commission to inquire out an Estate; visit Cordelia once more, then haste to Ferrara . When Cordelia saw him come again in Priest's habit, notwithstanding the item she had sent him, she turn'd pale, and fear'd he had deceiv'd her. He guess'd the cause why her countenance chang'd, and blush'd, which augmented her Jealousie. The Fryar observ'd their disorder, and quickly set all right again, by taking Sulpitia away to consult of business, whilst Alphonsus told Cordelia , such pressing occasions call'd him to Court, that he could not possibly evade, without hazarding his utter ruine. He express'd this, and the inviolable Affection he had for her, with so becoming a tenderness, that he obtain'd from the charming Maid many words and looks of kindness; and as an instance of it, she promis'd to repair early to a Lodge over the Gate, that she might see him pass Mounted, en Cavalier . He said, the longest time of his stay should not exceed a Month. Obligingly she gave her lovely hand, to preserve him in her Memory, which he having ardently kist, took his leave. The next Morning he appear'd, attended by Castro , before the Lodge; and Cordelia at a little Window; a place prohibited her; though now by some contrivance, she had stollen to it. The Prince look'd extreamly graceful; being a Man of an extraordinary make. He sent up whole Volleys of Sighs to his fair Spectator; who in pitty return'd many; and kindly resolving to bestow a mark of her Favour; took a blue Ribbon from her Wast, that Colour being the Emblem of Constancy; and threw down to him. He passionately kiss'd it; returning his Obeisance with an admirable mien, and fixing his Eyes upon her, full of Love and Tears, he seem'd immoveable; till she, fearing some mishap, first held up her hands to Heaven, for his safety: then wav'd them in sign she would have him go; her self also retiring, forc'd him unwillingly to move forward. Castro accompanied him part of the way, and taking all needful Instructions, return'd, visited the Friar; and leaving what money with him he could conveniently spare, gave him a great Charge to observe all proceedings at Sulpitia's : and if any thing happen'd prejudicial, to give Don Pedro notice at Ferrara , by directions they had contriv'd; which still kept them conceal'd. The grateful Friar faithfully promis'd his utmost assistance, and Castro began his Perigrination, to seek an Estate that wanted a Purchaser. In this time of absence, there happen'd a Contrivance at Sulpitia's , that was very near ruining all their Designs. Lusetta , whom I mention'd at the beginning of the story, being discarded for her infidelity, repairs to the Kinswoman who had set her at work, and meets again with Don Ferado ; where discoursing of these disappointments, she gives such a lively Description of the Beautiful Cordelia , that rekindles his Curiosity. So nothing now will satisfy him, without seeing her. But the means, there was the difficulty. After many irresolutions, Lusetta remember'd a humour of Cordelia's ; how she was always very fond of seeing the Trifles, stragling Women carry about to sell. In this dress Don Ferado is disguis'd; buys a world of little Pictures, fine Beads, and such Trinkets; goes with them, and hath immediately admittance into the House. The young Ladies, having notice, come about him; he was not a moment to seek, which was Cordelia , but so amaz'd at her Beauty, that he stood gazing without power to move. Cordelia blush'd to see the Woman, as she took her to be, look so earnestly, and minded her of her Things. This rous'd the Spark a little from his Contemplation; yet still his Eyes could fix on no other Object. When she had furnish'd her self with the Toys she fancy'd most; he was dismiss'd. He returns in love, to that degree, that he thought of nothing but proposing a Marriage; though it was absolutely inconvenient; his Circumstances requiring a Fortune; having many Sisters to Portion. Yet so amiable, Cordelia appear'd; that whatever Consideration interest offer'd, Love turned the Scale; and he follows his desires, with precipitation; employing a Friend the very next day, to solicite Sulpitia ; who approves of the matter; gives leave to his Seranades; several of which were perform'd before Cordelia knew from whom, or so much as guess'd her Mother was consenting. Till that discreet Lady, thinking it proper to sound her Daughter's inclinations, began to break the design to her. First commands her to follow into the Lodge, and shows her Don Ferado , bravely accoutred; prancing upon his great Horse. Words cannot express Cordelia's surprize; her Mind was already fill'd with an Idea, too admirable for Ferado ever to hope an Entrance; and compar'd to the Prince her partial Heart, being prepossess'd with Love; made him appear beneath her regard; much less esteem. She pretends indisposition; and retires to her Chamber. Sulpitia saw her much disturb'd; but was wholly ignorant of the cause. Cordelia instantly acquaints the Friar with this affair; declares her aversion, and desires him to inform Don Pedro . The good Man goes about it with speed, and dispatches his Intelligence to Ferrara , according to his directions. This information comes to the Prince, just as Castro had sent word of an Estate, he had pitch'd upon. The Priest's news heartily tormented Alphonsus ; however he was infinitely pleas'd, Cordelia order'd he should know of it. The careful Friar had writ every circumstance of Don Ferado's Fortunes; and the Prince, with reason, look'd upon him, as a formidable Rival; being a Neighbour, which, in all probability would induce Sulpitia to embrace his Interest, before the Prince's; who must of necessity be often absent, that is, if he kept his Quality conceal'd; which he could not, without running great hazards, avoid. Therefore he resolves to remove this Don Ferado ; and to that end gets, by other hands, a Commission for a Regiment of Horse, and sends to him; with Orders, that he should speedily repair to Court. Ferado could not imagine what secret Friends had done him this favour; however he was advis'd by all his Acquaintanc e, to embrace it: they convincing him, how much it would conduce, both to his profit and honour. Great was the Conflict; Interest and Glory were powerful Arguments; but eager wishes, and fierce desires all centr'd in Cordelia , were more pleasing. These dear tormenting Flames he nourish'd; but Cordelia blasted; for there he could discover only frowns, disdain, and freezing coldness. All that love him, urge his going; and flattering hope perswades he may return Crown'd with Lawrel; at which the Cruel Maid, overcome by Constancy and Courage, may yield to longing love. Such thoughts at length prevail with him; and he sets forward to the Court of Ferrara , just as Alphonsus had left it; who posts away to Castro ; takes care for the payment of the Money that was to be given for the Estate; puts servants into it, with orders to furnish the House neatly, and with riches, suitable to his pretended Quality: though he spar'd Magnificence. He had made himself very fine, and brought many considerable Presents for Cordelia ; and having put all things at his new Mansion, in their design'd Posture; he hastens, with Castro , to his Belov'd Mistress. As soon as ever they arriv'd at the Village, the Friar was acquainted with it, who flies with the news to Cordelia ; and humbly desires her from her Subject, yea and Slave, Don Pedro , to prepare Sulpitia with a full relation of all the foregoing adventure. The young Lady trembl'd at the Task; but Love mann'd her Resolution; and she, on her Knees, relates the story to her Mother. Sulpitia's Amazement, when she heard these unexpected Practices, is scarce to be conceiv'd; however being a Woman largely indowed with Wisdome, and Descretion; she perceiv'd her Daughter's Inclination, by her palliating the crime of his disguise, and representing every action favourably of this cunning Lover's. Therefore she consider'd, being ever indulgent to her Daughter, if she should now interpose her Authority; she might sooner break her heart, than bend it. These thoughts induce her to give way to his coming; setting her self to inquire after his Estate; which finding according to his word, and being afterwards, by his Conversation, acquainted with his Merit, grew very fond of him; freely giving her consent towards the obtaining his ador'd Cordelia . Whom he, with all love's Oratory, pursues; falls on his Knees, embraces hers, weeps, and talks till he forces a Confession; till she, blushing, acknowledges her Affection; owns she hath lov'd him from the first moment she saw him. The Transported Prince longs for the Consummation of his desires, and presses with his utmost Rhetorick a speedy Marriage. Which is at length agreed to, and perform'd, in Sulpitia's Chappel, by the often-mention'd Friar, before Sulpitia, Aminda , and Castro . None ever appear'd over-joy'd or fond, like this Amorous Prince, his doting still increas'd, every time he saw her, he seem'd captivated anew; and, as in a well drawn Piece, the longer we gaze, the more graces we espy; so her charms to the admiring Alphonsus were endless; yet still his interest bound him to keep his Quality conceal'd being a secret, he durst not divulge to her. Thus privately they liv'd and enjoy'd themselves for two years, the Prince being often absent, and long; which he always said was occasion'd by his place at Court. Just as the first Year of Wedlock was expir'd, Cordelia Crown'd the ensuing, with the birth of a Son, to whom the pleased Prince gave his own Name Alphonsus . A continu'd series of uninterrupted Happiness attended these Ladies for the preceeding years; Sulpitia never parting from her Daughter, and Castro , following the example of his Prince, Lov'd, Courted, and married Aminda ; a Lady of a desirable Beauty, and agreeable Conversation. By the borrow'd name of Phillipo , he wedded her, and she still continu'd with her much Lov'd Cousin. But Fortune now grew asham'd of longer confining such Illustrious Persons to so dull a Sphere, as the Country. For Alphonsus , coming to the Dukedome, by the death of Otho , after the first hurry of his affairs was over; dispatches Castro to fetch the beloved Cordelia, Sulpitia , and his own Wife Aminda , to Court. The Faithful Friar, no doubt would have attended them, and been sufficiently advanc'd but unkind Death prevented his preferment; he deceasing, to all their griefs, a little before. Castro arrives acquaints Cordelia with her Husbands desires, to see her, and Sulpitia at Ferrara ; still concealing, by the Duke's Order, his Quality. The Ladies willingly embrace the offer, and assoon as possible, begin their journey; and in good time concluded it. He brings his fair Travellers to a House, near the Court, where, at night, the new Duke comes; leaving the Court privately, and going to them in his usual dress, so that they had not the least umbrage of suspition. The only design the Duke had in this, was, the pleasure of surprizing Cordelia ; which is thus effected. On the morrow, Alphonsus leaves them betimes on pretence of extraordinary business, but he tells them, to make amends for his absence, Don Phillipo , when they are dress'd, shall have them to Court, and show them the Duke's Palace; which they are much pleas'd with. They prepare for this fine sight, and Castro attends them. Through all those richly furnish'd Apartments, he conducts his wandring spectators; where they behold the Chairs of state, the Tables, Andirons, Pictures, Frames, Glass-Frames; all either Gold, or Silver. They admire this Magnificence, and also are astonish'd to see, with what respect, all that pass salute Castro . After they had tir'd themselves with viewing various objects of Majestick Glorious Finery, he leads them to a Garden; where in a lovely Banqueting-House, a Breakfast is prepar'd of all manner of varieties, and delicate cool Wines; which, whilst they are entertain'd at, Cordelia discourses of the bravery they had seen; and smiling upon Castro , said, 'I believe my husband, and you are Courtiers; but I begin to doubt yee for Politicians: for now you have discover'd to your Wife, and me, the gawdy splendor of a Court: suppose we should fall in love with it, and with reluctancy return to our Country habitations. We are prepar'd for that, answers Castro ; your station, Madam, being to Reign here; nor will Aminda , I hope, dislike hers. I know not what you mean says Cordelia , with a surpriz'd look. I mean, he replies cunningly turning it; that where e'er Beauty, like yours, appears, it, of necessity, must Reign, since all must quit their claims, for soveraignity, when you approach. So, Daughter, cries Sulpitia pleasantly, you believ'd Don Philippo a Courtier, and now I think he hath prov'd himself a great one, by his compliment.' When their repast and discourse was ended, Castro begins agen to endeavour satisfying their unwearied Curiosity, in showing them the delightful Gardens that belong to the Palace, which Italy can scarce equal; though Italy is the Garden of the World. He tells them, that he hath yet a sight which exceeds all they have seen; that is the Duke at Dinner. This they are wondrous desirous of, Cordelia grows very inquisitive, what mighty affair detains her Husband, grieving much that he doth not participate in this Pleasure, and Entertainment. Castro promis'd to satisfy her in that also, in a little time. When Dinner was near, he brings them to a Closet, where, unobserv'd, through a Window, they might plainly see, all the Ceremony. After they had a while admir'd the melodious Musick, and stately order of the Preparations: the Duke appear'd inviron'd with Nobles, so that at first, they could not easily distinguish him. But when they came to have their full views, each look'd amazedly on the other. At length, saith Sulpitia , either we are in one of those enchanted Castles, we read of in Romances, where all seen is Illusion, or that Person in the Duke's Chair is really my Son in Law Don Pedro . Did not I tell you, Madam, said Castro , smiling, and addressing to Cordelia , that I would show you your Husband presently? What does he mean, answers that fair one gravely, to dazle thus ones Eyes, with Pageant-Greatness? Why doth he usurp the place of his Sovereign? It is no Usurpation, nor are you deceiv'd, replies Castro , for the same Prince that has prov'd an indulgent Husband under the borrow'd name of Pedro , no doubt will continue so; when he owns himself to be Alphonsus , Duke of Ferrara , and Modena. Cordelia could not digest this unexpected scene of greatness, without a visible alteration, both in her Countenance, and health; so that Castro was forc'd to Conduct her back to her Lodging. Sulpitia and Aminda accompany'd her. When the surprize was over, and they were all descanting on these proceedings; Aminda comes up very seriously to Don Castro ; pray my dear, said she, what must I call you? for I hope you have follow'd my Lord Alphonsus's Example, and are some great person in disguise? This set them all a Laughing; and Castro told her she would time enough know his Quality; his greatest happiness being to have so kind a wife as her self, and so good a Master as the Royal Alphonsus . That Afternoon, several rich suits of Cloaths and Cabinets of Diamonds were brought to the young Dutchess. The next day, she was, with great Pomp, receiv'd at Court, and by Alphonsus own'd, lov'd, carress'd beyond measure. That great respect and kindness, the Duke always honour'd Cordelia with, taught all the Court to do the same. And this Beautiful Lady was so fram'd, and compos'd for her greatness; that she became it to a Miracle. Young Alphonsus was quickly sent for, and nurtur'd according to his Quality. Eighteen years Cordelia grac'd the Court of Ferrara , and blest the Arms of good Alphonsus . But then, to show us that Worldly happiness is seldom permanent, that Insatiate Tyrant Death, whose inhumanity spares neither the Fair, the young, or brave, ravishes from the fond Alphonsus , this soft Wife. Which irreparable loss, it being impossible for time or nature to repay, the Duke mourns to that excessive rate, that the ensuing Year he also dyes. Alphonsus , the only Son and Heir to this departed Hero; the person who hath occasion'd this relation, is Proclaim'd Duke of Ferrara , and Modena . He had not long been in possession of it: before Ferado , who was now grown a popular Man, and had a settl'd picque against the Royal Family, for the loss of Cordelia , (so implacable and immovable is the hatred which proceeds from love refus'd) starts a Question concerning Alphonsus's Legitimacy; and boldly affirms, the late Duke was never marry'd. He knew well, all the Witnesses were dead, except Aminda ; and one Woman's word, would never convince a World; that is generally fonder of lies than Truth. This strange aspersion alarm'd the whole Court, and most of the Neighbouring Princes. In all Courts there are factious persons,  & persons desirous of change; though they were sure 'twere for the worst. Many of these join with Don Ferado , and demand a clear proof of the Marriage, which Alphonsus , not being able to give, they appeal to Pope Urban the Eighth; Who, willing to ingross the Soveraignty himself, declares against the present Duke; expels him to retire to his ancient Dutchy of Modena ; which their utmost malice could not pretend to deprive him of. This is the Prince, who, remaining privately at Rome , to solicite his present Holyness for the regaining his right in Ferrara , has seen you: and left his heart and liberty at your Feet. His many applications to me, for the furtherance of his affairs, have given me opportunity to be throughly acquainted with him: and I have discover'd such a Noble goodness in his temper that he does truly excel all others of his Sex. From him I had the foregoing story, which perhaps to you might sound Romantick, because I so punctually related each particular; but my hearing it often from this Prince Alphonsus , had deeply impress'd every circumstance in my memory. I would not undertake to be his Advocate, especially, my Dear to you, (went Olimpia on, with the kindest aspect in the world:) did I not know him well; and also know that my interest with his Holyness, is of that large extent, as to Re-establish this Prince, in the Throne of his Ancestors. But I am convinc'd, he is in love to that degree; that all the Kingdoms of the Earth can never make him happy, without your favour. The Trouble his Father hath involved him in, (answers Melora ) by matching privately, and below his dignity, ought, in common Prudence, to deterr this Gentleman, from any such design. Oh, my fair one! (replies Olimpia ) who can behold you and be deterr'd from loving, by the consideration of interest? But however repugnant it is to his interest (she proceeded gravely) I am sure it is very conspicuous, it agrees with yours, to listen kindly to the proposals of a Prince, who offers his Heart and Crown, without any other conditions, than your acceptance of it. Yet with closest Secrecy, this must be manag'd: for many of the Italian Princes will be drawn to assist him, in hopes of his Matching into their Families. And I believe you your self would tax any person with egregious folly, that should refuse to accept an inestimable present, because given in the dark: when afterwards they'd have privilege to make use of it before all the World. A Scene of greatness strait appear'd to Melora ; and she with the Eye of Fancy, beheld her self seated in a Palace, attended by persons, born above her. Women are generally ambitious, and opinionated of their own merit; and though Melora might justly boast she had one of the largest portions of Wit, and Discretion: yet she was a woman pertook of the frailty of her Sex; was willing to believe this fine story; and let these Glorious thoughts appear pleasing. Which Olimpia perceiving, augments these towring Joys, describing the pleasures of Pomp, and Splendor; extolling the happiness of being plac'd where Ten Thousand admiring Eyes would be fix'd upon her; all watching the Motion of hers; to fly at her commands. Thus she cunningly turns the gawdy side of greatness to this young Creature's view, hiding the thorns and fatal vicissitudes, which too too often attend power, had her Lover been Duke of Modena . But (alas!) Unhappy Beauty, thy Malicious Stars have pointed Thee a sad and gloomy Fate; which she is thus conducted to. Olimpia takes Melora to a fine village of hers, near Rome , after she had prevail'd with the deceiv'd Lady to see this pretended Prince. The Cardinal, whose lust gave him Ideas, that every moment, put him into raptures, comes, by Olimpia's appointment, in the night, to this Country House, attended only by a young Gentleman, whose scanty fortunes the Cardinal had augmented, and thereby indear'd him to his service. This Person is acquainted with the whole design; which he brooks not well, being a Gentleman, and hating such dishonourable proceedings. But interest overcomes these Heroick sentiments; and Francisco (for that was his name) promises his utmost assistance. Antonio Barbarino is adorn'd with a World of finery to appear amiable; his Hatband is of Diamonds of almost an inestimable value, and every particular expresses as much magnificence, as possible. He keeps himself conceal'd, by Olimpia's advice, till next day; who thus contrives his appearance. She takes this day to show Melora the fineries of her House, and Gardens. In the midst of the Garden, stood a Banqueting-House, painted by the most famous of that ingenious Art. One side was Ida's Plain, and Paris the loveliest youth, that pencil ever drew, standing with his sheephook, before three contending Goddesses. He had just presented Venus with the Apple; who, by her pleasing smiles, adds to the vast Beauty the Painter had given her. Then in Juno , Envy, and threatning was so plainly delineated, that you could scarce view her without fear. Pallas look'd with a noble scorn, as she knew her own Merit, and despis'd the Opinion of her Judge. When the Painter propos'd this story to me, said Olimpia , I forbad him doing it; remembring in the Fable, the Goddesses appear'd naked. The Limmer guess'd my scruple, and told me, I was mistaken in his design: for he would dress them all in Garbs, so becoming, that should sooner bribe a Judg, than naked Beauties. I think he hath been as good as his word, answers Melora , for that loose Sky-colour'd Robe of Juno's is admirable, nor is Venus's Crimson of less finery; it gives a Lustre to her Skin. In my fancy, replies Olimpia the silver Armour of Pallas , which reaches to her knees, and those shining Buskins, that discover her Graceful Legs, exceed far the other. But behold here, added Olimpia , turning to the other side of the room; and give me your opinion of this. It was the Fable of Iphis's marriage; who, by his Mother's Prayer, was Metamorphos'd into Man. First you beheld the Mother, devoutly kneeling; whilst in Iphis , you began to discover the effects of her Prayer. His Looks show'd amazement, and his lovely Hair turn'd upon one Cheek, in short Curls, the other hung down dishevel'd a little farther. He appear'd jocund; his Face Manly; with his fair Bride, and all the splendour of a solemn Nuptial. These excellent pieces were incompass'd with Festoons of Flowers, incomparably done. After Melora had sufficiently prais'd, and admir'd this surprizingly fine Painting; Olimpia desires her to sit down, in this delightful place, and requests her to sing the song, she lov'd; saying there was an excellent Eccho; which mightily helpt the voice. Melora , amongst her numerous perfections, had this in the highest degree: for all the judicious that ever heard her, own'd her skill and sweetness unequal'd. The Cardinal was conducted by Beatrice, Olimpia's woman, to the door of the Room; where he stood. No Princess liv'd greater in Rome , than the Princess Olimpia , and she had several Persons of good Quality her Attendants: but this Beatrice suited best her inclination, and was her chiefest Favorite. When the Friendship first began between Olimpia and Melora , this subtile Woman grew very uneasy, fearing a Rival in her Lady's Heart. But when the Cruel Olimpia intrusted her with the whole matter, and she saw this height was only the Prologue to her ruine, the malicious Wretch was infinitely pleas'd; and the Cardinal's Presents following, made her very assiduous in these wicked practices. Melora , ignorant of any unseen hearer, immediately obey'd Olimpia's Commands; and, with a charming Air, sung the following words.  The Beauties of th' approaching Year, She sigh'd to think how soon they would Wither, grow old, and disappear. Strephon , who long had ask'd relief, But always beg'd and pray'd in vain; Hop'd more Advantage from her grief Than he before could er'e obtain. Beware said he, my Life, my All, Destroying Time comes on apace Your fairest Charms must one day fall, And Age and Wrinkles fill their place. Improve your Youth now that remains, For Age does too too fast pursue; Be kind at last, requite my pains, And give to Love, and me their due. Then fly fair Nymph into my Arms, Whilst Youth, and Wit, and Beauty last; The Spring and Summer have no Charms, Which envious Winter will not blast. Just as she ended, the Cardinal steps forth; only bowing to Olimpia , whilst he eagerly addresses to Melora ; and fixing his Eyes upon her, cries in a Passionate Tone; 'Ah Madam! I was enough your slave before; and in my ravish'd fancy, call'd you all divine, but now I heard your Angelick Voice, I am convinc'd you came into the World some extraordinary way; and are really one of the bright Inhabitants of Heaven. Therefore, with Justice, you may despise the sighs of groveling Mortals.' Melora was strangely surpriz'd at his appearing without the least warning; and turning to Olimpia , her face being cover'd with blushes said; 'This is unkind, dear Princess, to let a stranger be Witness of your Servants failings, and unprepar'd receive such palpable flattery. Nay, Madam, returns Olimpia , bend all anger against the Prince, and I will join with you; for I think 'tis inexcusable in his Highness to surprize us thus without notice.' All Messengers seem'd too slow for my impatiency, replies that Impostor, nor could my own feet, though wing'd with desire, and love, conduct me half so fast as my wishes, to throw my self before this ador'd Beauty. Cease Prince, interrupts Olimpia , for I read displeasure in Melora's Eyes; this new strange Theme disturbs her. Divert us with the news of Rome; sure that great City cannot live a day without follies, ridiculous enough to make us laugh. If my Tongue must, (answers Barbarino ) leave the dear delightful subject of my life my Love ; I hope you'll give my Eyes and sighs the liberty to speak the Language of my Heart. That we may venture to allow, I think, replies Melora ; because wee can have the privilege, not to observe them, and only listen to your news; which we both expect (adds Olimpia .) The freshest; I know, (begins the Cardinal very gravely) is of a great judgment, that is lately fallen on a fair young Lady. This Lady had an humble servant, whom the World call'd very deserving, but the Cruel Maid thought otherwise; and, notwithstanding Days, and Nights, and Months, spent all in Sighs and Prayers and Tears; yet her obdurate Heart feels no compassion. Nothing the Amorous Youth neglected, either to say, or act, that might have gain'd a kinder doom, though all in vain; which when he plainly found, o'rewhelm'd with love, and deep despair, he languish'd a short time; then made his Everlasting Exit. Still the remorseless Maid was unconcern'd; only Civility and Honour obliged her to attend him to his Grave. And lest her Spectators should there censure her guilty of Barbarity, she cunningly conveys an Onion into her Handkerchief, to supply the defect of Natural Tears. But now observe the Justice of her Fate; for, from that moment, so violent a conflux of Rheum follow'd, that she, for ever weeps, spight of all the Physician's Art. And if in any Company where Mirth prevails, then the streams run down, enough to fright them with the apprehensions of a second Deluge.' Is not this , Ladies, (concluded the Cardinal) a sufficient warning to deterr you from Cruelty? They both laugh'd at the Romantick News, and Melora said pleasantly, the greatest Miracle she found in the story, was, the Gallant dying for Love; that being, in these Ages, altogether unpractis'd, and out of fashion. In such Conversation they in secret pass'd their hours, whilst the Cardinal forgot not to improve them; but by a Thousand Glances, Sighs, and Whispers, told Melora , that he dy'd, unless she in gentle pity sav'd him. Such great Persons wanted nothing, that either Art or Nature could afford, for their Pleasure, and Diversion. What they had told Melora of the Duke's being incognito in Rome , took off her mistrust when she saw him cautious to appear before any, but Olimpia her self, Beatrice , and Francisco . Every thing contributed towards the deceiving this poor Lady; the general discourse of Rome ; which was, of the Duke of Modena's pretensions to the Dukedom of Ferrara ; and that Princes absence from his own Court, being often in the Courts of other Princes, solliciting Aid, in case the Pope deny'd him Justice: But these many circumstances were needless; for though Melora had a Vivacity in her Wit, peculiar to her self; a Judgment perspicuous and clear; yet so cunningly had Olimpia , by her seeming Fondness, and artful Insinuations, wrought upon the goodness of her temper; that she believ'd whatever that false one affirm'd, stedfastly, as an Article of her Faith. After two days the Cardinal takes leave with all the passionate dearness Man can express; returns to Rome , whither the Ladies quickly follow: Olimpia still pressing her fair Favourite to be kind to this deserving Prince, as she always terms him. Melora was now wholly in the Princess Olimpia's Palace, only going every day to visit her Father; and every Night the Love-sick Cardinal paid his devoir to her. Yet spight of all these constant Visits, and reiterated Oaths of continual Love; Melora appears but cold, and expresses her self with a World of caution and reservation. This Torments the Amorous Priest beyond measure. Now, though Melora absolutely confided in Olimpia , her good Education had perfectly taught her to obey her Father's Will; and to undertake so great a Concern, without his Knowledge, shock'd all her resolves, and dash'd her with a Thousand Fears. Olimpia strives her utmost to incourage the beauteous trembling Maid; and in perswasive Arguments lays down the inconveniency of acquainting her Father: for he being a Loyal Man, and in a publick station, would certainly discover it to the King his Master; which would at present ruine the Prince Alphonsus in all his designs. Melora listen'd to whatever Olimpia urg'd; gave obliging Answers, but delay'd complying. Nothing was so hateful to the Cardinal and Olimpia , as this protracting time because they lay liable to a hundred accidents that might betray them by which the Cardinal would irrevocably lose his Fame; and, what was much dearer, Melora . Therefore the next time they are together, he pleads with all his Loves Eagerness and Oratory; tells his fair Mistress, his desires were grown to such a height of Violence, that without her consent to the fulfilling them, they would certainly prey upon his Life, and from her Adorer he should become her Martyr. 'Ah Madam! (went he on, sighing passionately, and grasping her Knees) Why are you thus Cruel? Why do you force me to live in these Insupportable Agonies, when 'tis in your power to raise me to endless Worlds of Bliss? Is not the Appellation of Kind and Pitiful more pleasing to you, than the Savage Names of Cruel and Rigorous? With what reason (reply'd that Charmer sweetly) My Lord, can you Complain, or ask me more? Have I not already broke the Sacred Laws of Duty, which I us'd to hold Inviolable, and receiv'd you here Clandestinely: heard all the stories of your Love, and only resolv'd to take such time as may confirm the Constancy and Faith, which you, with so much Rhetorick, have Vow'd.' 'In that resolve you give me Death (said he, with a sad Air) and e'er my probation ends, you'll be convinc'd, by the sublimest Proof, that I am yours.' When he said this, he takes his leave, and before he left the House, relates all this to Francisco ; ordering him to stay, till Olimpia was at leisure to hear it; and send him her advice in these perplexities. Through the Gardens, and Walks of Donna Olimpia's Palace, the Cardinal always went home, only passing a narrow Lane, he came to a back door of his own, where a Servant constantly attended: One , who, many Years, had been acquainted with his Debauchees, and Night Rambles, though he was not trusted with the story of this Intrigue. Barbarino going Melancholy through the before mention'd Lane was surpriz'd, notwithstanding the darkness of the Night, and lateness of the hour, to perceive the glittering of Swords; and stepping hastily to avoid them, one immediately rush'd upon him, and gave him a Wound in his Breast; at which the amaz'd Cardinal cry'd out, Villains! Assassinates! Hearing his Voice they fled; only saying, Damn it, we were mistaken in our Man. 'Twas very near the Cardinal's private Door, this accident happen'd, and the Servant that waited for him, having skill in Surgery, he trusted him to search the Wound; who assur'd the frighted Priest, that there was no danger; only the loss of Blood would, for some Days, confine him to his Bed, and Chamber. He then began to revive his Courage, and Commanded the Servant to say, his Illness proceeded from a violent bleeding at the Nose; which took him in the Night: this pass'd upon his Physicians; who only order'd him comfortable Cordials to renew his Spirits. The next Morning, the Cardinal found himself at ease enough, to consider his Love affair, and accordingly dispatches Francisco , to acquaint Olimpia with his Misfortune; and to beg, her Almighty Wit would make some advantage of it with his Mistress. One would have thought, the Heavens sending the Mischief, design'd another, on the Cardinal's Head, might have deterr'd them from pursuing further the ruine of that soft Innocent , the fair Melora ; but they were harden'd, and Olimpia , resolving to fulfil the desires of the Friend of her darling Lust, Ambition, manag'd with Woman's Cunning, her design. Melora observ'd Olimpia Melancholy; and her fondness and particularity to her, laid aside; and for three days only Complacency, and cold Civility remain'd. This perplex'd her strangely; fain she would have ask'd the reason; long'd to know the cause of the Duke's (as she thought him) absence; but Modesty, the Virgin's constant necessary useful Guest, witheld her Questions a while. At length, impatiency prevail'd, and she desir'd Beatrice to let her know, when the Princess Olimpia would be alone in her Closet. The same day, word was brought her she was so, and wish'd to see her. Melora attends her the very instant; and found that subtle Lady sitting upon a Couch, leaning her head upon her hand, with an unusual sadness in her Face. Assoon as Melora enter'd, she bid her sit down; then, fetching a deep Sigh, continu'd silent. The poor young Creature surpriz'd with this counterfeited sorrow, remain'd also dumb, for some time, till her Tears made way for her words. She implor'd Olimpia to acquaint her, if through any inadvertency, she had offended to that degree, as to lose the honour of her Friendship, and be banish'd that dear Bosom, where all her Happiness and Delight were Center'd; Adding, with a World of sweetness and real trouble, how willingly she would abate, participate; or, if possible, take off those griefs, she saw o'erwhelm her beloved Princess, might she but know the cause. Olimpia lifting up her head, answer'd very seriously; my Affliction will perhaps occasion your rejoycing; I mourn the Prince Alphonsus , whom as a Friend I lov'd. Your inclination caus'd him to be your aversion; and consequently his Miseries will move no Pity; which made me forbear relating them. Alas, Madam! (replies Melora ) wherein has your Highness discover'd that aversion, you are pleas'd to charge me with? I have receiv'd the Prince's Address, with all the Complacency imaginable, at any time, or any hour. If this is hatred, I am mistaken; and must beg directions, how to express my Esteem to my Lord Alphonsus ; both as to his own merit, and what's yet more, a Person recommended by you, (ended she, bowing.) With such a height of Passion, such an excess of tenderness (returns Olimpia ) the Prince adores you, that your fatal Coldness hath destroy'd him. Signore Francisco acquaints me, that, ever since his last parting from you, he hath Languish'd of a Fever; which his Physicians say, is desperate; whilst he, Foe to himself, and Friend to his Disease, gives way to that, and flights all their Applications. Let me dye (cry'd out Melora eagerly; frighted with the apprehension of such a Person's Death) rather than have a guilt like this, imputed to me; Ah Madam! (went she on) if you have any sparks of that generous love remaining, which you bestow'd on this Ungrateful; teach me a way to expiate my Crime. I own whate'er my inclination was, I err'd, to an extremity, in disobeying your Commands; and to attone, I'll Visit him, I'll write, do what my nature hath most abhorr'd; so my Princess will again receive me into favour. Do nothing against stomach (Answers Olimpia coldly) and though I know a line or two might save his Life, yet a dissembl'd kindness is but a Reprieve; and to relapse into despair, is irrecoverable, therefore I'll not ask it; 'tis to desire a present Cordial, that carries with it, a future Poison. When she had said this, she left Melora in the Closet, and went to Company, that stay'd to kiss her hand. Nothing was more glorious, than the Friendship of Donna Olimpia ; who enjoy'd it, participated of all the pleasures and grandeur of Rome . Then, to be a Princess! Attractions, which may excuse Melora , if she committed an indecency in writing to the pretended Duke. For after many struglings with her native reservedness, she resolv'd it, and wrote thus.  unfortunately seiz'd with Sickness; and unkindly makes me the occasion of it. If I have that power over you, which my want of Charms perswades me I am only flatter'd with; I charge you, use your best endeavours to recover Health, and hasten to us that I, through your mediation may be re-establish'd in the heart of my dear Princess. Which Obligement can never sufficiently be acknowledg'd, or return'd by Your Servant Melora .  Olimpia in haste dispatch'd her Visitants, those of Ceremony, and those of Business. Coming back to the Closet, she found Melora reading; having left the Letter open upon the Table. Melora stood up as Olimpia came in, and begg'd she would please to peruse that she had written; saying, she was wholly ignorant of those sort of Letters, and humbly pray'd her approbation. When Olimpia had read it; she, smiling, said; you have plaid the pretty Sophister, my dear, and so kindly express'd your obliging sentiments of Friendship, that I know how to resent your Cruelty, in discovering so little Love to a Prince, who perhaps may want Life to receive it. Beatrice undertakes the conveyance, and with needful caution hath it deliver'd to the Cardinal; who began already to think of speedily leaving his Chamber, and this favour added to his health, and his desires. He, all night, contrives the kindest Answer, words could frame, and the next Morning sends it to Olimpia ; who, with her usual cunning, presented it; first bewailing his weakness, then wondering at Love's Power, which had given strength to answer her Letter so quickly. Melora , blushing, took it; and to Olimpia read as follows.  am better, returning from the grave. The charming Mandate, which brought me your Commands to live, brought likewise power to obey them. Yes my Adorable Mistress, I own you have sav'd my Life; and 'tis a mighty act of mercy. Yet Pardon me, fair Saint, if I presume to say, there's Justice in it too; for 'tis but just my Angel should preserve that Life, which is wholly dedicated to her service.  How think you, Madam, cries Olimpia hastily; does he not write, as well as he speaks; I own him Excellent at both, Answers Melora ; therefore should not I be guilty of Vanity, to imagine my self blest with perfections great enough, to Merit his endless Love? Olimpia reply'd, in Compliments of her worth, and caress'd her with new Indearments. A few days after the Cardinal's Physicians advis'd him to the Country Air, for the perfecting his recovery; and he let his Friends know, that being weak, he desir'd privacy without Visiters, designing to spend this time at Olimpia's Villa , (attended only with Francisco ) instead of his own; though the World was made believe he lay there retir'd. Assoon as Olimpia understood the matter, according to the Cardinal's wishes, she asks Melora to leave Rome a second time with her; telling her also, that the Duke of Modena was advis'd to the Air for his Health; and she had given him an invitation to her Villa ; where he might remain undiscover'd. I let you know this, said Olimpia ; that you may not seem surpriz'd or displeas'd at his coming to us. Melora receiv'd the News of his Company very agreeably; and they with much pleasure began their Journey. Soon after the Cardinal arrives, and 'twas then, and not till then, that Pity, Loves sure Forerunner, seiz'd the Compassionate Heart of that young soft Maid; when she beheld Antonio look as pale as Death, and tremble, as he mov'd, with weakness. This, she thought, Almighty Love had been the only cause of, and that the World would Tax her of Barbarity, should she refuse to apply Cordials of Kindness, to such a consuming Languishment. Therefore she receives him with smiles; and says obliging things, that beyond measure charm'd the Priest. They Supp'd together in Olimpia's Closet; and being all pleas'd, their Conversation was extraordinary. Barbarino had formerly been imploy'd in several Negotiations, to the Courts of Foreign Princes; he had good natural parts, and all the Acquirements of Learning, that great Men are able to receive. No wonder then his Company was agreeable to Melora ; who was ingenious, and therefore understood the wit he deliver'd in pleasant relations and discourse. While they were at Supper, Beatrice brought Olimpia word, that there was a Benedictine of the Neighbouring Monastery, waited to desire the honour of her Highnesses Presence at the Feast of their Patron; which was to be Celebrated on the Morrow. I shall incur your displeasure, said Olimpia smiling, my Lord Duke, if I take Melora with me; yet I would willingly have her see the Solemnity, because I believe it will be very fine. I shall mourn your Absence, replies the Cardinal, but should grieve more to hinder the fair Melora participating the pleasure of beholding the Ceremony. We will indeavour to make my Lord amends, at our return, with a full relation of our Entertainment, said Melora . A Description from so sweet an Oratrix will charm me far beyond the gaudy show, answers the Cardinal. Thus they talk'd away the Evening; and the next Morning, the Ladies rose early, to prepare for the Festival. When they were drest, Barbarino was admitted to pay them a Visit in Olimpia's Chamber. Melora lookt surprizingly beautiful, and the Cardinal express'd his admiration, in lavish Commendations; seeming to come nearer to view her: he, in a moment, fix'd a Crociate of valuable Jewels upon her Breast. She went immediately to take them of; but Olimpia coming up forbade her; and she, blushing, let them remain. That Night several Persons of Quality conducted the Princess Olimpia , from the Monastery home. The Ladies were oblig'd to stay and entertain them; so that they could not see the Cardinal. The next day Olimpia resolv'd to have to her self; and gave her Servants order to say she was indispos'd, and would receive no Visits. They chose a retir'd Grotto to spend the day in. This cool retreat was very delightful; for 'twas with wonderous pains cut in a Rock, the Lights were all cover'd with Vines; which look'd very agreeable. One side of the Grotto was hang'd with Forest Tapestry, the other most artificially adorn'd with Moss-work, which glitter'd with shining Shells and Pebbles; whose Lustre equal Diamonds. The Couch and Canopy was green Florence Sarsenet; at the end, opposite to the Door, a full Curtain of the same hung down to the ground: along the side of the Rock that was covered with Moss, a small Rivulet ran, whose pleasing Murmur was able to inspire the most stupid, with tender Sentiments. Whilst Olimpia said something to the Cardinal, Melora fixt her Eyes upon the purling Stream; whose transparent clearness show'd the bottom, strow'd with the Rock's Ornaments, Shells, and Pebbles. The Cardinal turning, observing her so intent, stoop'd nearer; and with an Ingraving Pen, upon the Marble Pavement, wrote thus:  Should some small Water Deity to day Be sporting here, and those bright Eyes survey, With eager haste he'd fly to Neptune's Court, And tell the God the Place of your Resort. Then, turn away those All-Commanding Eyes, Lest this small Rill, should to an Ocean rise; And Neptune vanquish'd by thy killing Charms, Should bear thee hence within his Watry Arms. See, Madam! said Olimpia , when she had read 'em: the Prince's Passion penetrates the obdurate Marble; yet your harder heart still denies access. Melora was amaz'd to behold the lines at her Feet; thinking they had still been discoursing. She had, with blushes, just perus'd what was written, when from behind the Curtain, they heard the agreeable charming found, both of Vocal, and Instrumental Musick. Ha! cry'd Olimpia , seemingly surpriz'd, you mention'd the Watry Deity, and I believe he has sent his Mermaids, to entertain you. I rather suspect an Earthly Goddess, reply'd Melora , smilingly, looking upon Olimpia ; and the best way to express our thanks for the favour, is silence. Whilst the Italian songs, with the most exquisite Musick, was perform'd, they din'd; and after that , the Princess Olimpia gave her Commands the Musick should retire. The Curtain was drawn up, and the delicate Organs discover'd; which, from the Water receiv'd their incomparable Musick; and all the glorious painted seats, which held the tuneful Masters, whom they had heard before. In vain, cry'd Melora , in a pleasing transport, we hunt the World for pleasures, when ransackt Italy , can never equal, what my charming Princess's Villa gives. Ay but, my Life, return'd the Cardinal, I expect the discharge of your Promise, in describing the Entertainment you receiv'd Yesterday. Indeed, went the fair one on, smiling, I think these Saints Festivals are fuller of diversion, than devotion. To see a fat Abbot walk in state, cover'd with Embroideries, and looking as great, as if the Triple Crown adorn'd his Head; and all their Ornaments set forth in the greatest Pomp and Lustre imaginable; doth it not resemble Pride, and Vanity? Be cautious, my dear, interrupted Olimpia , lest you incline to the errour of the Hereticks; who care not how fine their Houses are, nor how plain their Churches; tacitely discovering they love, and esteem themselves, better then the Deity, they Worship. I submit, said Melora , and will admire their glories. But to what end should I describe vast Banquets of Sweet-meats, and delightful Musick; which is here every day excell'd. That only which deserves perpetual remembrance, was the Lovely Duke and Dutchess of Parma . Such a becoming tenderness he express'd, such a sympathy of Souls there seem'd, as if one cou'd not do, what the other did not like. How can you praise, what you refuse to practice, cry'd the Cardinal in a Rapture; so would I gaze all day on those lov'd eyes; but then the Night; the Night; burning, raging, sighing, clasping! Oh forbear my Lord! ( Olimpia stops him;) leave these strong extasies; till that happy Night arrives: see how Melora blushes. Indeed said the Cardinal, cooling himself with a sigh, I ought to have patience, since that Duke, you mention'd, waited long for one, less fair, and through many hazards, at length was blest. Olimpia knew, Melora took delight in nothing more, then hearing the Histories of Persons, where the Capricio's of Fortune had been most evident: and to oblige her, ask'd the Cardinal, if his Highness was acquainted with the particulars of their loves? He answer'd her that he could procure them a full relation, if they desir'd it; for Francisco was bred, from a Child, in the Duke of Parma's Court;  & inform'd of each minute circumstance. Melora express'd great joy at the proposal; and Francisco being call'd, the Cardinal commanded him to sit down, and to the Ladies relate the Adventures of Emilius , and Lovisa , Duke and Dutchess of Parma. Francisco , after a moment's recollection, with a submissive reverence, began thus. this Prince and Princess, because my words cannot reach the height of their Perfections; as your own Eyes may be witness; but must of necessity go so far back, as to take a view of the late Duke and Dutchess, Parents to this. He was a great Souldier, and a great Politician, which of consequence render'd him a great Man; yet of a humour so positive and absolute, that neither Sons nor Subjects durst ever contradict his Resolution. Whilst the Dutchess was all sweetness and affability, as oft as possible mitigating the sternness of her Lord, and obliging all the World with Offices of Kindness. He had two Sons, one elder than the present Duke Emilius , over whom he exercis'd an Authority, wherein very little of the Father appear'd; whomsoever they favour'd he frown'd upon, always denying them whatever they coveted with eagerness. Few therefore durst make their Court assiduously to the young Princes, lest they incur'd the anger and jealousie of the Old Duke. Only Count Bileront broke all these Rules of Policy, and openly profest an intire Service, and humble unfeign'd Friendship for the Prince Emilius , with whom he had been nurtur'd. The Duke often storm'd at that, often chid the Lovely Youths for their so strict amity; and often Commanded Bileront's Father to send him farther from Court. Yet all these shocks they stood; for Emilius , who had a large share of his Mother's sweet nature, drooped so when they went to part them, that before he reach'd at Manhood, they cou'd not do it, without visible danger to the Prince's Health. By that time Emilius had past his Eighteenth Year, he grew quite tyr'd of the Court; the harshness of his Father's temper abridging him of all those Injoyments, whereunto his Inclinations led him. He sets all Engines at work to obtain leave, that he may join the Venetians , as a Noble Voluntier, and see a Campaign; hoping to raise his Reputation in the World, and quit, for some time, a place that disgusted him. After much opposition, Emilius accomplish'd his desires; but the Old Duke not finding in his heart to prove too indulgent, orders Bileront to stay behind; and perceiving notwithstanding that faithful Youth, covertly prepar'd to follow him, he without hearkening to the intreaties of his Friends, Imprison'd him under a strict Guard. If Emilius resented this ill, he was very likely to meet with the same treatment. So that being assur'd no other harm was design'd him but to hinder his Accompanying him; he smother'd his smarting griefs, and went on with his intentions. Several young Sparks, in whom the love of glory had kindled a Warlike Fire, forsook the soft pleasures of the Palace, and waited on the Prince. This Noble Cavalcade having left Parma , directed their course towards his Holiness's Galleys, where they design'd to imbark, after staying some time at the Port, till the Fleet were ready to sail. As the Prince, having all his things Embark'd, was walking on the shore, he felt somebody take him by the Cloak, and turning, he saw one in the garb of a Common Souldier; but looking more heedfully, Oh how pleas'd was he to behold his lov'd Bileront ; such Joy fill'd their delighted Souls, there was no room for words. At length, a hundred Questions throng together, which as confusedly are answered. Bileront , whose sweet Eloquence cou'd move things almost inanimate (for next to that I account the stupid sort of Men) had with his Promises and Presents prevail'd upon a Centry to let him have his Cloaths, in which he drest himself, the Fellow putting on the young Lords, and over them his own Cloak, and thus they both escap'd. Now Emilius's wishes were compleat; and the faithful happy Friends went in all haste aboard. I will not trouble your Honours with a description of the War, only say of these, they were a second Pylades and Orestes ; always fighting by each other, always undertaking the greatest dangers; and always Crown'd with Glory. The Campaign ended, they with several of the French Nobility, Voluntiers likewise, went to France ; and in that Court spent their Winter. In the mean time, the Dutchess of Parma long'd to see her Darling Son; and having at length, obtain'd Bileront's Pardon, she writes earnestly to her dear Emilius , that he would return. He obeys his indulgent Mother's reiterated desires, and again, with his Favorite Bileront , graces the Court of Parma . His Travails had extreamly added to his natural perfections, and though he was not Heir Apparent, yet his eminent accomplishments drew all admiring Eyes towards him. Nothing now was to be seen in the Palace, on the Dutchesse's side, but Balls, Masquerades, and such other demonstrations of Royal Pleasures. At one of the Balls, a young Lady, having danc'd in a Persian Habit, with a particular mien and charming smoothness; Emilius ask'd who she was, saying, he had not observ'd her amongst the Beauteous Train before, though he thought she excell'd them all. He was straight inform'd her name was Lovisa , Daughter to Don Henrique , and Donna Elvira , who were, as he knew, both great Courtiers and had, Dying, left this their only Child, to the care of the Dutchess; that her Fortune was very opulent, and her Person very taking. For his not seeing her, the reason was, she had been some days in the Country, and return'd but the night before. This, adds the Prince's Informer, is an account of the fair Lovisa , who is call'd the Dutchesse's Ward; and ador'd by all. Emilius , getting near her, told her in a whisper that she was unjust, her Beauty being enough to fix all Eyes upon her, she ought not to excel so transcendantly in Dancing too; but let some more indifferent do that , and obtain a glance. Lovisa , blushing at the Prince's praises, answer'd him; we must expect your Highness full of the French Gallantry, and whatever Object you are pleas'd to rally is oblig'd to bear it. That place was too publick, for a longer Conference, but the Prince was wonderfully pleas'd with her, and talk'd of nothing else all the night, to his dear Billeront . Soon after, he paid Lovisa a visit; and finding her Conversation as full of charms, as her lovely Face, he was never so well pleas'd, as when with her. His Mother the Dutchess, saw this growing Friendship, but hating nothing more than venturing Emilius in another Campaign; and considering Lovisa was a great Heiress, whose Ancestors sprung from a Branch of the Royal Family, he also being the second Son; should he fall in love with her, the match would not be so disproportionable. These reasons made the Dutchess not only connive at his often Visits; but also conceal them from the Duke. Lovisa's Apartment lying through the Dutchesse's, the Duke thought he had been with his Mother, whilst he and Bileront spent their time more pleasantly. They had form'd a Party for their particular Conversation, which they call'd the Friendly Society, and made several pretty Laws amongst themselves, with suitable Penalties, if they infring'd them. One was, to communicate to all the Campany, every Letter they receiv'd, be it Love, or Gallantry. Nay if it was business, some Person was to inspect it cursorily over, and witness to the rest, that it afforded no diverson. Happy was he, that could partake the satisfaction of this ingenious company; which was compos'd of the highest young Quality. Their discourse was made up of pithy relations; or viewing the newest works of the writing Wits; Censuring, or extolling those labours of the brain, according to their Merit. Emilius , coming one day, before the usual hour for their meeting, surpriz'd Lovisa alone, reading a Letter, which she blush'd at, and hastily put up, when the Prince came in. Ha, Madam! cry'd he, eagerly running towards her, have I caught you breaking one of our greatest Laws? She blushing still answer'd, 'twas business. This augmented the Prince's curiosity; and he said very gravely, you know, Madam, our Statutes are, that if Letters are full only of business, one is just to overlook that, and report it to the whole Body of our Society. Now I being here first, claim the privilege of seeing it, and satisfying the rest. She insisted, 'twas in her power, to chuse the Person, she desir'd should see it; but finding the Prince really earnest, unwilling to displease him, she gave it him, which he read thus; (for said Francisco , I having the happiness to know each particular of this Intrigue, took Copies of all the Letters to help my Memory.)  Madam, My Dear Niece, my Kindness; and believe, that my continual study is for your Advantage, and Honour. The young Count Lodowick is now preparing to kiss the Duke's hand, and make a handsome appearance at Court, his Estate is large; and the World justly calls him a Gallant Man. He is already in love with the report Fame brings us of you. I don't Question but your Sight secures your Conquest; pray let me hear your Opinion of him. I am, My Dear Kinswoman , Yours Alvarez .  The Prince sigh'd, and blush'd, as he read this Letter; and giving it Lovisa again, said, I don't like this Marrying, 'twill spoil our Society. I'll give my Vote, that it shall be High Treason, for any of our Ladies to Marry. Nay then, returns Lovisa , laughing, we shall have a very pretty Character Twenty Years hence, a Company of Old Ill-natur'd Maids; better forsake the World quite, and become holy Nuns. Well, answers the Prince, I find all my Joys are at an end. You must be in Love now, and we bear all those absences of Mind, so frequent in Lovers, Silent whole hours; or if you talk, Count Lodowick must be brought in, by head and shoulders, at every Paragraph. You were the glory of our little Select World: your Wit and Eloquence gave Life to all was said; now you forsake us, I'll forsake the rest, and leaving an insipid Court, i'th' Camp forget Lovisa ; if that be possible; (ended he with a sigh.) My Lord, replies Lovisa , I have indeavour'd to be rude, and interrupt your Highness; you talk, as if I was to be Marry'd to Morrow. The World (went she on, with a Majestick Air) knows little of Lovisa's Heart, if they imagine it so easily gain'd; and that but hearing of a Man, is likely to fall in love with me, I should begin first to be so with him. More of the appointed Friends coming in, the Conversation became general; yet still Emilius was harping on this (to him) ungrateful string, Count Lodowick's coming. He ask'd Lovisa , whether she thought she should fancy him, and what sort of Man she could like, begging her to express what Qualifications she expected in the happy Slave, whom, amongst her numerous Adorers, she wou'd bless with her Smiles. My Lord, said that charming Maid, were I to behold a Man Masculine, yet Beautiful, Great, yet truly Brave; A Prince whose Virtues, brighter than his Diadems, appear; one more glorious than boundless Fancy can to the thinking Mind depaint; and, not convinc'd by signal proofs, his heart inclin'd, his passion forc't him to my feet: I might gaze on such a Master-piece; but my Eyes should let him no farther in: He never shou'd disturb my Mind. You may, reply'd the Prince, love wheresoe'er you look; nor need to fear they'll not sigh for you; at least, if I may judge the Soul of others by my own. Lovisa took this for raillery, and pleasantly return'd, such Hearts as yours will be most glorious Trophies, and I shall grow exceeding proud, but that, to humble me, I know Prince Emilius's way, and my own Imperfections. That night Bileront , whose Apartments joined the Prince's, heard him, after all was gone to rest, walking about his room. Fearing he was not well, he rose and went to him. Pardon, said Bileront , if I intrude, and fly uncall'd, to learn what disturbs my Lord. Oh my Friend! (Answers the Prince) I'm sick at heart, the Distemper revels there; and gives me pains that I ne'er felt before. Bileront , who was really frighted, began to call the Servants for the Physicians; when Emilius hastily stops him, saying, it lay not in the power of Art. None, none could heal his wounds, but the fair Causer. Then blushing, and hiding his Head in the Bosom of his dear Friend, he told him he lov'd the glory of her Sex, the sweet Lovisa . I mistrusted long ago (went on the Amorous Prince) but durst not examine my heart on that point, till Yesterday discovering another like to possess her: love and despair at once seiz'd me; broke the soft Chains of sleep, and set me here upon the Rack. Bileront said all, excessive Friendship prompted, to calm the distemper'd Mind of his lov'd Master; but he, witty to torment himself, study'd impossibilities that might arise, to bar his wishes, out of meer Chimera's: though indeed obstructions there were enough. Thus spent the restless Prince the tedious Night. Next day, he long'd till the fatigue of Ceremonious Duty, business, all was o'er; that he might find his darling Mistress, where all his thoughts were fix'd. He saw her; thought her more charming than ever since to himself he had own'd he lov'd her. Then he gave no bounds to his admiring Eyes; but helping forward his disease set every thought at work; what Happiness, what Raptures she could give. When he came near her, tremblings and sighs turn'd him pale; then a rising heart cover'd his face with blushes. He try'd to tell his love in whispers, but his courage fail'd him, for he, who truly loves, beholds his Mistress stamp'd with such divinity as awes his presumption. Nor dares he trust his tongue, lest that too boldly shou'd offend; leaves to his Eyes the sad silent Tale; and hopes the Charmer will read it there. Lovisa , who thought the minds of others like her own, free and gay, was brisk as Air; and often chid the Prince for his unusual Melancholy; nor could she forbear asking Bileront if he knew the cause. He answer'd her ambgiuously; suppose she her self was, wou'd she promise a remedy? That's so unlikely, said she 'tis not worth my answering; for I never was chearfuller in my Life; and I hope my mirth is not so ridiculous, as to work just the contrary on the Prince. Bileront fear'd to say more, lest he shou'd incurr the danger of displeasing both. A few days after, this expected Count Lodowick came, was very well receiv'd by the Duke, the Eldest Prince, and indeed all the Court, except Emilius ; who notwithstanding his natural sweetness, could not forbear looking cold on this young Nobleman; whilst Lodowick's only care was to dress well, and make a Figure answerable to his Quality. Finding Lovisa the handsomest Lady; he was most particular to her though he had a general complacency for all the young and fair. Mean time Emilius's melancholy so visibly increas'd that every body took notice of it. He complain'd to his faithful Bileront , that he thought Lovisa took more care in dressing, since the arrival of Lodowick ; and he fancy'd she gave him favourable glances; then would he burst into a Passion, and ask that fond Friend, wherein Lodowick deserv'd more than he? Thus, this impatient Prince nurst up groundless terrours, till they rob'd his days of Joy, his Nights of rest. When Bileront could get leave to speak, he told the Prince, that for his part, he discover'd no such alteration in the dress, or looks of Lovisa ; then you talk (went he on) of her preferring Lodowick before you: when alass, she is wholly ignorant, knows not the vast honour her Eyes have won; think you, my Lord, being possest of your Illustrious Heart would not satisfy her Ambition; and were she assur'd of it, I dare believe Lovisa wou'd preferr you in her esteem, not only to Lodowick but even to all the World. Yet still either a favourable opportunity was wanting, or his fears how Lovisa might receive a Declaration of Love prevented him; and poor Emilius languish'd on. Bileront met, one day, Lovisa , in a private Garden, belonging to the Palace, in quest of a Favourite Female Friend; who, she was told, was gone to walk there. Meeting Bileront , she ask'd him if he had seen her; Bileront had just left the Prince Emilius alone, in a Grotto; and straight resolv'd, without much consideration, to send his Mistress to him. Accordingly he directed this fair Lady thither; tells her very confidently, her Friend was there. The Prince started as she enter'd the Grotto, and Lovisa leapt back, with the surprize; both blush'd at this unexpected Rencounter; till Lovisa , taking it only for a trick of that young Lord; recollected her self, and smiling told Emilius ; she wou'd be reveng'd on Bileront ; nay, said she, pleasantly, your Highness ought to join with me, since he occasion'd this interruption of your thoughts. Madam (return'd he bowing) you you might much more properly call it, an Elevation of thoughts, for I assure they were full of you, in Courts, in Camps, in Cells, in Grotto's. Answer'd that fair one, in a pretty Heroick tone: Emilius is still the same; all Compliment; all Rhetorick. Yet not so to all, replies the Prince, looking passionately upon her, 'tis only Lovisa merits more, much more, then I can say were my tongue immortal and Tun'd to nought but praise. Ah! sit Lovisa , and hear the State of poor Emilius's Heart lest you find too late how fatally I was in earnest. Lovisa still smiling, said; 'Ha! it seems the Plot lyes deeper than I imagin'd. I am to believe your Highness is in love, am I not, to help the Jest?' The Prince vex'd to see the real Language of his heart turn'd into raillery: threw himself at her feet; and spoke with a moving Air, thus. 'If to have you the perpetual Image of my waking thoughts; or when I sleep the charming Vision of my Dreams: if it be greater pleasure to hide me from the inquiring World, that I may shut out all but you, to fancy joys in you beyond the Crowns the united Universe cou'd give: to draw it Hell without you: to sigh, and wish, and tremble, when I hear you named; if this be love, I'm sure I am in love.' Lovisa rising, and viewing the kneeling Prince, with a becoming Majesty, said, 'Remember, Sir, as you are born a Prince, so I descend from the same Line; my Soul as great as yours; therefore, if you vainly think, depending on your Birth, the conquest easie; and I with open Arms must receive your offer'd love: I say you are much deceiv'd; for whilst there are Monasteries, or distant Kingdoms, to the Earth's Verge I'll fly, rather then meet with Arrogancy, instead of that respect, which humble Love Creates. Am I arrogant? (reply'd the passionate Prince) when prostrate at your feet I Lye? Carry these dying Eyes a look of pride? Blasted be the Honours of my Birth unless it helps me forward in my Love! And for yours to me, you are a Queen, a Goddess.' Rise, my Lord, Lovisa interrupts him; I have heard enough. This is a strange Theme; forget it Prince; indulge not such desires, destructive to your Peace, and never like to be fulfill'd. 'Were I,' said the Prince (as he lead her out of the Grove) 'so wretched; convinc'd that destiny must attend me; Life so, tormenting I wou'd not bear too, long.' They had walk'd but a few paces, when they met Bileront , and the Lady Lovisa wanted, whom Bileront had entertain'd, that she might not disturb Emilius . The Count soon read in both their Faces, the Minutes had not been spent in common talk. Many Weeks this Amorous Prince employ'd in trying to perswade Lovisa , that he lov'd her above all Earthly things; yet had obtain'd no more than a bare permission to tell her this, whenever opportunity favour'd. The Court was, all this while, ignorant of the Amour; they knew there was a Cabal of Wits, and thought Emilius only went often for the sake of the Conversation. Love's an unexhausted Spring; and still hath something more to say; nor cou'd the Prince be satisfy'd with short Discourses, stollen at Windows, or got some moments, before other Company came. He long'd for whole hours, and fancy'd, if he had time enough, he might move her heart to pity. To that end, he sent Bileront (whom Lovisa had given him leave to make his Confident) with this Letter (said Francisco , pulling out the Copy:)  grant me an hour when my longing Eyes may gaze without Controul; where I may throw me at the feet of my adorable, and say a thousand thousand tender things, that Love, like mine, inspires. I do not ask a pitying word, or a kind look, in answer to my sighs; I only beg a hearing, that sure the nicest Vertue will allow; since Virtue guides, and honour dictates every Wish that fills the heart of your poor wounded Slave. Emilius.  Lovisa was hard to be prevail'd on, for this private interview; but the faithful Count pleaded, with so much Zeal, for his Amorous Friend, that the fair one almost compell'd, yielded; and gave Emilius leave, after his formal good night, to return with Bileront a back way; into her Closet. Lovisa also brought the Partner of her heart, a dear lov'd Friend. When the Prince came, the Lady and Bileront retir'd to the farther end of the Closet. Cou'd any Man win a heart only with the silent Language of the Eyes, sure 'twas Emilius ; for, in his, Lovisa might plainly read Sparkling Joy, for the permission she had given him to see her; yet intermix'd with so much awe, and fear; that the charming confusion show'd, her love had taught him, to forget he e'er was born a Prince. And Ambition's Lessons prompted him no farther, than to become her Slave. His words were soft as flakes of falling Snow, his person lovely; who then can blame that charming Maid, if she forgot her rigour, and heard, with pleasure. He kneel'd, and snatch'd her beauteous hand, and printed these his Vows. 'He said, he lov'd her more, much more than Life. Oh! (went he on) were all the pleasures of my past Years cramm'd into one happy hour, 'twould not reach the least part of the Raptures, this blest Moment gives; this dear important Now . If then to have but one Minute, when I dare call you Mine, fills my Heart with such Content; what would a Week, what would a Year, an Age? Oh I fear the Cordial wou'd prove too strong; and I shou'd dye with Joy. These Imaginary Visions (returns Lovisa gravely) exceed Love's real Joys. Love, like a Course Picture set in an advantageous light, at distance we admire, and gaze with wonder, but when nearer to our view, a hundred unthought of faults appear; and the imperfect daubing's seen. Ah! No; there's nothing but perfection here, cry'd he transported, and grasping her hand) I long, (said he, looking earnestly on her) to break Conditions. I promis'd not to ask a look or word of pity, yet my Soul is on the Rack, to know how your heart is towards me. If constant love can ever gain admittance there; if you can ever feel a warmth; I do not hope that it will burn and rage like mine. I must not, dare not hear you ( Lovisa stops him) yet I am well; but who knows not, 'tis dangerous, Prince, listening to words like these. Why (said Emilius in a moving tone;) where lies the danger? Heaven grant they prove infectious; and you Catch but the same pleasing Fever possesses me. If I shou'd (returns Lovisa blushing) if I shou'd (not that I do incline my Ear, to the soft story of your Love) place you first in my esteem, and suffer my Virgin thoughts sometimes to be employ'd on you; and after this, an offer'd Princess (state interest) takes you from me: where shou'd I hide my blushing face? For then, not Angels Eloquence shou'd e'er perswade me to behold false men again. Emilius answer'd with Vehemence, By all my hopes, were there an Empress, who brought the conquer'd World her dower; and beautiful as painted Deity; me she wou'd not move. You do not know Emilius , nor Punishments, nor Pleasures prevail, when I am resolv'd.' Lovisa wou'd hear no more, nor cou'd she force him from her, till he obtain'd a Promise, in a little time, to receive the same favour, such another Audience; and that procur'd another. In short, the Prince, a thousand ways, so tenderly express'd his Love, that Lovisa was content he shou'd discover his Passion was not disagreeable, that her Sentiments were kind; though Nicety deny'd her words to express it. Mean time, Count Lodowick laid close Siege; the Dutchess thought it a good Match; her Uncle press'd her hard on his behalf; but she was deaf to all; nor had scarce Patience to obey the Dutchess, in letting him see her; Yet this disturb'd Emilius ; he hated, Lodowick shou'd view her, with such greedy Eyes; or have the privilege to Visit her alone. As he was one Night in Lovisa's Closet, complaining of this, that fair one chid him, and said, 'She fear'd he was naturally Jealous; since he saw Lodowick was her aversion, and that all she did was by compulsion, yet still he was displeas'd. 'Tis that compulsion, answer'd the Prince, with a sigh, I fear; if you should be forc'd to Marry him (Heaven avert that thought!) what would then become of wretched me? No, No, My Lord (return'd Lovisa ) though I am not a Man, yet I am Mistress of such resolutions, that I'll never Marry Lodowick .' There is one way (said the Prince kneeling, and turning pale, for fear of Angring her) one way secures my fears, and makes me blest above all humane kind. What's that, says Lovisa , surpris'd? I dare not tell you (returns the Prince) unless you'll promise not to be displeas'd, nor think that I presum'd too far, and make too bold a Suit, incourag'd by the favours I to your pity owe. Since I know, said Lovisa , (with a reserv'd look) Prince Emilius will not ask, but what's within the strictest Rules of Honour; I give you free liberty to speak. Emilius trembled as he spoke, and clasping her lov'd Knees, 'Wou'd you, said he, but let the Priest before these two' (pointing to the aforemention'd Lady and Billeront , who were in the Closet) 'join our hands, knit that Sacred Knot, which only Death unties; then all my fears wou'd be remov'd. Know you the raging temper of the Duke (saith Lovisa , raising him) and ask you this without his consent, or knowledge? No, let it suffice, I ne'er will be anothers; and let us wait till fate will smile, and Crown our Wishes without danger.' 'Then my fair Life will venture nothing on the score of Love, when I'd forego a Crown for her (said he passionately) Oh! satisfy my fears; give me but the Marriage Vow; I'll beg no more: At this awful distance still remain; nor offer at the Crown of all my Joys, your Bed, till the Fate, you speak of, smiles; till there's not the least shadow of a danger. Lovisa told him, she durst not resolve on a thing of such a Consequence, lest he, or she, or both hereafter should repent; but against the next meeting she would consider, and bad him rest assur'd, all Lodowick's Efforts were vain.' A few days after this there happen'd a sad accident which alter'd the face of all things, in that Court; the Eldest Prince of Parma dyed suddenly, of an Imposthume. You may imagine the fright and confusion the Court was in; and that decency confin'd Emilius to his Closet; yet in the midst of his Grief, he was not unmindful of his Love; but sent Bileront , with a Letter, which contain'd these words.  Soul with Grief; and that I may not have a Glimpse of Joy; I dare not yet see my fairest Mistress. But, Oh! Believe, Lovisa , no vicissitude of Fortune has power to lessen Love. My Death only ends the Passion vowed by Yours Emilius .  A short Postscript beg'd a line to bless his Solitude: She taking her Pen, while Bileront staid, wrote thus:  too great before, now the Ducal Crown hangs near your Brow: Court Glory, that's the Brighter Mistress; and gives Reward beyond the Power of Poor Lovisa .  The Prince was tenderly touch'd with the kind Doubts of his Beloved, and in a short time visited her, renewed his ardent Vows of Constancy, and Endless Faith. Whilst Lodowick , whose Glass told him he was not Unhandsome; who Danc'd well, Drest well, had all the Perfections of a Young, Empty, Airy Courtier; and Master of a vast Estate; raged to be Repuls'd in his first Amour. One day he grew so importunate to know the Cause of her Aversion; that she resented it; and told him sharply, he was Troublesome; and were it not for the Commands of those, whom Reverence taught her to Obey; she had, long e'er that, forbid him her sight. He Answer'd warmly, with an Air too haughty for a Lover: I see too well your scorn; but I fain would find (what 'tis said, we can't in Woman) a Reason for't. Is your heart made of that impenetrable Mould, that Sighs and Prayers are vain Batteries; or doth some hidden happy Youth rob me of my desir'd Prize? She blusht at that, and he observ'd it. Ah! 'tis so; (went he on) your conscious Blushes reveal it. If I blush (return'd she, with a look full of Anger and Disdain) 'tis at your Rudeness. Go---You are Insolent! Durst your conceal'd Lover call me so (said he, throughly nettl'd;) I cou'd Answer him. As he spoke the last words Emilius enter'd, and hearing 'em so loud, he stopt. When Lodowick turn'd to go away, Emilius came up to him, and looking fiercely on him, said, 'Is this like a Man of Honour, to be Noisy in a Ladies Chamber! I say 'tis Insolent, and Brutal.--- Now your Answer you threaten'd--- Not to my Country's Heir (return'd he, Bowing) nor dare I contend for a Jewel, my Prince lays Claim to.' Soon as he had said this, he went out. 'Ah! what have you done? (Cry'd Lovisa , looking with a Melancholy sweetness on him) this flies like Lightening, through the Court, and I must never see you more! Never see me more (answer'd he eagerly) Oh! I must ever see you; nor can it be conceal'd! My Eyes, my Tongue betray it. How often, unawares, I start; mistaking every Name for yours! My longing looks devour your Charms; my Sighs redouble at your sight; and every Motion shows the Fires of my Soul! Oh! I'll cast me at my Obdurate Father's Feet; nor leave his Sacred Knee, 'till he has given you to my Wishes. Flatter not your self with vain Idea's (said she, sadly;) The Duke, I know, will never yield; and my Foreboding Heart whispers, this is the last time we e'er shall meet in Peace.' Am I thus Blest (cry'd the Transported Prince) to perceive such a concern at the detested Thoughts of Parting! My, once severe, but now more Charming Fair! What shall I say, or how Express my Joys! Lovisa , who had hastily discover'd more of her Heart, than she design'd; felt her lovely Face glow with Blushes; and walking from the Prince, a great Glass more plainly show'd her this disorder. Emilius following, smil'd to see the becoming Confusion that Excellent Maid was in. And forgetting that it was the publick Room of State, and the hour of Visiting; Caught her hand, and kist it with a happy Lover's Ardency; whilst two or three Ladies enter'd. The equal surprize of that Amorous Pair, confirm'd it to be more than a common piece of Gallantry. However the Ladies, out of Respect, took no notice of it there; but once remov'd, the Blaze was set abroad which Lodowick began; and it was grown the only News the Court was full of. Every Body had got the story, Prince Emilius Ador'd Lovisa ; and happy was she could first Communicate it to her Friend. The Duke was last inform'd, because all lov'd the Prince, and fear'd his being displeas'd. At length an old Courtier, one who had liv'd even past the remembrance of his Youth, thought this Match inconvenient, and politickly resolv'd to tell him. He heard the Relation with a fierceness beyond that which his own rugged nature gave. 'Unthinking, Unambitious Boy! said he (just as the other finisht) have I, for this, with pains obtain'd to bless his Nuptial Bed with Isabella , the wealthy Princess of Mantua ; and doth the idle Slave to his Passions, worship the fading Beauties of a Bauble; whilst the choisest Jewel of a Crown is offer'd?' With this, he flew to the Apartment of the Dutchess. His Eyes carried Rage, that every cringing Courtier shrunk into a Corner; and durst not meet their Fury. The mild, and ever gentle Dutchess, trembled at his sight, before she heard the story. When with Frowns ushering in his words, he thus began: 'You, Madam, I suppose, have fondl'd up your Son to this, like a true Mother; but unlike my Wife indulg'd his humours, 'till inevitable ruine has got within his grasp. Nor wou'd you yet cry hold! rather than your Child shou'd grow uneasy, give it the Poyson. I thought your Son haunted your Apartments not to learn the Rudiments of Honour; they are seldom to be found amongst the Women! Alas, my Lord! (interrupts him the Affrighted Dutchess) I know not what you mean! No, no; (went he on) you have not conniv'd, nay, perhaps, desir'd that Rebellious Boy Emilius , to make Love to your fair Favourite Lovisa! But, mark me, Madam! For by Heaven I swear, let this be remedy'd, or you will find the consequence will give you cause to tremble! I know the Maid is Virtuous (said that good Lady, with all imaginable Mildness;) her Birth is Noble, since her Blood is mixt with yours: but, that my Son, or Loves , or Courts her, witness the Heaven you swore by, I know not. My Blood! (replies he, all inrag'd) the stream has run too far; and all that's Royal is lost! But were she my Brother's Daughter, and a Bar to my designs made me retrench my words, or promise given: Cloyster, or Death shou'd force the stubborn Girl; and set the way clear before me. Therefore I charge you, School your Son, and dispose of her; else I, who have been the Partner of your Bed these Thirty Years, will ever after prove a Stranger and a Foe!' This said, he left the weeping Dutchess. Poor Emilius was just going to his Mother, there to open all his heart; and beg her kind Assistance to mollify his Father. He sent Bileront before humbly to pray the Dutchess; she wou'd, in her Cabinet, hear him on a subject, that was to him important. Bileront streight return'd, and told the expecting Prince, the Duke was gone thither with an angry Brow. Emilius fear'd the worst, and staid conceal'd till the Duke return'd; then going to the Dutchess, in her melting Eyes, he reads his Fate; and stood a while immoveable. That sweet Princess no sooner beheld her Son look so pale, and deeply sad, but her Tears increas'd. For the Duke had rightly charg'd her in that particular: She excelling most Mothers in Fondness. The Prince first broke silence; and respectfully askt her, if he might know what his Father had done, to cause those Sorrows? First Answer me (says the Mourning Dutchess) are you so Unhappy to love Lovisa? Pardon me, my Mother (said Emilius in a moving tone) nor call me Unhappy, in loving, and being belov'd, by that Virtuous, all-deserving, Noblest Maid! This Declaration touched the Dutchess nearly; and she, word for word, told that despairing Prince, what his Incensed Father had sworn. 'Therefore (added that Wise, yet tender Mother) quit thou thy unauspicious Love, before the threatn'd storm comes on: it hangs just breaking o'er our Heads; and if thou persist, falls upon all. Quit my Love! (answers the Prince passionately) Ah! Madam! E'er you resolve to be obey'd, please to hear, how great a Villain you wou'd make your then abject Son! Lovisa , most perfect of her Sex, by nature reserv'd and cold, unapt to Love; One, who lays not out her wondrous stock of Charms, to catch at Hearts; but declines her modest Eyes; nor Triumphs, nor rejoices in her Conquests. This I saw, and lov'd her for't; pursu'd her with a Passion violent and unfeign'd: I sigh'd, I kneel'd, I pray'd; nay, quite Unmann'd, I even Wept before her. She saw, I joy'd in nothing but her sight: My alter'd Face show'd the pangs, my aching heart indur'd. Mov'd at last, she kindly heal'd my Suffering with gentle pity. And shall I quit the dear relenting Saint? I, who drew her to love's bewitching Mischiefs, against her Inclinations, almost forcing her tender heart, guarded with an aversion to Mankind, now shall I quit her? Oh! never! sooner I'd quit my Birthright, turn Lunatick, Naked travail the inhospitable World; feel first the distracting grief needs must seize my Dear one, shou'd I prove so basely Wicked to forsake her? Leave me (said that tormented Mother) for this but increases the Woe, that my heart is already too full of.' The Dutchess seeing the Prince thus obstinate, resolves to try a gentler subject. He being gone, she sent a Page of Honour, to call Lovisa to her. That Noble Maid had heard nothing of these Disturbances; and readily obey'd; entering the Cabinet with a chearful Countenance. But when she saw the Dutchesses sorrow, her heart sunk downwards, and she appear'd just such another Statue, as the Unfortunate Emilius did before. 'Come near, my Charming Charge (said the Disconsolate Dutchess;) thy dying Mother left thee to my Care. Have I not been careful of thee? Speak boldly, Lovisa , and accuse me if I utter any untruth! Royal Madam (answer'd the kneeling fair) were I to recount the Favours you have done, and I receiv'd, long hours wou'd unheeded pass; and yet the obliging story not half be finished. Here, near your own Apartments, Lodg'd, Honour'd, Lov'd, and smil'd upon, as if I had been your Daughter. Rise (reply'd the Dutchess) and if your Soul is grateful, now's the time that you, by one great Act, may Cancel all these Obligations, and leave me eternally your Debtor. Then conclude it done (return'd Lovisa ) were it to Sacrifice the quiet of my future days, I'd live my self in Torment to give my Princess Ease. My Son--- Nay blush not my Lovisa , I know it all, nor, were I disposer of his Fate, wou'd hinder the Alliance. Thy Beauty, and Brighter Virtue, deserves a Crown; deserves Emilius : But, Oh! his Father, whose Rage like Madness, curst with Power, knows no Bounds; whilst the poor Youth fixt to thy Charms, and fond to Death of Thee, never will Obey. Think then the end of this Rebellion's Murder; thy ravag'd Country's Bowels torn; Thou the fatal Hellen that sets the World on Fire. Reply not (went the Dutchess on) I know you did not foresee all this, when first Emilius , with a Lover's Eagerness, breathed his warm sighs around you, woed to the sweets of Love---Thou Weepst, Lovisa , and I pity thee; I my self have felt thy Sorrows; torn from my Virgin Wishes; Compell'd by Parents to wed this Duke; I took my reason to aid, and time o'ercame it; so may you, if you will hotly strive. Instruct me, Madam, (all drown'd in tears, Lovisa cry'd) Instruct me, Madam, for I am at a loss. The Heart of my Emilius is Heroick (said the Dutchess) and force is lost upon him: 'tis you only have Power to charm him to Obedience. Take then your choice, be greater than a Soveraign Princess; Rule your Passions, let your looks deny what's acting in your heart; and tell Emilius , that your alter'd Soul abhors his Love; else unite with my Unhappy Son, and meet destructive ruine both. Lovisa wiping her fair Eyes, and looking as if she cou'd accuse the cruel Powers: No--- the Prince shall not for me be ruin'd; at least I'll do my best, he shan't (said she.) To morrow, with your Highnesses leave, I'll see him; and after that, I hope, you'll have no just cause to blame me. Go, my best Girl, (return'd the Dutchess) and as an earnest of thy truth, see not my Son to night; I know he'll long to tell thee all his Woes, but listen not to the sad story, 'twill melt thy best resolve, and leave thee Spiritless.' Lovisa took her leave, and promis'd the Dutchess what she desir'd. At the usual hour, Distress'd Emilius sent Count Bileront the well known way to gain admittance to his Beloved; but was surpriz'd when he brought him back word, she was not to be seen; not well, and gone to Bed. Not well; and gone to Bed (repeated the Prince) return, my Friend, and tell her I have Business of Importance. Oh! she has heard the Unlucky Story; and now, in Anger will not see me! Tell her I am Innocent; tell her I cannot live beneath my Griefs, unless the dear sight of her support me. To please the Prince, that faithful Friend went, and came again with the same Answer. The Prince was vex'd, only he comforted himself, that, if she wou'd not see him privately, he before the World, resolv'd to profess his Endless Love. Next day, as he and Bileront were walking in the private Grove, his surprize was augmented, when Lovisa's Page accosted them, and said his Lady desir'd instantly to speak with them both. As they cross'd the Court which leads to Lovisa's Lodgings, the Prince observ'd her Coach and Attendance stand ready. His Heart misgave him, though he knew not why. When they came up, they found her sitting in her Closet, with her fair Friend, who was always her lov'd Companion; both dress'd in Habits for a Journey. Lovisa's Eyes were full of Majesty and Resolution. Love, overaw'd durst not peep, nor show a beam of pity. 'I sent for you (began the Life of all Emilius's Joys, in a tone far different from the usual sweetness:) I sent for you here before these two the constant Witnesses of all our Follies past; to give you back your Vows, to free you from the luckless Chains you chose. Recal your ill-plac'd Love, the hasty errour of your Youth, and think of it no more.' Emilius view'd her with a piercing air, and falling at her feet; the posture his humble Love had often us'd him to: 'In vain, said he, in vain you give me back, what I can never take. What have I done? Why am I doubly punish'd, with my Father's frowns, and yours? When I, but in thought, consent to what he offers, may some God to you reveal that thought; and may you then for ever, justly look as cruelly as now. I stand prepar'd (said Lovisa ) for all that you can say, foreseeing the horrid ills that may accrew, if we should follow the blind track, rash, inconsiderate Love wou'd lead us. Therefore, obey your Father, Espouse the Princess Isabella \---Ha! (begun the Prince) I beg you---interrupt me not (went she on) If you'll do this, I instantly will go and remain with my Uncle, Don Alvarez , till this discourse, which buzzes thus in every busy Mouth, is hush'd. I'll still preserve you in my heart; I'll see you when I may with honour; and my Friendship shall excel vulgar Love---Yet I have not done (she perceiving him go to speak) if you agree not to what I've said, at least consent; then I, this very moment, will drive directly to St. Clare , the next adjacent Monastery, be straight immur'd, Probation year and all; nor will I ever hear, see, or, if possible, think of Emilius more. Do not hope Prayers or Tears can stir me---May Poverty, Diseases, loss of Fame attend me, if one jot I vary or change from what I've vow'd! This is not sure, the ever gentle Goddess, I thus long have Worshipt (said the Prince with Eyes all languishing) some Tygress hath usurpt the Face of my Adorable; and form'd those cruel words, I last have heard!' Lovisa rising, and making a sign to the other Lady, who was to go with her, to be ready, hastily catching hold of her Gown, ' Lovisa , (says he) my Life! See, Bileront ! See! How have I Dreamt! not worth a Look! a Sigh, a parting Word to think upon! Ah, Prince! (return'd that Self-constraining Maid) shou'd I give the Deluge way, it would o'erwhelm me! Go, inexorable, go; (said the Prince, letting loose his hold) my Death I'm sure you'll bear as Unconcern'd as this! For I feel greater Pangs, than bitterest Death could bring; though drest in new invented Tortures; exceeding all the old. Oh! Wrong me not (said she passionately) to that degree! Believest thou I am unconcern'd? Oh! No! I share thy Agony, my Dear; my lov'd Emilius ! Take from my Arms, the first, the last Embrace, that e'er you'll receive from your Lovisa !' He claspt her to his heart, and wou'd have spoke, but stifling Joys o'ercame, and left him almost Breathless on her Bosom: When, she, fearing her Virgin Modesty had yielded too far, work'd by the Prince's Sorrows, and her Love; started from his Arms; and, swift as an Arrow, pass'd the Chambers towards the Coach. Scarce cou'd Bileront , and 'the Lady o'ertake her.' Thus Lovisa left the Court of Parma , and went directly towards the Palace of her Uncle Don Alvarez , which was many Leagues from thence. When Bileront had put her into the Coach, he return'd to the Prince; who, like one stupify'd, leant, against a Cabinet. Bileront rous'd him, and begg'd he'd go; because the Servants wou'd observe him. He, by his Friend's perswasion, almost insensibly remov'd from her Closet to his own; then throwing himself upon the Floor, he said all a violent despair cou'd prompt. 'Princes harder brook to have their wishes crost than other Men; their Birth, their Education flatter 'em; the World was made for them. Emimilius was young, his desires fierce, his Mistress fair; and, what pierc'd deepest, willing, on Honourable Terms, to grant the long'd for Bliss.' The old Duke, who thought a great point gain'd in Lovisa's being remov'd; left him to himself a while, in hopes he'd Conquer these Reluctancies, and prove Obedient: but he, wholly given up to Melancholy, found the Passionate Thoughts, that possess'd his Love sick Mind, too entertaining to be dismiss'd. His Cabinet and Closet-walks, where none but Faithful Bileront gain'd admittance, took up most of his hours. When he was forc'd to appear, his Eyes carry'd the marks of his discontent; his words were few, and spoken, as if his Mind was still on something else. The Duke perceiving Emilius indulg'd his Passion, and yielded to his Bonds, instead of strugling to get loose, sent for him, and beginning mildly said, 'I well hop'd, my Son, that before this, reduc'd by reason, you wou'd have acknowledg'd your Failings; rendr'd me just Gratitude, in a thankful Obedience.---Open your blinded Eyes, and view the dazling glory of an Illustrious Birth, and Royal Fortune. Is a subject to be prefer'd to Her? Far be it from me (reply'd the Prince, respectfully) to derogate from the Princess of Mantua: She may be, for ought I know, a Miracle. Wou'd my Royal Father permit me not to injoy my Wishes, that were too mighty for my hopes; only leave me but free from others, as I am debarr'd from her I love: That's the humble All I ask!' This was not what the Duke expected; and as it was constraint on him, to make use of Mildness, like a Bow bent backwards, he impetuously returns to Rage. 'Says he (looking sternly) Am I to be thus dallyed with, Foolish Boy? Prepare to Execute what I Command, with readiness; lest my Resentment, great as thy Folly, reach thee! An Extraordinary Ambassadour is now dispatching, with my last Orders for the Court of Mantua ; I'll send the Articles to be by you perus'd, and expect your Letters; Letters fit for Emilius to write, and Isabella to receive. Command my Life, (Answers that Afflicted Prince, kneeling) and without a murmur, I'll Obey. Alas! Sir, I respect the Princess Isabella more than you; I wou'd not betray her to Faithless Arms, where she must ever meet with Coldness, Neglect, nay Hatred, instead of Conjugal Affection. Thou stubborn Fool (retorts the Duke, in a furious tone) born for my Curse, and thy own Undoing!--- but I shall find a way, at least, to Plague thee, if thou darst refuse the offer'd Blessing. By Heaven!--- I'll have thy Mistress Poyson'd, or else try'd for a Witch, and so Condem'd! Her Sorceries have ruin'd thee! Dost thou not fear me? As I am a Man,' (reply'd the Prince, rising and looking with a becoming Bravery) and (what's yet more) 'your Son; my Soul has still a stranger been to fear! heap tortures on my disobedient Head! Cast me from your sight, and Throne: nought that's Unmanly; nought that's Seditious shall appear in all my Sufferings. With Patience, I'll renounce all the glorious Honours that my Birth provides; forsaking all at your Command: all but my Unhappy Love; whom I am sure, what e'er you have said, you will not wrong. Princes shou'd not extend their Power to hurt the Innocent, or force their Laws Interpreters to find out Crimes where there are none; and punish where they shou'd reward! Go from my sight (cries the Angry Duke!) Blot and Contagion of my Blood!---And if thou dost not Repent, and with my Will comply; unheard of Curses o'er take you!--- You, and your dear Destruction, Lovisa! ' The Lords, that saw the Prince pass through the Anti-Chambers, from his Father, perceiv'd additional Vexations in his Face. Many, who lov'd him, wou'd have follow'd; but he forbad them all, and enter'd his Cabinet alone. Bileront no sooner heard of his new Discontents; but making use of what the Prince's Favour had allow'd, a Key he had of the Closet; without Commission ventur'd to disturb him. Good Heavens! what sorrows touch'd that Compassionate Lord; when he beheld the same Hero, whom he had seen foremost Charge the Turkish Troops, and last Retreat; now extended on the ground; giving way to Griefs scarce fit to be recited of the great Emilius! See here (say'd he, casting his sad Eyes on Bileront ) the destin'd Bridegroom! the destin'd slave! the People's Property! Who for their pretended Interest, and a cruel Father's Arbitrary Will, must be, for ever, join'd to what he hates; and lose the Brightest Blessing, the softest Good, that e'er Adorn'd the World! Many, and tender were the Complaints Emilius pour'd into the Bosom of his lov'd Friend; who comforted him with all the sweetness faithful Friendship cou'd Inspire. Next day, the Duke sent the Articles of Marriage to his Son; with Command that he shou'd examine them, and return his Answer. But Emilius absolutely refus'd to look upon 'em. This gave fresh Rage to the already Incens'd Duke; and he resolv'd the Dutchess shou'd not lose her share of the vexation. Again he storms at her; reiterates the cruel Vows of deep Revenge; whilst that Distress'd Lady seeks to her lov'd Son in vain; who only Answers her Intreaties with far fetch'd Sighs, and looks of wild despair. She writes to Lovisa ; and conjures her to study some means to oblige Emilius to yield. The retir'd Lovisa , who possess'd her fill of Melancholy (though her Indulgent Uncle, fond as a Father, study'd to divert her) receiv'd this Letter, as the extended Malice of her Fate, that knew no end. And, far from joying at the Prince's Constancy, wept at the Mischiefs her resistless Eyes had caus'd. Lovisa knew Emilius was not naturally stubborn or Disobedient; therefore in the movingest terms her Soul cou'd dictate; (her desire and wishes for his real Good o'ercoming Love) she writ to him. The Prince might more properly be said to be Immur'd, than Retir'd. For he permitted none to see him, except Bileront , and Servants, just necessary to wait on him. The Dutchess first receiv'd Lovisa's Letter; and having perus'd it was pleas'd. She Seal'd it again, and gave it Bileront to deliver. When Emilius saw Lovisa's hand, he kiss'd it eagerly; and transported, cry'd, 'What Summons hath my Goddess sent? Has she kindly revers'd my Doom; and given me leave to share her Banishment? Oh! Bileront ' (went he on, his Eyes sparkling with the same Passion, his heart was full of) 'Methinks I cou'd do wonders for my Love, wou'd she consent! With her, fly the rigours of an Inexorable Father! Fly Ungrateful Parma ! And in some peaceful Corner of the Globe, fix my unimitable Fair; whilst for the loss of Crowns, Glory, Ambition, All, bewitching, dear, delightful Love makes up, and far excels.' He open'd the Letter, and Bileront saw his Countenance alter, as he read it; that short Beam of Joy which so lately shone through his Face, Eclips'd with blacker Clouds of sadness, than before. 'Read, my Lord, said the Prince, for sure my Eyes, only us'd to sorrow, transform the words of Kindness into Cruelty; even from her.'  Heaven! Must I with Justice complain of Emilius ? Must he become my greatest Persecutor? And, by his cruel Obstinacy, draw down the Curses of late Posterity upon me? Will no Retirement but a Monastery, though never so remote, prove an Asylum for this Tortur'd Wretch? I've cause to think you wish me in a Cloyster! Now Prince, you shall have your desire! Conclude, within few days, I am a Votaress! Since you dislike the offers I made at partings; since my Eternal Love promis'd as far as Honour wou'd allow, on the Condition of your Obedience, is not acceptable: My next Task shall be, to banish you my Heart! This is the last unalterable Resolve of The Unfortunate Lovisa .  After Bileront had ended the Letter, the Prince remain'd half an hour silent; then rising hastily from the Couch, where he had thrown himself, he took his Pen and wrote; and giving it to his Favourite, bid him carry it to the Dutchess; saying, he suppos'd Lovisa's Letter came by her Approbation; and he hop'd she wou'd like the Answer. Bileront did as Commanded, and the Dutchess found these words.  Madam, I'd sooner chose to Reign Absolute Monarch there, than over half the Universe. But since the unrelenting Fates deny, rather than be totally Expell'd, give me that cold Corner allow'd for Friendship. Change your unjust Design of Quitting the World, as I must do the happy Name of your Adorer; to that of Your Eternal Friend and Servant, Emilius .  Think you my Son is real in this, said the Dutchess; I know not, Madam, (answer'd that young Lord) Indeed, in my Opinion, his looks discover a new Resolution. The Dutchess dispatch'd away her Letter; and straight put the Duke upon sending the Articles again to the Prince; which he did; and Emilius immediately sign'd them; and said his Letters to the Princess, shou'd be ready, in a day or two. He appear'd publickly, look'd pleasantly; and all, except Bileront , thought the Alteration unfeign'd. The eyes of Friendship, next to Love, are the most Prying. Bileront alone observ'd his stolen Sighs; and those Absences of Mind, which so oft possess'd him. And meeting him opportunely, he with a concern'd obliging Air, began. 'What Breach of Faith have I been guilty of; wherein offended, that my Lov'd Royal Master hides from me his Soul; conceals from me, as well as all the World, the Griefs that Prey upon his Noble Heart! Griefs (reply'd the Prince Ironically) I've none; Am I not to Marry the Infanta! There, Beauty, Wealth and Merit join to Bless my future Reign. Ah! Prince (return'd Bileront ) why will you use your Faithful servant thus? I wou'd not press, nor wish to know your secret thoughts, but only in hopes to assist, to serve you. Be satisfy'd (say'd the Prince, going towards some Company, he saw:) I conceal nothing from you, or if I do; 'tis because I'll not Involve my Friend in the inevitable Woes, ordain'd for me.' Bileront , cou'd not answer then; but he resolv'd to Watch him. That night Letters for Isabella were to be deliver'd to the Duke; on the Pretext of writing them, Emilius dismiss'd his Attendance; and shutting himself up in his Closet, said, when his writing was over, he'd sleep the remaining part of the Night, upon his Couch. Bileront , who heard these Orders, hid himself behind a loose piece of hanging, till the servants were all gone. Then stealing along, he softly Unlock'd the Closet Door. The Prince was writing, though not to Isabella ; he heard Bileront stir and turning with a furious Aspect, ask'd who was there! That Faithful Lord, affrighted to see his Prince look so stern, cast himself at his Feet; and, with Tears, implor'd he might share his Fate. For (said he) I'm sure you have determin'd to abandon Parma , rather than your Fair Mistress. The Prince cou'd not but be sensibly touch'd to see the sincere Affection of the Count; and Raising him, said with a sigh, why wilt thou not with Fortune, leave the Wretched lost Emilius ? I am a Barque, that's Bound for sure Destruction! All near must share the Tempest; and meet the Face of horrid Ruine! Did I like a Coward, (Answer'd Bileront ) start from your side in War; that I am now Discarded? No, No! (return'd Emilius ) nor did I then Deny thy Going. Alas, Alas! It is not now the Field of Honour, Emilius seeks! Lethargick Love hath seiz'd my Soul; and in a Cell I mean to Dream away my Life! Endeavour not diswading me (went he on) showing him a Cordelier's Habit; near these, the only Robes, that I shall ever wear, a Dagger lies; if I'm prevented, that sends me to a long Eternal Sleep! Therefore, if, out of Zeal to my advantage, as thou think'st it, this gets air, before I am past their reach, they take me dead, my Bileront , unalterable truth is in my words; thou may'st believe me. 'I do believe (said that Troubl'd Confident;) and only beg to participate. I can brook the solitude of a Cell, as well as my dear Lord; nay the Court wou'd seem to me a Desart, were you absent. No; by our past Friendship, I conjure you, stay (returns the Prince) on that condition, I'll, to you alone, unfold what I've design'd. I'm inform'd, near the Palace of Don Alvarez , there stands a Monastery of the Cordelier's , thither I direct my steps; speak once to my Lovisa ; then leaving Parma , Imbarque for France ; and in some Cloyster, I best shall like, end my wretched Days. I tell you this (continu'd he, with a resolv'd Countenance) and you know, what I have sworn, if you discover it. I am not us'd to faulter or break my word, therefore, Dear Bileront , now retire. I'll send you word of my abode in France ; and shall accept a Visit kindly.' Bileront saw it then in vain to diswade him, and having learnt where he went, designing to follow him, said nothing against it; only ask'd him, how he thought to get admittance amongst the Fathers. That Contrivance is Comical enough (returns the Prince; forcing a smile) for I have here (showing him a Letter) with my own Hand and Signet, recommended my self, as a Fryar of my Acquaintance. I have also a Compound to turn my Complexion Yellow; and a Powder to black my Eye-brows. All is ready; the Letter for the Duke my Father, and the Dutchess; whose troubles for this concern me nearest. Once more, my Faithful Friend, Farewel, said he, Embracing Bileront ; who unwillingly left him; satisfy'd in nothing, but his design to see him again before he parted from the Monastery of the Cordeliers . He gone, the Prince, about three a Clock in the Morning, taking the Habit with him, left any of the Centry, seeing him like a Cordelier , shou'd give Information, when the hunt was made for him. He pass'd unobserv'd; or if any did see him, he was so us'd to walk early, and alone, that there was no notice taken of it. The first Thicket he reach'd, he pull'd off his own Upper Cloaths, and put on the Vestments of a Fryar, and tying a stone to his Coat, threw it into an adjacent River. You know, my Illustrious Auditors, (said Francisco) Emilius is a very Fair Man, his Eyes sweet, and his Hair very light; to alter which, he took his Compound, and washing his Face, and delicate Hands in it; appear'd just of a Sun-burnt Yellow. Then blacking his Eyebrows, he lookt so chang'd, his most intimate Friends cou'd not have known him. He had put up a considerable quantity of Gold; so, the first conveniency of riding he met with, he made use of; and pass'd securely; not so much as hearing any inquiry made after him. Being arriv'd at the Cloyster, and showing Prince Emilius's Letter, the good Fathers receiv'd him with infinite Civility. They observ'd him Melancholy, and unwilling to speak; and, out of Respect, askt him few Questions. He saw the Turrets of Don Alvarez's Palace; and after a repast had refresht him, he cou'd not forbear asking one of the Fathers to walk. He chose to go that way; and when near the House, the Palpitation of his Heart inform'd him how Dear Lovisa was. He ask'd the Father, who that Palace belong'd to; and being answer'd, as he expected, to Don Alvarez : I was told (said he) Don Alvarez was your Neighbour, and have a Message from the Prince to him, which I design to Morrow to deliver. We have a nearer way than this (said the Fryar) which leads us from our Orchard-Walls, through his Groves of Oranges and Jessamin, to his door. This pleas'd the Prince, and he soon retir'd; all Night revolving in his Love-possess'd Mind, how he shou'd speak with Lovisa alone. He, at length, concludes to deliver a Letter, as from Emilius to Alvarez ; wherein the Prince shou'd desire him to let the Cordelier speak alone with Lovisa . Wisht Morning being come, our Royal Cordelier rose, and being by one of the Society directed, entred those Fragrant Groves: whose sweets, wafted by the early breeze, wou'd have Banquetted Senses, less imploy'd; but Emilius thought on nothing but Lovisa . When he was got pretty near the Gates of the House, he heard a Clock strike Four; which as it were awak'd him out of his Contemplation; and made him consider, how improper a time it was, to disturb a Nobleman's Family. This thought turn'd him again into the Grove, and seeking out of the direct path, some Grotto suitable to his Melancholy, he observ'd a part of the Grove inclos'd; which lookt extream shady; he, without much trouble, got over this Inclosure, and found the thick gloomy shade, dark as he cou'd wish. Vast aged Trees form'd the grand Walk; whose high meeting tops, and strait Trunks, lookt Majestick; and a Myrtle Hedge grew thick and even about their Roots, which added to the Beauty of the Place. Behind this Hedge, upon high Grass, Emilius threw himself along. His Anxious Thoughts, those usual Torments, awhile imploy'd him; till Nature's Reliever, soft refreshing sleep, the effect of restless Nights, seiz'd him. This prov'd the very walk Lovisa lov'd; nor had the Prince repos'd long, before the Voice of that perpetual Object of his Soul wak'd him. He found 'twas she, and her Companion: Love made him curious to listen if their discourse related to him; and concealing himself, he heard the Lady, that was with her say, When, Madam, will these Destructive Griefs leave your disconsolate hours. You shun the fond Indearments of your Uncle, that you may take your fill alone of heart-breaking sorrow: Your Eyes have lost their wonted Vigour; and your lovely Cheeks, like gather'd Roses, Fade; and in their prime, forsake their Native Lustre. You promis'd, when the Prince obeyed his Father, and instead of burning Love, embrac'd cool Friendship: You wou'd mourn no more. His Letter assures you this is done; yet I behold no alteration. Still the days are tedious, and the Nights are worse. When (I beg to know!) will your Woes have End? 'With my Life (answer'd that Sighing Afflicted Fair.) Though, witness ye Powers (said she, looking up;) who, with ease can view the inmost Recesses of my Soul; and plainly see what's Acted there: Witness, I say, if I not rejoice, that Prince Emilius to Duty, and to Reason yields; quitting the Weight, the Burthen insupportable of Blind impetuous Passion; that sinks Lovisa down to Ruine. Mutual Love creates a pleasing Habitude of Joy; wherein the Mind transcendently is Blest: and which Time, that with Oblivion buries all things, can scarce blot out. 'Twas not with ease the Usurper got Possession here (went she on; pointing to her Heart) nor will he be with ease dislodg'd. All the Sighs and Tears it cost Emilius to gain this Virgin Heart, to bind it in the Inchanting Chains of Tyrannick Love; I must, with Interest, pay back, e'er I can set the Throbbing Prisoner free. Perhaps i' th' Conflict too the Rebel, ingag'd too far, may break. I have also a part of Falshood to Act: Think'st thou (continu'd she, looking on her Companion;) I design never to see Emilius more? No, no: spight of the Promises, wherewith I've flatter'd him; soon as he is happy in the Arms of Isabella ; the Cloyster, to which I've only seem'd averse, hides me for ever.' The Prince, who cou'd no longer bear his Mistress shou'd think him guilty of breaking Vows, he left a Crown to keep, met her at the end of the walk, and falling at her Feet, he Embrac'd her Knees, and said, 'If Lovisa never became a Recluse, till Emilius is happy in the Arms of Isabella , the Church will lose its Fairest Votary.' Who can express the surprize of Lovisa and the other Lady! The Voice was the Prince's, but the Face, the Habit, contradicted that thought. 'Heavens! (cry'd Lovisa , in raising him) it cannot be Prince Emilius ! Why shou'd my Life (said he; looking passionately on her) wonder at the Metamorphosis? Was this the hardest Task my cruel Love injoin'd; My Fate revers'd, I shou'd only talk of Joys and Blessings. Ah! Prince, (said Lovisa in a moving tone and air) was this well done? Didst thou fear I shou'd too soon forget thee. Cruel Man, thus to interrupt the Peace I am striving for! Go to the Royal Nuptials, thy Fate prepares; and leave me! Leave me Emilius , to my Belov'd, and chosen Solitude. I do design to leave thee, (reply'd the Prince,) Thou Dear, thou only Charmer! Excellent Woman! The First, the Last, that e'er possest Emilius's Heart! I'm for ever going; push me not from thee, with precipitated haste; Let me but gaze a moment, grasp thy lov'd hand, and bear it to my trembling Lips; print my last Kisses there: I'll then pursue what, sure as Death and Fate, I have resolv'd. What, dear Bewitching Talker, (returns Lovisa , her Eyes swimming in Love and Tears) What hast thou resolv'd? Even in these very Weeds to be for ever shrowded (said Emilius ) and far, far hence removed; at once forsaking, what to Death I loath; and what more than Life I lov'd! This must not be ( Lovisa interrupts him): Rob not the World, and your Unhappy Country, of Virtues, which as they are Exemplary, shou'd be Conspicuous: that the Great Example may incourage a degenerate Age; and make the Subject blush at Vices which his Prince abhors. Ah! Do not vainly wast the last, and only precious moments of my Life (cry'd Emilius .) Death, or a Cell, I've swore, by all that's Sacred! Therefore no more, my Love; look on me, as a Wretch that's dying, as one Condemn'd; without the possibility of a Reprieve; with gentle pity sooth the rugged'st blow of Fate, Eternal Parting. And for the Ease of my divided Heart, which with unbated Passion still will heave and swell, and pant at thought of thee, give me thy Promise to keep thy Faith inviolate. When, I, low as the Dust, shall grovel in my distant humble Cell; let me hug this thought; not Crowns, nor Youth, or Beauty, tempts Lovisa to entertain another Love; and blot the lost Emilius from her constant Mind. Is this all, thou dear Deserver (said Lovisa , looking on him with the kindest aspect in the World?) Ah! poor return for so much worth; for so much Love, I'd be lavish in my Protestations, were there need; but sure Emilius neither knows himself, nor me, when he requires one. You are for a Cell, and where, think you, I am to be dispos'd? Not in a Court, I'll promise ye! Distant, indeed, our Cells will be; but the thinking Mind can travail, in one moment, many Leagues. I'll beg of Heaven, it may be no Offence to dedicate, each Day, some lov'd peculiar hours to thee. I'll think of every tender word, and look, and Blush, as it were Acting o'er again. This shall be the Banquet of my Mind, all Times, besides those Devoted to my Sighs, and Sadness! Oh! unequal'd Charmer (answer'd the Transported Prince) why dost thou talk thus? Why did I beg for Kindness, when my foolish nature cannot bear it! That I cou'd now, this instant, fall a Victim at thy Feet; and thereby Eternalize the greatest Flame, that e'er possest the Heart of Man! But I will live; and suffer for thee! Yes, my Fair Saint! Judge thou thy self, if 'tis not greater Pain to live than dye; to live without the Wretched'st last Comfort, Hope ; to rave; to love like me; even to Madness Love. And in all these heights, to leave Thee! Parted by Seas, and Wilds, and Alps, and what's yet a greater Bar, a Father's Curse! Thou Cold Benumming Hand of all-destroying Death, seize me. Embalm'd by my Lovisa's Tears! At her Feet Expiring is a quick Conveyance to a quiet Grave; a Blessing I wou'd court with the same Eagerness, as others shun approaching Fate.' His looks, which the very Image and Impress of unartificial sorrow bore, gave terror to his words, and wou'd have pierc't Souls more insensible than Lovisa's , or her fair Friend's. That Friend, a sorrowful Spectator of this dismal Meeting, told Lovisa she heard the Gates open; and believ'd it was for Don Alvarez , who was coming to seek her. Lovisa Conducted Emilius away, to avoid her Uncle, out of this Inner Grove. At parting, Grief grew too big for Words: A strict Embrace, and mingl'd Tears, conclude the cruel Separation. Not that Lovisa fear'd Don Alvarez's knowing the Prince in his Disguise: only the mutual Trouble, and Confusion they were in, was too visible, and of necessity must have been perceiv'd. This occasion'd her to hasten him away, before her Uncle reacht the Place. Disconsolate Emilius return'd to the Monastery, inwardly bewailing his Condition; esteeming himself the most deplorable of human kind. His Body yielded beneath the Fatigues of these perplexing Inquietudes; so that he was taken very ill. The careful Fryars did their best to comfort, and refresh him. He desir'd to be left alone to his Repose; though, in reality, 'twas only to enjoy the Melancholy Cogitation, his disappointed Love suggested. In the Evening, one came and told him, a Gentleman inquir'd for the Cordelier , that came the night before. This put the Prince upon his Guard; he bid 'em Conduct the Stranger to him; and contriv'd his Fatal Dagger in a readiness, to give him liberty, if they offer'd to seize him. But he found those Thoughts needless, when he saw Bileront enter. Emilius , with a sad Air, turn'd from him; and said, Why dost thou follow me? Thy officious Love is grown troublesome of late. Condemn me not, till you have heard what I have to say (reply'd Bileront: ) 'Alas! there's an alteration of a fatal wondrous sort, since your Departure. Our Duke---Cruel though he be (interrupted Emilius ) Heaven preserve him ever from approaching Danger' \---The Prince silent, Bileront reassumed his Discourse. 'The Morning your Highness left the Court, the Duke prepar'd to hunt, and inquiring for you, was told, that out of respect to the Princess Isabella , with your own hand, you had been most part of the night writing. This pleas' him, and he said, you shou'd not be disturb'd. He had not rode far, before his Horse unfortunately threw him, and he receiv'd a dangerous wound in his Head. He was brought back to the Palace, just as the Dutchess was inform'd of your being gone. This Completion of Misfortunes o'er- whelm'd her. The Duke fainted several times at the dressing of his hurt; yet knows not of your Absence; though, when he cou'd for his intolerable pain speak, he has often ask'd for you.' Emilius lookt earnestly in Bileront's Face; trying to discover whether this sad Narration was Truth. Bileront perceiving his Doubts, with earnest Asseverations confirm'd what he had said, and convinc'd the Prince. He also told him, how he had contriv'd to leave some Servants, with Cloaths for him, and directed him the way to enter the place privately; and get shifted without discovery. Emilius , though indispos'd, prepar'd to see his Dying Father; his Nature was Tender; and notwithstanding Almighty Love, this sad accident toucht him nearly. Yet wou'd he not forget his Mourning Fair, but contriv'd a Letter, which being of necessity to be sent by one of the Cordelier's , he wou'd not use his own hand or name, but desir'd Bileront to write the following words.  Madam, hasty Resolutions. An Affair of weighty moment calls him back to Court; in a few Days this shall be Explain'd. What I have said, is by directions from the--- What remains, is only that I am Your most Humble, and Obedient Servant, Bileront .  Emilius gave a Fryar this Letter, and charg'd him to deliver it that Night. Then he took his leave of those Hospitable Fathers; saying, he was sent for in great haste, to Court; and promis'd that he wou'd acquaint the Prince, how Courteous, upon his Account, they had been. Emilius fancy'd his Deportment so odd in the Convent, that their Curiosity might prompt them to open the Letter; which caus'd him to have it writ so ambiguously. But they, without the least thought of such rudeness, accomplisht his desires. Lovisa had, the remainder of that Day, been discoursing with her Uncle of her resolution to enter the Nunnery of St. Clare . That good Man us'd all the Arguments, a tender Affection cou'd Inspire, against it. Told her, that being Childless, he had design'd her for his Heir; which, said he, added to your own Fortune, will, as to Estate, render you a Match for any Prince in Christendom. And Beauty, Virtue, or whatever Graces else adorn your Sex, the World, that is, the Happy World which knows you, with Justice, owns you, in Perfection, Mistress of. Alvarez said this, and a thousand more kind things, to no purpose. Gratitude and Love possest her Noble Soul; nor cou'd she in honour act less; when brave Emilius set the great Example. The Arrival of the Cordelier , with the Letter of Bileront , surpriz'd her extreamly; and for the time desir'd, she remain'd in wondrous Expectation; framing many Conjectures wide of the matter. Prince Emilius and Bileront reacht the Court, just as the old Duke had been in another swooning Fit. Emilius went directly to the Dutchess; who almost Distracted with her Unexpressible Sorrow, beheld him as a Vision. After the Dutchess had chid him for his Disobedience; she, in Mourning Terms of real Concern, related the Misfortune and Danger his Father lay under; adding, that he had been, that Day, so earnest to see him; that they were forc'd to own his Absence. Which News the Duke receiv'd with less Passion than was expected. The next Interval, when his fainting Spirits were a little retriev'd, Emilius enter'd his Chamber, and going towards the Bed, he kneel'd. Silence and a sadness unfeign'd stampt his Face, with humble Duty; and pleaded more in his Excuse, than if he had offer'd at extenuating words. The Duke beheld him, but with no signs of Rage, and with a weak Voice, said, ' Emilius , I know my past Severity, rough Usage, and my positive Commands, thy tender Nature cou'd not kindly brook. Believe me, Son, 'twas well meant; I wou'd have form'd thee, Youth, a perfect Souldier; but thy Mother's softness hangs about thy Soul; and she hath stampt thee all a Lover. And since I'm going to the Land of Peace; I will not ruffle the Calmness I've so late obtain'd, in strugling with Desires violent as yours. With my Blessing Possess the Mistress, you with such an Eagerness have Lov'd; and do not hate the Memory of your Departing Father, who only for your Interest, oppos'd this Passion: too great, it seems, to be remov'd. Oh! Heavens! (cries the poor Prince, o'ercome with Filial Sorrow) must I ne'er aim at Joys sincere! Live, my dear Father, live; though to continue Cruel, divided ever from my Unhappy Fair, I fancy I cou'd bear it now! No more, no more, (the Duke stops him) on this Theme! Come nearer, receive and remember the last Instructions of thy Dying Father.' The Prince, being seated by him, he gave him such Politick Rules, as he, by long Practice had found most useful; the constant observing of which, has inlarg'd his Dominions, and augmented his Power. That Night the Duke Expir'd, Emilius was immediately Proclaim'd, according to his Right, Successor. The Young Duke manag'd his Affairs with a most uncommon Prudence; being Affectionately Dutiful to his Weeping Mother; and obliging all whom his Father had lov'd, and favour'd. Lovisa was, by his Order, acquainted with all these Particulars; yet so fearful was he of committing any undecency, that he deny'd himself the satisfaction of seeing her, for three Months. The delight of reciprocal Love, being the highest Abstract of Joy, he justly judg'd it improper to possess at a time, which in Duty, he ought to dedicate wholly to Affliction. All the Court look'd on Lovisa , as a Person ordain'd for their Dutchess; and already gave her a profound Respect. Don Alvarez , who lov'd her entirely, was so pleas'd with her Exalted Fortune, that he settl'd all his Lands and Lordships on her, after his Decease. This render'd it Policy as well as Pleasure, for the Duke to Espouse her; the Estate being too Opulent for a Subject, without danger, to injoy. The Dutchess Dowager prevails with Lovisa to return to Court, and the time of strict Mourning being over Emilius constantly Visits her; his Love, if possible, still seeming to Increase. At length, the Nuptials are concluded; and with great Solemnity perform'd. Billeront deservedly remaining his dearest endless Favourite. I think, I safely may affirm (added Francisco ) Prince Emilius a happy Man. His publick Affairs are Prosperous, his Beauteous Dutchess Fruitful in Issue, as well as Charms; indearingly kind to him; and naturally good to all. Whatever progress he undertakes, she, by his desire, still accompany's him, except to the Camp; where he hath done wonders, since his Accession to the Throne. Demonstrating that a perfect Lover may be a compleat Souldier. Thus ends Francisco ; By the Commands of your Highness (bowing to Olympia: ) I have, to the utmost of my knowledge, discover'd each particular relating to the Loves of that Incomparable Pair. The Ladies were liberal in their thanks to Francisco ; and infinitely pleas'd with the Narration; especially Melora ; her Sentiments were Delicate; and by a Sympathetic Power, the Misfortunes or Blessings of others sensibly mov'd her Passions. This the Cardinal observes, and improves by a thousand new Protestations of everlasting Fidelity. Melora was so full of the foregoing History, she did not seem to listen much to the Cardinal's Complements. Olympia took notice of it, and said 'My Dear, you are mightily delighted with Lovisa ; but I don't perceive you intend to follow her Example: She did not maintain her rigour half so long. True (added Barberino) Emilius , in all his Sufferings, had the rich Cordial of Lovisa's Love for his support; but I pay all my Vows to an obdurate Rock; to a fair Marble Statue; Deaf to my Prayers, and with my Sighs unmov'd. I thought reply'd Melora , (Blushing and looking on Olympia ) my Royal Governess wou'd have chid me, as discovering my Weakness too far: and I assure you, my Lord (went she on smiling) you cannot oblige me more than in comparing me to Rocks and Marbles, and such impenetrable stuff: for I have a great vanity to be thought Inexorable.' Melora deliver'd this with an unusual chearful air; infinitely charming the amorous Priest. He snatcht her lovely Hand, and moulding it with burning Kisses, cry'd passionately, this warm softness is, I'm sure, no Kin to Marble. Unavoidable Business call'd Olympia next Day to the Court of Rome . For this Politick Niece of the Pope's was as busy in the Ecclesiastical Affairs, as any Favourite Nephew, before, or since. Most part of the last Night at the Villa , they spent in woing Melora , that the next Journey to this convenient Solitude shou'd complete the Happyness of the pretended Prince Alphonsus . Reiterated Prayers prevail'd; and that Fair Sacrifice, by her sweet blushing silence, gives consent. Transported with their Fatal Success, they all return to Rome ; the Ladies by themselves, and the Cardinal another way. Fate, as if not fully resolv'd to destroy such Perfection and Innocence as sweet Melora's , made offers at a Discovery; offers only they prov'd, and the black contrivance went on. The first Prospect of undeceiving her, was Francisco's falling in love with her. His being privy to the Design, gave him often Opportunities of her Conversation. And you may as well suppose it easy to dwell in Flames and not be scorch'd; as to be often near Melora , hear her talk, and view her Charms, yet feel no warmth. Stifl'd Fire can never be long conceal'd; much less the Hottest Flame, Smother'd Love . Cunning Olympia catcht his unwary Eyes Rivetted to her fair Face; observ'd his frequent Sighs, his Tremblings, and his change of Colour, when she talk'd to him, or he, by accident, was near. This in the first beginnings of his Love, Olympia informs the Cardinal. He consider'd it as dangerous, and being sending dispatches into Spain , makes him the Chief Commissioner, and hurries him away; giving him no opportunity again to see Melora . Francisco guess'd the Cause of this new Employ, and was upon the rack. He knew shou'd he disobey, or give Melora caution of her approaching Ruine; if there were Daggers or Poysons to be bought in Rome , his Life must satisfy the revengeful Cardinal. Then, he justly thought Melora's hate would fall on him, as well as all the rest of her Deceivers. He vainly hop'd, diversity of bus'ness wou'd efface her Charming Image from his Breast. He knew his Fortunes destroy'd for ever, shou'd he forsake a Prince Cardinal, whose Power was so vast to raise him. Yet against these, gentle Compassion, increas'd by Love, pleaded strongly; and always whisper'd him to save such Matchless Innocence. But e'er he had determin'd, the Impatient Cardinal forces him on Board. When Melora ask'd for him, Barberino told her he was gone to Modena , by his Order. Olympia now began to press her earnestly, for this design'd Journey to the Villa. Melora knew what they expected from her there; and her Virgin Fears representing Marriage, without her Father's Knowledge, terrible still, caus'd her to put it off, delaying with many excuses. Olympia had procur'd a Priest, she having a hundred of them at her service; Preferment lying so greatly in her Power. The Priest knew not the bottom of the design; was only told it was two Friends of Donna Olympia's , who desir'd to be Marry'd privately. Whilst things remain'd thus, with no other stop, but Melora's delays; she happen'd, passing through her Father's Hall, to drop a Letter of the Cardinal's; which her Father, following her, took up, and read these words.  Divine Princess, Each moment, that I see you not, seems to drag a heavy Chain. To live another Day and Night without you, wou'd be a Torment wholly Insupportable. When I see you next, to read a little Anger in your lovely Eyes, for my long stay, will please me more than the smiles of Empresses. So much is every word and look priz'd by the Humblest of your Servants.  The Embassadour strait calls for his Daughter, and showing the Paper in his Hand, ask'd her from whom that Piece of Gallantry came? It is observable that Women are so ingenious and quick at nothing, as the Affairs of Love. And the most ignorant and illiterate, commonly have cunning enough to manage an Intrigue. I believe, the Reason is, Love being the most agreeable Passion of their Minds, employs every Faculty of their Soul readily; no wonder then Melora was so quick at an excuse. For she, without any hesitation, answers her Father, it was a Letter of her own composing, and design'd for Olympia . He suddenly returns upon her, but how comes it then in a Man's hand? I have it always drawn over by one of her Pages (replies Melora , without any visible discomposure) to divert her the more. Though this sounded a little strangely, yet so unblemish'd was the Carriage and Conversation of this Young Lady, that her Father gave her back the Letter, without the least mistrust. Glad was Melora thus easily to recover it, and going to Olympia acquaints her with the story. Who, thereupon presses her again for the Marriage; assuring her that the Duke's Bus'ness went on successfully; and that she wou'd quickly be Proclaim'd Dutchess of Ferrara and Modena ; will you then (adds she earnestly) neglect the opportunity of this proffer'd Glory; and by backwardness delay time, till some sinister accident occur, that may frustrate all our designs? These Arguments, deliver'd by so faithful a Friend, as Melora took Olympia to be; mov'd her to yield. This joyful News is communicated to the Cardinal, who came that Night, and expresses his transports by a thousand Extravagancies of Fondness. Now the third Journey is made to the Villa , where these Unhappy Nuptials are Celebrated; at which Hymen ought to have hid his Face; and only Portentous Omens appear'd. Melora's Genius still whispers she has done ill; which foreboding Thoughts take from her Eyes their chearful Lustre. Innumerable were their Prayers before they cou'd obtain a full Consummation: at length powerful importunity overcomes; and the Cardinal has sacrific'd to his Lust Nature's Master-piece. Who, if her Fate had equall'd her Beauty, and other rare Indowments, might justly have expected in reality, as much Greatness, as Olympia only flatter'd her with. Six Months this Insatiate Priest Revels on that Luxurious Banquet, Blooming Youth, and yielding Beauty. By which time his fierce desires begin to cool in that certain Cure for Love full Enjoyment. Then he, with vexation reflects on the almost unaccountable sums, this short-liv'd Pleasure hath cost him; besides Melora's Pregnancy; which, spight of their utmost indeavours, wou'd, in a short time, appear; adds infinitely to his Terrors. These Thoughts take from his Conversation that Vivacity and Livelyness which before made it pleasing. Melora quickly perceives this alteration; and sensibly resents it. Her demeanour was replete with Duty and Love; nor can she but with inexpressible regret, indure this cold return. He excuses it with the crossness of his Affairs; which Melora in part believes: for by the publick Discourse at her Father's, she understands the real Duke of Modena was near a Rupture, with the Pope; and that a War was like to follow. She represents this to Olympia ; who puts her off with fair words only. Whilst these unhappy things were Acted in and near Rome , the foremention'd Francisco , whose Soul was agitated with a hundred different Resolutions, arrives in Spain . But neither the Sea, nor distant Climates, can Efface Melora from his Memory. Slight Wounds, Absence and Time may heal, but this Charming Beauty gives no such; and his pains augment. Then he Curses his Cowardise, and calls himself a thousand Villains, for leaving the Lady expos'd; first to the Lust, and then the Cruelty of the Cardinal. For he knew Antonio's Temper too well, to doubt Barbarity would follow his satiated Love. These Apprehensions distract him to that degree, that he resolves to leave unfinish'd all his Bus'ness, and return disguis'd to Rome ; and rescue, if possible, the Guiltless Maid from the Jaws of Ruine. Pursuant to this design, he immediately goes on Board; but is unfortunately, by contrary Winds, kept on the Seas, till the time is Elaps'd for his doing any service to Melora . At length, he lands, comes to Rome in the Habit of a Pilgrim; discolouring his Face to that degree, that 'twas impossible any Body shou'd know him. He rejoices in his safe Arrival at Rome ; and vainly hopes, something hath hitherto disappointed the Cardinal's Consummating his Wishes. Then Love presents him, with the false flattering Joy (it being natural for that Passion to deceive us:) that he, saving Melora from the dire Fate that hung over her; she might, in recompense give him leave to own his Flame. Not then considering, that, when Melora was convinc'd of the Treachery design'd against her, she must needs detest every Instrument of the Treason. Now the difficulty that remain'd, was the getting an Opportunity to speak with Melora , she being perpetually almost at Olympia's , where he not daring to venture, was in a great Perplexity. He lurks in the Evening near Olympia's House; discovers the Cardinal go in, by an usual door of the Garden, and resolv'd to watch his return; but was amaz'd to find it not till the Morning's approach. Then his fears began to inform him, all help was past; however delays must certainly make it so. Therefore he designs the next time Olympia went to the Pope's Palace, to ask boldly for Melora , and trust to his Disguise. But he was prevented in this, by seeing Melora take Coach in the Afternoon, accompany'd only by Olympia's Woman; and inquiring whither the Coach was going, he was inform'd to Olympia's Villa . He immediately follows them; and the next day, with a Key he had preserv'd, got into the Garden; hoping he might find Melora there; if he did not, he knew his Habit would protect him from Violence, shou'd any of the Family see him. But here his Wishes were answer'd; for e'er he had searcht far, he beheld that sweet Lady lying on a Bed of Grass, near a Fountain, whose murmurs joining with her own Sorrows, had lull'd her into a slumber. For sorrowful he perceiv'd she had been, by the rich dew which wet her Handkerchief, and yet hung upon her fair Cheeks. He cou'd scarce view this Mourning Fair, without joining in the Womanish Grief. After he had gaz'd, and sigh'd, and talkt things, sad as despair cou'd utter; he spies her Table-Book open; where something seem'd to have been just written. Taking it up, finds these lines.  Happy's the Nymph born in a homely Seat, Nor knows the troubles of the rich and great. Wrapt in th' Embraces of her faithful Swain, Feels still new Joys with no allay of pain. Ambition ne'er disturbs their gentle Love, Nor Cares, nor Fears, their harmless Mirth remove. In Huts as humble as their Minds they lye, And lofty Roofs despise that reach the Sky. To these alone does Heaven true Joys dispence, And with content rewards their Innocence. Content a Jewel that is seldom known To bless or beautify a Regal Crown. Ah! How have my unwary Footsteps straid, While noise and glory my soft hours betray'd. My purchas'd Pomp my Happyness has cost, So in pursuit of Toys the Gem is lost. Alas! Unhappy Beauty, said he, with a sigh; (as he had done reading) if thou art already sad, how wilt thou mourn with endless Wailings, when the bottom of thy Fate is known! all the woful truth discover'd. This, Francisco , Transported with his Passion, spoke so loud, that he wak'd the sleeping Fair; who seeing a Man so near her, starts up and cry'd, who art thou, that thus rudely pressest on my solitude, and disturb'st my quiet Moments? A Wretch (he answer'd, putting one Knee to the ground) that's born to Curse himself; nay worse, one whom you are bound to Curse, with direst Imprecations pursue, nor ever mention, but when an Invective of the bitter sort must follow. Sure (replies Melora calmly) you take me for some other Person, since I dare boldly say, my Conscience, my Soul's faithful Register, does not accuse me with so much Injustice, as ever to have an Inclination to Curse a Stranger, much less one who bears the Religious Show; which I, in all Persons, venerate. Is this Voice wholly a Stranger to you (he return'd passionately.) Oh that it were; or that the Name of Francisco had been blotted with Eternal Oblivion, rather than have reacht the Ears of the Ador'd Melora! Or that an avenging Bolt had struck me to the Center, before I had been made the detested Instrument of deceiving you! Why do you perplex me thus with Riddles, (says Melora ; the Blood beginning to forsake her Cheeks) if you are Francisco , my Lord's Chief Favourite, whom he sent to Modena: what means this Habit? And why this strange Address? Your Lord (answers this feign'd Pilgrim hastily)---then all my fears are true; and you must prepare to hear a story, at which my Bleeding Heart sinks down, and my faultring Tongue almost denies me power to relate. What does Alphonsus then design to abandon me? (interrupts the fearful Creature, falling upon a Bank, her trembling Knees not being able to support her:) has he cruelly resolv'd (went she on, all in Tears) to deny his Marriage, and expose me, and his Off-spring to endless Infamy? Oh! haste! Deliver me from these Fears; or see me dead! And is (said she, before he cou'd speak) Olympia join'd with him, in my undoing? Why do you not answer me, and ease my Throbbing Heart? If the Duke and she are both false to Love, and Sacred Friendship, pronounce my Doom, at once; let me not linger long in Torments. Since Providence has Ordain'd you so unkind a Fate (replies Francisco ) take to you, Madam, the resolution, your Innocence affords: Let your Injuries disrobe your Soul of Tenderness: Arm your self with a noble scorn; and make your just Resentments overcome your Sorrows. Oh! Do not pause (cries that weeping Fair) go on; though it give me Death. Heaven is my Witness (says he, still delaying) I wou'd not undeceive you, so sad's the task, did not I fear a farther Mischief. But, to prevent that, know, Madam, your Husband is not Alphonsus , nor Duke of Modena ; but Antonio Barbarino , the Pope's Nephew. He assumes most unjustly, the Title of Cardinal Patron; when in reality he is a Destroyer of his Country, and an utter Enemy to all Goodness. As Francisco was about to proceed, he perceiv'd a deadly paleness to o'erspread Melora's Beauties; and after some Efforts of strugling Nature, she fell into a Swoon. Never any perplexity equall'd this poor Lover's; he was unwilling to call any of the House to her assistance, because he had not finish'd his Discovery; nor given her a Caution of Barbarino's Cruelty. He runs to the Fountain, sprinkles some of it's Waters on her Face, bows her Body gently forwards; at last she revives. Casting her lovely Eyes, o'erwhelm'd with Sorrows, upon him, she said with a Sigh: 'Ah! Cruel Man! why have you brought me back to this detested Light; which, I must never more view with Chearfulness! Yet, how know I (adds she, recollecting her self:) but you may be an Impostor, and forge this Story, to abuse my Friend, and Lord. On that condition I wou'd part with my right hand replies this guilty Informer: No, Madam; what I averr, is too sad a Truth: Antonio is the Man: I can bring you, where you shall see him in his Scarlet Robes going to the Consistory. Behold here (went he on, pulling Papers out of his Pocket) Dispatches written with his own hand; which, I believe you know. Melora cou'd not but own she did; having receiv'd a hundred Billets-Doux's, in the same Character. Fly then Madam, (proceeds Francisco ) from this most abhor'd of Men, and Basest of Women, whose degenerate Souls cou'd Betray such Matchless Virtue, to Unparallel'd Ruine. I am certain their wicked designs will not end thus. For when the Cardinal who knows not to put a true Estimate on Beauty, has satiated his Luxurious Appetite: your Death (Ah dismal Thought! cries he, in a Tone wholly Passionate) your Death will follow: I have heard them so resolve. Whither shall I fly (replies the Disconsolate Lady) with this Guilty Load! Not to my Incens'd Father; he will upbraid me with my Disobedience, and say, my Punishment is a just Reward for my crime. Oh! Heavens! (say'd she) may I not murmur, may I not Complain: that these Probations are too severe for my Frailer Sex to bear! Consider, Madam, (replies the truly Afflicted Francisco ) Parents are Indulgent; and when he shall hear the Truth; which I will also, with my Life attest; your Innocency, and Nature pleading in your behalf; will force him to receive you with Paternal Tenderness: Therefore hasten from this Dissolute Priest; whose many Lusts and Impieties to relate, wou'd die your cheeks in a modest Crimson: La Cecca Buffona was once his Mistress, and Glory'd in her shame. Then to a Courtesan, who dwelt in the Julian-street , he gave, to satisfy his Lust but once, a Thousand Crowns: not to mention the more than Brutal Passion he hath oft had for his own Sex.' 'My Soul sickens at these Black Relations; (say'd Melora ) and Unborn Innocence Dy's in my Womb.' As she was speaking; a Page enters the Garden, and tells her Donna Olimpia was just Arriv'd; at which Melora , composing her self as much as possibly she cou'd, prepares to go and receive her. But first she desires Francisco to make her Father's House his Sanctuary; and tells him she will Escape thither, if by none of their stratagems prevented, the next Day; adding, that till she came, he shou'd not mention any thing of these Unhappy Circumstances. 'I will, in every particular, obey you, (answers that Dejected Man) but e'er I go, I wou'd, on my Knees, implore what will, in you, be an Act of Mercy, almost above a Mortal; and bring to my despairing Soul, the only Balsam, that can heal it's rancorous Wounds, and deter my Desperate Hand, from Committing on my Body the Violence, my Guilty Thoughts suggest: I mean, Forgiveness. Madam, if from your fair Mouth I hear my Pardon Seal'd, I shall embolden'd grow, and look towards Heaven for Mercy; else, I must sink to the dismal Grave, cover'd o'er with trembling horror, and never hope with Joy to rise.' 'Bear Witness Heaven (replies that lovely Creature; her intermingling Tears almost hindering her Speech) I forgive you, and may that boundless store, from whence Eternal Mercy flows, forgive you too! Yet give me leave, Francisco to add, it was unkind, mighty unkind, thus to betray a harmless Maid; who never so much as in thought harbour'd a wrong to you. 'Twas Barbarous; ---'twas something worse than I can give a name to (replies her Idolater, almost- raving).' Melora interrupts him, and Commands him to rise, and fly to his intended refuge: saying, she knew Olympia wou'd immediately be there. He obeys, and departs with the saddest aspect in the World. Assoon as Olympia had convers'd with Melora , she discover'd the pressure upon her Spirits; and plainly saw she put a great constraint upon her self, to appear chearful. At first Olympia imputed it only to the Cardinal's Absence, and told her, in a gay strain, she must not be so fond; but however to satisfy her longing, the Duke would be there that Night. Will he, Madam, (Answers the other, with an Air of scorn) and when shall we injoy this glorious Splendor, my dazl'd Eyes have but in Fancy seen? Methinks I wish my Lord wou'd quit his pretensions to Ferrara , and be content with Modena ; that will satisfy my Ambition. Melora deliver'd this in a tone so different from that she us'd to discourse of his Affairs in, that the cunning Olympia fixing her Eyes upon her, immediately guess'd, she had some Information of the Deceit; and making her a slight Answer, goes to inquire who had been there; and understands by the Page that went into the Garden, a Pilgrim was seen talking with her. Whilst she was busy'd in this Examination, her Woman brings her word the Cardinal was in her Closet, and desir'd to speak with her before he saw Melora. Olympia flies to him, but e'er she cou'd deliver her News, Barbarino greets her with this: 'Madam (says he) I have this day had Intelligence from Spain , that Francisco has quitted the Negotiation, I imploy'd him in there, in a disguise.' Nay then the Riddle's Explain'd, replies Olympia , and relates all the foregoing Passages. Upon this, they both agree to send a couple of Trusty Servants in search of this Feign'd Pilgrim; who should seize him, and lay him fast; rightly conjecturing his design was to publish their Crime. These Fellows o'ertake the wretched Man, before he was got half way to Rome ; his Afflictions hindering his swift travelling: They straight bind, gag, and hall him back to Olympia's ; where he is committed close Prisoner to a remote Chamber. Now these two wicked ones, the Cardinal and Olympia , begin to consult farther, and take Melora into their Consideration. After a thousand Arguments and Reasons urg'd backwards and forwards, her doom is seal'd. Thus this Lovely Rose, the wonderful excess of extravagant Nature, whose blooming sweetness wou'd have given years of Rapture, to an honest, honourable Husband: is now , by the very Possessor, Condemn'd to Fade, and wither in the Thoughtless Dust. Nor cou'd her Pregnancy, even by him (which wou'd have made Barbarians to have Melted;) move this Inhuman Cardinal. No; his Reputation is concern'd, and she must dy. That ensuing Night accordingly Olympia deliver'd to this most Cruel Man a Powder, whose fatal Power wou'd, in Twelve hours time, certainly dissolve that well appointed Union of the Soul and Body. At Supper they conclude to give it her in a Glass of Wine and Water; they three always eating in Olympia's Closet, without Attendance, except Beatrice , because the pretended Duke was not to be seen by the Servants. Full of these Hellish Resolutions Olympia goes to seek the intended Victim; finds her in her Closet devoutly kneeling, directing her Pious Prayers to a place, where Persons guilty of Olympia's Crimes, must never enter. A sight, one wou'd have thought, shou'd have struck that Barbarous Woman with remorse. But she, unmov'd, proceeds, and with a seeming chearfulness, asks Melora to go with her to the Duke. This disconsolate Lady's Face was deckt in Sorrow's chiefest Robes; yet, through all that Clouded Sadness, such a World of Beauty shone, as wou'd have turn'd a Tyrant's Rage; disarm'd the Fury of Irrational Creatures; and preserv'd her in the very Paws of Lyons. But the Bloody Barbarino views her with relentless Eyes; and with his own hand presents her the poisonous Draught, which the trembling Lady drinks: For every thing she fear'd; yet hop'd they were ignorant of her Information. Now, the Plot for the Cardinal's removal to Rome must be Executed. To that end Olympia's Woman brings her a Pacquet, saying a Gentleman, in great haste, had just brought it. In this Pacquet, there is a Letter directed to the Duke of Modena ; which he reads with show of great concern, and tells the Ladies he must needs leave them instantly, and post back to Rome . Poor Melora inwardly rejoices at his design; having resolv'd to deny him her Bed, which she fear'd might betray her knowledge of their Treachery. He takes his leave with seeming Reluctancy, and returns to Rome , jocund that his Lust is satisfy'd, and his Crime like to remain undiscover'd. Melora retires to her Chamber betimes; designing to make her Escape early the next Morning; and then thinking her self out of danger, she resolves to leave a Letter, that shall accuse Olympia of that perfidious dealing she hath us'd towards her. She writes the following Letter, and lays it upon her Table in the Closet; and intends to leave, the next day, the Key in the Door.  shall have escaped your Power. Think then, Madam, how the judging World, when they know my Wrongs, and hear my Story, will Condemn you of Unexampl'd Perfidy, that you must for ever hide your guilty head; lest, as you pass, the Virgins Curses catch you, and bring down swift Destruction. You have betray'd the most trusting Maid Breathing: one, who wou'd willingly have laid down that Life you so unkindly pursue, for your service; and for that Lustful Satyr, whose Crimes no Age can parallel. Tell him, when I appear, his conscious Cheeks shall outvy his Scarlet. But if that unauspicious Fate, which has led me to this heavy Misfortune, shou'd still continue its Malignity; and let your Crimes Center in my Death: know, I can meet that with undaunted Bravery; being assur'd at the last day, I shall appear incompass'd with Myriads of glorious Spirits; whilst I behold you, and your black Accomplice, rouling beneath in Sulphurous Flames; howling out dire Lamentations, for the Cruelties practis'd on the most Injur'd Melora.  That next Morning Olympia goes into her Chamber, and finds the young Creature, according to her wish, dead; she makes a dismal Outcry; and having drawn all the House about her, Counterfeits Sorrows almost to a Frenzy. The Marquess of Cour , her Father, is immediately sent for; to whom she continues her Grief at such an immoderate rate, that he is forc'd to neglect his own Sorrows, and turn Comforter. Soon after is Melora's private Interment; where the poor Embassador left all his Joys; Mourning to that Excess, as wou'd have mov'd a heart of stone. She being his only Daughter, and a Person of that Beauty and Parts, I must leave Indulgent Fathers to judge the Sorrows I cannot describe. Now the Cardinal's next Business is to dispose of Francisco , which he does to the Galleys; where he may tell his despair, and prate of Barbarino's Cruelty, to the Winds and Seas for they assoon will hear him, as his Robust Companions. The unusual Toils, and the intolerable Bastinado's which the Cardinal orders to be given him, quickly end his days. Yet these dark Practises are doom'd to be brought to light, and that by one of the Actors, Olympia's Woman Beatrice ; who taking some deep disgust, flies to the Embassador, and relates to that Disconsolate Father, each particular of this sad story. The unhappy Marquess then remembers a hundred circumstances, that convince him of the dismal Truth. He immediately Petitions the Pope, lays open plainly the Fact, brings the Maid to attest it; but all in vain. Antonio and Olympia are Persons too Great, for him to obtain Justice against, in the Court of Rome . So that he is forc'd to leave the last mention'd to the Terrors of her own Conscience for her Punishment, and enter himself a Souldier in the Duke of Parma's Army; who then made War against the House of the Barbarino's ; to be reveng'd of the first. But Heaven's Vengeance slept not long; the Succeeding Pope Banishing Olympia to Orvieto , a City Twenty Leagues from Rome ; where she dy'd miserably of the Plague, abandon'd even by her own Domesticks; and the Cardinal soon after, loaded with Diseases, and Infamy, sunk to the Grave; by all unpity'd. Thus, Ladies, you are brought to the deplorable end of the Beauteous Melora . And as her Misfortunes must raise Compassion in the tender Bosoms of the Young and Fair; so they may stand a lasting Caution to beware the Insinuations of the designing part of your own Sex; who having themselves lost that inestimable and never to be recover'd Jewel, Reputation: endeavour to destroy Blooming Innocence. Beauty, as we may call it, is but the Paint of Nature; which, though it outlast the Lilly and the Rose; yet, sure as they, must Fade: whilst a Fragrant Fame never dies. Melora cannot justly be taxed with any Miscarriage, but venturing to Act weighty things, without her Father's Knowledge.
