 Now high Augusta , now Britannia rung With Lyric Numbers, and Heroic Song. Adulter Bards rehears'd their noble. Thoughts, And Infant Poets lisp'd their tender Notes. Harmonious Striplings, by an early Bloom, Promis'd ripe Numbers, and Great Men to come: They all their Stores of Wit and Language drain'd; They rais'd their Voices, and their Sinews strain'd. Lavish of Force, and at a vast Expence Of noble Fire, and tuneful Eloquence, The British Poets labour'd to display The Martial Toil of Blenheim 's wond'rous Day. A Day, which fatal Albions Isle regards To Gallic Warriors, and to British Bards: Those by contending Marlbro' to repel, And these, by singing his Atchievements, fell. For Blenheim was a Theme too bright, too strong For any Rapture, any master Song. In this Attempt, they did their Stock exhaust, They spent their Genius, and their Vigor lost. Say, ye uncautious Sons of Eloquence, Wastful of Wit, and prodigal of Sense, Could you believe the British Hero's Sword. Would no more Triumphs, no more Themes afford That here the Chief's victorious Course would cease That you and Gallia might indulge your Ease? This Judgment had been right, had Marlbro fought For Martial Fame and only Laurels sought. For one brave Toil, like that of Blenheim 's Field, To which the twelve Herculean Labours yield, Consummmate Vertue to the World displays, We own the Hero, and we sing his Praise. Had therefore low Designs, had Wealth and Fame, Had mean Ambition kindled Marlbro 's Flame, Had he, as vulgar Warriors do with Care And Caution, play'd the doubtful Game of War; After the wond'rous Deeds at Blenheim done, Where all, that Thirst of Glory seeks, was won, The Hero had resign'd his high Command, And rose from Combat with a winning Hand. He had retir'd with noble Laurels crown'd, Had a delightful Seat on Isis found; There liv'd from publick Labour free, and far From Fields of Slaughter, and rude Shocks of War But 'tis his Country's, 'tis Europa 's Cause, That to the Field the mighty Briton draws. Divine Compassion to oppress'd Mankind, Like that which dwells in Annas gen'rous Mind, To lead Her Armies forth, the Hero's Heart inclin'd, Fair Liberty and Right, and ancient Laws, And Annas , which is Human Nature's Cause, Invite the Chief, his Labours to repeat, Europa , thy Redemption to compleat. He yields; he undertakes the Pious Toil; Laden with Trophies, and with Gallic Spoil, With Laurels sprung from Danaws Banks adorn'd, His rapid Course of Glory back he turn'd. Blessd by the numerous States to Peace restor'd, And Princes rescu'd by his conquering Sword, The Great Delivrer marches to the Rhine, To break his Chains, and drive encroaching Sein. Tis done. The Sein 's ambitious Waves subside, Reluctant roar, and backward roll their Tyde. Oh! had not Envy, had not Discord reign'd, And the swift Progress of his Arms restrain'd, The next Campaign had equal Wonders shown, And Laurels giv'n, like those at Blenheim won. But then the next did on the Chief come Vict'ries post-pond and Glory's full Arrear. The Solar Orb did from the South retreat, And thro' the Air diffuse reviving Heat; Solace the Soil, exhilerate the Swain, And Nature loose from Winter's Crystal Chain; When the Great Chief, so Anna gave Command, Return'd to cheer Batavia 's joyful Land. Dreadful in Arms he marchd to Brabants Coast, And Terror struck thro Gallias shuddring Host; Whose Numbers o'er the Ground, like Locusts, spread; Each Herb devour'd, and crop'd each verdant He do. The Veteran Troops, inurd to Blood, advance, The Plague of Europe , and the Pride of France. The Squadrons reach'd thy frighted Fords, Mehaigne, And cover'd all Ramillia 's spacious Plain. Here their Brigades, in Battel rang'd appear Determind to sustain th' advancing War. The Briton saw. Transported with the Sight, And bravely eager of decisive Fight, March'd swiftly on, but march'd in Pain and Fear, Left Gallia should decline the proffer'd VVar. Should, to elude his threatning Arms, retreat, Their only way the Hero to defeat. He drew, he brandish'd his victorious Sword, Blenheim , remember Blenheim was the Word, That magic Sound the Cohorts did inspire, Their Courage rous'd, and set their Veins on Fire. With Blenheim , ring the Hills and Vales around, Lovania 's trembling Towers reverberate the Sound. Unguided Muse, say, whither dost thou stray, In Manlbro 's rapid Vortex caught away, In the bright Eddy lost, and blind with too much Day Stop thy ambitious Flight, with Rev'rence yield Thy Strength unequal to Ramillia 's Field. For thee the Theme is too sublime and bright, Thou art not wing'd to rise to such a Height, No Eigle-Ey'd, to bear, this Blaze, this Stress of Light. Can'st thou to Heav'n, secure from sinking, rise, And soar with Strength amidst superior Skies? Can'st thou, supported with thy vig'rous Wing, To list'ning Orbs around Ramillia sing, And make the ecchoing Spheres with Marlbro 's Actions ring? Hast thou of noble Words a Stock Immense, Vast Stores of rich inestimable Sense, To furnish all the Pow'r and Pomp of Eloquence? Can'st thou warm Fancy, and cool Judgment show, Make Numbers charm, and Words like Colours glow? Then take the Lyre, and in a lofty Strain Sing Marlbro 's Triumph, sing Ramillia 's Plain. But wanting this, attempt not, muse, to sing; Weak is thy Voice, and weary is thy Wing. Thou art too poor to bear the vast Expence, The rich Profusion and Magnificence Fit to adorn a Subject so sublime; Prevent inglorious Fall, and do not climb. Proportion'd Strength, Invention, Numbers, Skill, All Things to thee are wanting, but a Will. Be then advis'd, and prudently forbear, For this Attempt more unprovided far, Than German Circles when engag'd in War. But since the Bards, whose Laurels spring and thrive By Marlbro 's, should to Marlbro' Tribute give: Should to remotest Realms, their Envoy Fame Dispatch, their Hero's Triumphs to proclaim. Since Cam and Ouze , which, from the Gauls Alarms, And thine, O Rome , preserv'd by Marlbro 's Arms, Do Peace enjoy, and gently murmuring flow, Should tell the World, what they to Marlbro' owe. And since superior in the Field, 'tis fit VVe should assert the Empire too of VVit, And make the haughty Gaul in both submit. To sing Ramillias Field, ye Bards, awake, The tuneful Lyre let none but Masters take. Ye mercenary Wits, who Rime for Bread, Ye unfledg'd Muses, this high Subject dread. Let not th' inferior Race, who can indite A pretty Prologue, or a Sonnet write; Tho' none so forward are, so bold as they, Make on this Theme an Impotent Essay. All who can raise a Shed, must not presume To frame a Palace, or erect a Dome. No more let Milton 's Imitator dare Torture our Language, to torment our Ear With Numbers harsher than the din of War. Let him no more his horrid Muse employ In uncouth Strains, pure English to destroy, And from its Ruins yell his hideous Joy. Away ye Triflers, who all Rule disdain, Who in Pindaric sing Philander 's Pain, And Camps and Arms, in Pastor Fido 's Strain. Hence, vain Pretenders to the Song sublime, Turners of Verse, and Finishers of Rime, Who think with Fame Immortal you are Crown'd, By flowing Numbers, and harmonious Sound: Who without Fire, and mindless of Design, Ply hard the Pump, and labour every Line, To make, like empty Clouds, your Diction shine. So many Masters of this tunesul Skill, With their melodious Songs the Kingdom fill, That to compleat Poetic Eloquence, Nothing is wanting, but Design, and Sense. Yet of the Few, who can with Judgment praise, And sing Great Actions in becoming Lays, Let none, betray'd by generous Thirst of Fame, Adventure singly on this Mighty Theme. Lest crush'd beneath th' unsufferable Weight, He curse th' ambitious Flame, that caus'd his Fate, And learn his Error in his Fall too late. Let many Master Bards their Force unite, And with Consederate Fire a Song Heroic write. The Muses richest Treasures let 'em drain, Lavish their Genius, and exhaust their Vein. Let'em this generous Resolution own, That they are pleas'd, and proud to be undone, While they adorn, with all the Muses Charms, Bright Anna 's Empire, and brave Marlbro 's Arms. Tho' any one unvulgar Bard might raise The Briton 's Triumphs in superior Lays, To my unfinish'd Songs, and crude Essays; Yet a distinguish'd, and consummate Piece, Excelling that of Mantua , that of Greece, A wond'rous, unexampled Epick Song, Where all is just, and beautiful, and strong, Worthy of Anna 's Arms, of Marlbros Fire, Does our best Bards united Strength require. The Poets, who assume this noble Theme, Must have their Hero's Fire, their Hero's Flegm. They must have Judgment to direct their Flight, Be never low, and never out of sight. Calm they must be, and yet with equal Grace, Enthusiastick in a proper place. Then Prior , for distinguish'd Lays renown'd, And Congreve with repeated Laurels crown'd, Harmonious Granville of superior Name, Stepny and Walsh , both of establish'd Fame, And in a tuneful Genius happy Hughes, Strike your concordant Lyre, and join your noble Muse. For this great Task, let all these Sons of Art, Their utmost Skill and Energy exert; Let each his Genius know, each take his proper Part. Let Summers , and let Montague preside, Correct their Labours, and their Progress guide! One is with all politer Science grac'd, Of Thought refin'd, and delicate of Taste. All to his Judgment, as decisive fly, By that just Standard all their Notions try; Like the fam'd Grecian 's chief Intelligence, He sits sublime, in the first Sphere of Sense: He rules the rest by his superior Force, Puts them in Motion, and directs their Course. And one, like Rome 's Immortal Angelo, Does rich and universal Genius show. This Master, this Poetic Architect, Can stately Domes and Palaces erect: The Painter too, and Sculptor in his Turn, He can the Building, which he rears, adorn. Let these sustain the chief Surveyors Care; By these directed can the Poets err? The Age in Taste, grown curious to a Vice; (O, that it were as delicate, as nice!) And all contending Parties will submit To such a Sovereign Court of Sense and Wit. Let those employ'd the Building to erect, Some Hero worthy of the Song elect, Whose conquering Arms in Albion 's Annals shine, And let the Action suit the Great Design. Ye Bards, let all the noble Scheme be wrought With Art, and Care, and deep deliberate Thought. Before the Basis of the Frame you lay, The famous Plans of Greece and Rome survey. The Iliad , and the Æ neid , well inspect, All that is Just, and Bright, and Great select: You know their Errors, those you will correct. With due Connexion let the Parts cohere, Lean on each other, and each other bear. Let Order, Rule, and Symetry proclaim The Artful Wonders of the happy Frame. Believe no Cost too great, but every where Let Plenty, Wealth, Magnificence appear. A Plan so firm, so beautiful contrive, As may the Critick mock, and Time survive. A nobler Subject will your Care employ, Than Latian Conquests, or the Wars of Troy. Let the stupendious, everlasting Pile, Worthy of Albion 's Arms, of Marlbro 's Toil, The Glory of Ramillia 's Field sustain, Longer than Woodstock 's Tow'rs can that of Blenheim 's Plain. Let those appointed to adorn the Song, Be bold with Care, with Delicacy strong. Let Mantuan Judgment, and Horatian Words, And all the noble Fire which Greece affords, With all the Beauties which in Spencer shine, To form their Diction's Dignity combine: Let all the Charms of Verse, and Strength of Sense, Let all the Pride and force of Eloquence, Let all the bold and beauteous Images, Which by their Master-Strokes amaze, and Please, The fairest Forms of all the airy Train, With which the brightest Fancy fills the Brain. Let Gilding, and Poetic Painting, grace The Roofs and Rooms of all the stately Case. Let Episodes , contriv'd with Art, surprize, Which from the Subject unconstrain'd arise: Like Walks and Gardens, charming to the Sight, And Pleasure-Houses, let'em give Delight. In your Machines you will no Gods employ, Who by the Poet listed fought at Troy. The Pagan Gods might grace a Pagan Scheme, But will they too adorn a Christian Theme? Can you Concern, or Admiration move, By introducing Pallas, Mars , or Jove ? No more than Indian Pa-Gods, Jove we fear, And Mars no more than Mahomet revere. Yet should you these employ to grace your Plan, You may the Indian please, or Musselman, The Christian , who reflects, you never can. When you the Briton 's Character pursue, Design Æ neas , and Achilles too, Else you but half the Hero set in View. Let him in Steel bright, as Achilles , shine; Give him his Godlike Port, and Arms Divine. So let his Mien, and Martial Charms surprize, Let such a Flame irradiate his Eyes. Make him to fight, Achilles like, advance, so let him wave his Sword, so grasp his trembling Lance. With such an Ardor, and intrepid Air, To Danger fly, and plunge himself in War. Make him augment the Dyle with hostile Blood, As the Greek Hero did Scamander 's Flood. Then Marlbro draw, for Poets too can paint, They never Lights, or Shades, or Colours want: Give us his Picture, when engag'd in Fight, Let him with glorious Slaughter smear'd, affright And please us too, with terrible Delight. But by this famous Greek 's, ye Poets know, The Briton 's Courage you imperfect show. Fierce is the Greek , and rugged as the Age, And too near Brutal is his Martial Rage. The Briton is courageous and serene, To the Angelic Warriors more akin. If you would Justice to the Hero do, In a true Light would you his Valour shew, Delineate Fury mixt with God-like Grace, And Indignation in a Seraph's Face. Describe the Leader of the Guards above, Tell how he charg'd, how he in Battel strove, How o'er the Plains of Heav'n he raging Satan drove. Then let the Hero's noble Mind be crown'd With all the Vertues in Æ neas found. Give him his pious Soul, his gen'rous Heart, Leave out his boastful, and ungallant Part, In Marlbro' none can these Defects assert. Did the good Trojan bear his aged Sire On his strong Shoulders from the raging Fire? Malbro' on his sustains a nobler Weight, His Kindred's, Country's, and Europa 's Fate. The Heads by me suggested to your Muse, And those, which you with more Success shall chuse, As Epic Laws demand, should be express'd In proper Types, and in Allusion dress'd. Thus you'll Mankind with greater Pleasure strike By side Advances, and by Views oblique. Tell how the Prince, who to retrieve his Fame From Boian Fields, to those of Belgia came, To make the Dola and Ramillia clear, The Danube 's Debt, and Blenheim 's vast Arrear, Eager of Conquest, to the Battel flies, Revenge and Fury flashing in his Eyes. As when a Panther has with gen'rous Pride, His Strength in Combate with the Lyon try'd, And quickly vanquish'd by superior Might, All maim'd and wounded, sav'd himself by Flight, If when grown whole, he meets the mighty Foe, His Hair erect, his raging Eye-balls glow: Fierce he extends his Paws, he threat'ning stands, And with revengeful Looks new War demands. He calls to mind, to animate his Flame, His painful Wounds, and his more painful Shame. The noble Beast once more his Fortune tries, The former to repair, to greater Ruin flies. The Boian so.---Ye Bards, forgive me, you Will of that Prince a nobler Image shew. Tell how the Gallic Gen'ral was distrest, What Grief, what vast Disturbance fill'd his Breast, When first he saw his plying Cohorts yield, And to th' advancing Briton quit the Field. Tell how amidst the trembling Troops he flies, With Tears and Fury mingled in his Eyes. How to prevent their Flight, and his Defeat, He some did menace, and did some intreat. How he exclaim'd aloud amidst the Host, Oh Gallia ! have thy Sons their Courage lost? By Gallia 's Safety, and your Monarch's Name, By your past Deeds, and Military Fame, Return.---Be for your Lives and Honour brave, Your King, your Country, and your Altars save. In vain. The Gauls , unable to sustain Unequal War, forsake the fatal Plain. Tell the Distraction, tell the dreadful Cry Of Gallia 's Troops, while from the Foe they fly. Describe their haughty Leader's Mein and Air, Forc'd by his Troops away, and in Despair Born with th' impetuous Tyde of refluent War. But first, to form this Image strong and true, In Raphael 's famous Piece Maxentius view, Whom such another Briton did pursue. Observe him plung'd in Tiber 's troubled Tyde, Remark his sullen Rage, and melancholly Pride; His vast Amazement, Anguish, Horror, Care, And Indignation finish'd by Despair. See how he frowns like a black Tempest driv'n By warring Winds thro' the blue Chace of Heav'n. Of Vill'roy in his Flight, this Picture give, In his wild Lcoks let all these Passions strive. Let Malbro' on his Rear conspicuous shine, Make him advance like Raphael's Constantine. Give him his Ardor, and Majestic Grace, Give all the Martial Beauties of his Face. Give him a noble, unaffected Mein, Sedate in Triumph, as in Fight serene. Give him the Conqueror's, and the Judge's Air, Oblig'd to punish, tho' inclin'd to spare. So the destroying Angels look'd, who came To cast on Sodom 's Tow'rs vindictive Flame. They with Reluctance did their Arms employ, With Pity touch'd, and backward to destroy. They would have spar'd, they would have mercy shown, Had not her Crimes to full Perfection grown, Extorted Wrath, and pull'd Destruction down. Since I the mighty Constantine have nam'd, Renown'd in Arms, for Moderation fam'd, A Christian Hero, and a Briton born, Why may not he, ye Bards, the Song adorn? Think, if he may not be your noble Theme, A proper Hero for your Epic Scheme. In this Illustrious Warrior, may not you Brave Malbro 's Praises with Success pursue, And of the Hero give an allegoric View? The Piety and Love to Human Kind, Which fill'd, Great Constantine , thy gen'rous Mind, Are the same Vertues we in Malbro' find. Did not thy States and subject Realms, O Rome, From Constantine 's Success expect their Doom? Like vast Events on Malbro 's Progress wait. Whose Sword, O Europe , will decide thy Fate. In this indeed the Heros diff'rent are, One gain'd an Empire by successful War. One greater Glory wins, who by his Sword Reduces Countries for their rightful Lord. In some fit Place, which you know best to chuse, Bring in a Stranger, who in Paris views The Place, in which the Gaul 's proud Statue stands, And Veneration from the Crowd demands. Let the disdainful Stranger point, and say, How swift, amazing Change! is thy Decay? The strong Foundations, which thy Pride sustain, Break with the Thunder of Ramillia 's Plain. The Tow'rs around thee tremble at th' Alarms Of Anna 's Anger, and her Gen'ral's Arms. The Briton 's blasting Flame thy Head invades, Thy Laurels wither, and thy Glory fades. This Place, this Scene of Pride must change its Name, No more the Place of vict'ry, but of Shame. See the resistless Briton does advance, Europe 's Deliv'rer, and the Scourge of France. He'll of its Honours strip thy haughty Head, And in the Dust thy ruin'd Glory tread. The States and Cities, which in Fetters bound, At thy triumphant Feet here lie around, Th' Immortal Foe of Tyrants shall release, Unchain thy Slaves, and give Europa Peace. He'll from its tow'ring Height thy Marble thrust, Pollute thy Pride, and spurn thee in the Dust. Thy Titles, and thy Trophies he'll deface, Thy Arrogance, thy Blasphemy erase. You the Narration will so well dispose, That all the Great Campaign it may enclose, Tell all the Wondersidone on Belgia 's Plain, The Countries conquer'd, and the Numbers slain In the short Compass of one circling Moon; Superior Orbs with greater Swiftness run. In a few Days such Actions are atchiev'd, As will with Pain hereafter be believ'd. One Month so full of Miracles, contains The mighty Deeds of many Great Campaigns. The Briton 's Course of Glory does out-shine Thy Progress, C aesar , and Adolphus , thine. So thick, so great the confluent Triumphs come, Confin'd and crowded in such narrow Room, That this bright Month redundant Fame bestows, And with a swelling Tyde of Glory overflows. If you in Hangings, or in Painting show, For that an Epic Song may fitly do, What Tow'rs, what Towns, what stately Cities yield, To crown the Labour of Ramillia 's Field: Let her high Gates Lovania open lay, Receive the Conqu'ror, and Protection pray. Then to Brussella let his Arms advance, Driving along the frighted Herds of France. Pour'd from the Gates of fair Brabantia 's Head, Of rescu'd Captives let a Deluge spread: Let them with wond'rous Joy the Briton meet, Bless their Deliv'rer, and embrace his Feet; Who has releas'd, by one amazing Stroke, Their feet from Gallia 's Chains, their Necks from Gallia 's Yoke. Describe him ent'ring high Brussella 's Gate, Midst loud Applauses, in triumphant State. Express his God-like unelated Air; Oh! who can conquer so? Who Conquest so can bear? Th' Illustrious Vertues, which in Malbro' shone, As once the Glory that did Moses Crown, Dazled the Crowd around, but were to him unknown. Let all the eager Belgians throng to see The Mighty Chief, who set their Nation free, The Fence of Europe 's Rights, the Prop of Liberty. Let Princes, Lords, and Counsellors of State, Augment the Pomp, and on the Triumph wait. Let 'em deliver to the Conqu'ror's Hand Their Keys, and all their Ensigns of Command. Shew all the Ways of fair Brabantia 's Soil With Trav'llers throng'd, and smoaking with their Toil: Great Prelates, Princes, Magistrates supream, High Soveraign States, and Lords of greatest Fame. Let some from high Mechlinia 's Tow'rs, and some Pour'd from the Gates of fam'd Antwerpia come. Be these from Bruges , those from spacious Ghent, From Oudenard some, and some from Lier sent. From every Region let a num'rous Train Fill ev'ry Road, and cover ev'ry Plain. Panting in Clouds of Dust, and bath'd in Sweat, Let 'em advance to fair Brussella 's Gate; There to the Conqu'ror humbly to submit, And throw themselves obedient at his Feet. Let 'em his Favour and his Aid implore, And to be safe, resign to him their Pow'r. Thus Malbro 's Arms excel ev'n C aesar 's Fame, Conqu'ring before he saw, before he came. You in your Plan will leave capacious Room For promis'd Triumphs, and great Deeds to come. What a luxuriant Harvest of Renown, What full ripe Glory will the Autumn crown, Since early Seeds so thick, so bright appear, That Fame a nobler Bloom did never wear, Nor pregnant Time Events of more Importance bear? While I so near, so long the Hero view, And Hints suggest to be improv'd by you, My fading Flame does in my Veins renew. I feel an inward Impulse not unknown, Urging your Muse, I have provok'd my own. Oh! did a Portion of the noble Fire, With which the Hero fought, my Breast inspire; I'd raise my Voice, and with a lofty Strain Would to Etherial Fields uplift Ramillia 's Plain. The Laurel I would win from Maro 's Brow, My happy Lays the Grecian 's should out do. The Trojan Chief should to the Briton yield, The Latian Triumphs to Ramillia 's Field. Scamander 's Flood should own superior Dyle, And Grecian Deeds submit to Malbro 's Toil. 'Tis done. I've compas'd my ambitious Aim, The Hero's Fire restores the Poet's Flame. The Inspiration comes, my Bosom glows, I strive with strong Enthusiastic Throws. Oh! I am all in Rapture, all on Fire, Give me, to ease the Muse's Pangs, the Lyre, How can a Muse, that Albion loves, forbear To sing the Wonders of the glorious War? I rise, O whither am I caught away? I mount, I must the tow'ring Muse obey; I cut the Space immense, and reach the Realms of Day. Where will the Flight, where will the Labour end? Thro' the steep Gulph I to the Stars ascend. Stars, which I now behold vast Orbs of Light, Only by Distance little to the Sight. All Suns of equal Bulk, and equal Flame With that, which rules the World from whence I came. All glorious Centers, whose attractive Sway Revolving Moons and wand'ring Worlds obey, Each is a Globe immense, each is a Source of Day. Amazing Prospect! ravishing Delight! How vastly great they are? How dazling bright? In beautious Order, how they hang around? Good Heav'ns!---but hark, I hear an ecchoing Sound, It does from Sphere to Sphere, from World to World The Noise augments; attend, it seems to rise rebound. From Belgia 's Land; hark, how it fills the Skies? This mighty Noise is Triumph, 'tis Applause, 'Tis loud Rejoycing for some Victor Cause. 'Tis known. I hear, I hear these Accents plain, Arms, Anna, Malbro', Dyle, Ramillia's Plain. But see, with radiant Wings, see, yonder flies One of th' Immortal Envoys of the Skies; From the Terrestrial World he seems to rise. How bright, how strong, how swift he wings his Way? How mild a Glory, what a circling Day Does the Coelestial Youth around display? Important Joy does his glad Looks possess, I follow, I attend the bright Express. With him I climb the steep Empyreal Height, Swift as an Angel's is the Muse's Flight. We now arrive at Heav'n's Eternal Gate, Where the Immortal Guards in Arms Immortal wait. Thronging about Heav'n's Courier, they demand, What happy Tydings from the Belgian Land. Of Albion 's Captain Guardian Seraph, say, What great Events, and what new Triumphs pay The noble Labour of Ramillia 's Day? That Chief, the shining Minister replies, Who on the Justice of his Cause relies, His prosp'rous Ensigns daily does advance, To sink the Pride, and break the Pow'r of France. The Conqu'ror all things does before him bear, Like Torrents in the Hills, or Tempests in the Air. The stately Cities, which Brabantia crown, And Flandria 's fairest Towns their Sov'raign own, And from their Necks proud Gallia 's Yoke have thrown. Hark! now I hear the Shouts of Joy around, I hear the Triumph's multiplying Sound. Th' Angelic Acclamation grows, it fills All the blue Plains, and all the crystal Hills. They shew by this, repeated loud Applause, Those fight in Heav'n's, who fight in Anna 's Cause. The Shouts of Joy diminish, but behold Yon Seraph takes his Harp of Heav'nly Gold: Hark! the bless'd Poet of the glorious Choir Begins, he strikes his bright Coelestial Lyre. How the Terrestrial Lucifer, The Son of Pride , the haughty Gaul, Does from his high Imperial Sphere, Struck with Britannia 's Thunder, fall? Th' Almighty gave his high Command, From all the Hills and Tow'rs of Belgia 's Land, Hang out the Flag, and let the Banner stream, Terror denounce, and growing War proclaim. Call forth my Warriors from Batavia 's Soil, My Gen'rals from Britannia 's Isle: Warriors, to whom proud Tyrants yield, To Gallia known at Blenheim 's Field: Warriors, who only God-like Fame respect, Despise the Danger, and the Spoil neglect. Let confluent Cohorts crown the Mountain's Head, Let o'er the Plain a Martial Deluge spread. Let them extend their Front, collect their Rear, And terribly advance the congregated War. Lutetia , tremble, see the Clouds arise, The Tempest darkens all the Skies. 'Tis with Destruction charg'd, and will unload The Terrors of an angry God. On thee he'll pour his Viols forth, Of high fermented Rage, and old digested Wrath. Justice no longer will delay, It will the Debt of Vengeance pay. Aspiring City! which did'st raise thy Head, Did'st tow'ring midst the Skies thy Glory spread. Who, mad with Pride, wer't wont to say, Europa 's Realms shall my Commands obey, The ruin'd Nation's woeful Cries, The Widow's Tears, and Orphan's Sighs, The Seas of Blood by thy Ambition spilt, And all th' Effects of thy enormous Guilt, Provoke just Heav'n on thy proud Head to pour Fury reserv'd, and as thy Crimes, mature. See, drunk with Wrath Divine, the Tyrant reels, What Anguish, what Distress he feels? Against the Gaul th' Almighty does declare Against th' Oppressor he denounces War. His Arm stretch'd out, descends with ling'ring Sway, But heavier Wrath will Recompense delay. Arm'd with his glitt'ring Sword and Sun-like Shield, The Lord of Armies takes the Field. Grasping his bright Immortal Lance, To Belgia 's Plain he does advance. The Earth's Foundations quake, the Mountains bow, Affrighted Rivers backward flow. Nature 's strong Fears, and vast Distress, The awful Presence of her Lord confess. Torrents of Glory his dread March proclaim, Clouds, and thick Darkness, and Tempestuous Flame. The Gaul before his Terrors flies, A hideous Yell, and lamentable Cries Of routed Warriors, fill the Skies. How red with Slaughter is Ramillia 's Plain? How are the Mountains cover'd with the Slain? How deeply dy'd with Gallic Blood Belgia 's polluted Rivers roll their Flood! Ye Flandrian Hills and Tow'rs around, declare, For you beheld the wond'rous War; You heard Britannia 's terrible Alarms, You heard the Shouts of her victorious Arms; You saw the Foe subduc'd in Fight, You saw the Rout, and ignominious Flight; Tell how against the Gaul the Battel turn'd, How from the Field their Cohorts fled Like scatt'ring Flocks upon the Mountain's Head; How Albion 's Captain, dreadfully adorn'd With Dust and Slaughter, did pursue, How on their Rear he hung, and how his Terrors flew. The Gallic General's Looks relate, Enrag'd, and cursing their amazing Fate. Their Consternation, and their Woe declare, For you their Anguish saw, and absolute Despair. Let us in rapt'rous Hallelujahs sing The Praises of th' Eternal King, Who sits above th' Empyreal Height, Enthron'd in uncreated Light. He by his Servant Anna 's Hand, On Dola 's Flood in Belgia 's Land, Has the proud Oppressor broke, Who his just Vengeance did so long provoke. The wond'rous Deed does Men below surprize, 'Tis wond'rous too in Seraphs Eyes. This mighty Work of Providence Divine, In Earth's and Heav'n's Records shall shine. Bless'd be Ramillia 's Plain, that gave Ease to th' Oppress'd, and Freedom to the Slave. That has rebuk'd th' ambitious Gaul, A glorious Promise of th' Oppressor's Fall. May'st thou with flow'ry Pride be crown'd, With Nature 's richest Gifts abound. May Genial Show'rs and Heav'nly Dew Thy verdant Honours still renew. Let not the cruel Plough-share wound, Let not the Harrow tear thy Ground: Let thy prolific, but unlabour'd Soil, Enrich the Farmer, and prevent his Toil. Unconscious of inclement Skies, Be neither chill'd with Cold, or scorch'd with Heat, Let no destructive Meteor rise, No Tempest on thy peaceful Reglon heat. Let not thy Glebe produce a Weed, Thy Caverns no raw Vapour feed, No spotted Plague, or Pestilential Seed. Unfading Bloom and vernal Verdure wear, And with spontaneous Plenty blest, Like Eden 's happy Garden rest, Thy Soil as fruitful, and as mild thy Air. Be this its Fate, for this auspicious Plain Has sunk th' Oppressor's Hopes, and broke Europa 's Chain. Now, Dola , thou, before a vulgar Stream, Among the noblest Floods shalt have a Name. Danaw alone shall Rival thee, Thames shall alone superior be. Auspicious Chief, thy great Designs pursue, Defend the Suff'rer, and the Proud subdue, Till by Defect of Foes thy Triumphs cease, And grateful Europe thank thee for her Peace. Then 'midst Applauses of the Realms restor'd, And Nations sav'd by thy victorious Sword, Return Triumphant to thy native Soil, To honourable Ease, from glorious Toil. Then let the Queen, with a just Umpire's Hand, Of Europe 's Pow'r, the balanc'd Scales command. Let her ambitious Monarchies restrain, Religion guard, and publick Right maintain. Let her be dear at Home, Abroad rever'd, By all good Princes lov'd, and by all Tyrants fear'd.
