 Of seven smooth joints a mellow Pipe I have , Which with his dying Breath Dam aetas give : And said, This , Corydon, I leave to thee , For only thou deserv'st it after me . As in another Pastoral Writer, after the same manner a Shepherd informs us how much his Mistress likes him. As I to cool me bath'd one sultry Day , Fond Lydia lurking in the Sedges lay. The Wanton laugh'd, and seem'd in haste to fly , Yet often stop'd, and often turn'd her Eye . If ever a Reflection be pardonable in Pastorals, it is where the Thought is so obvious, that it seems to come easily to the Mind; as in the following admirable Improvement of Virgil and Theocritus . Fair is my Flock, nor yet uncomely I, If liquid Fountains flatter not. And why Should liquid Fountains flatter us, yet show The bord d'ring Flow'rs less beauteous than they grow ? A second Characteristick of a true Shepherd is Simplicity of Manners, or Innocence. This is so obvious from what I have before advanced, that it would be but Repetition to insist long upon it. I shall only remind the Reader, that as the Pastoral Life is supposed to be where Nature is not much depraved, Sincerity and Truth will generally run through it. Some slight Transgressions for the sake of Variety may be admitted, which in effect will only serve to set off the Simplicity of it in general. I cannot better illustrate this Rule than by the following Example of a Swain who found his Mistress asleep. Once Delia slept, on easie Moss reclin'd, Her lovely Limbs half bare, and rude the Wind: I smooth'd her Coats, and stole a silent Kiss; Condemn me, Shepherds, if I did amiss . A third Sign of a Swain is, that something of Religion, and even Superstition, is part of his Character. For we find that those who have lived easie Lives in the Country, and contemplate the Works of Nature, live in the greatest Awe of their Author. Nor doth this Humour prevail less now than of old: Our Peasants as sincerely believe the Tales of Goblins and Fairies, as the Heathens those of Fauns, Nymphs and Satyrs. Hence we find the Works of Virgil and Theocritus sprinkled with left-handed Ravens, blasted Oaks, Witch-crafts, evil Eyes, and the like. And I observe with great Pleasure, that our English Author of the Pastorals I have quoted hath practised this Secret with admirable Judgment. I will yet add another Mark, which may be observed very often in the above- named Poets, which is agreeable to the Character of Shepherds, and nearly allied to Superstition; I mean the use of Proverbial Sayings. I take the common Similitudes in Pastoral to be of the Proverbial Order, which are so frequent, that
