 This Place may seem for Shepherds leisure made , So lovingly these Elms unite their Shade. Th' ambitious Woodbine, how it climbs to breathe Its balmy Sweets around on all beneath! The Ground with Grass of cheerful Green be-spread , Thro' which the springing Flow'r up-rears its Head. Lo here the King-Cup of a golden Hue , Medly'd with Daisies white, and Endive blue ! Hark, how the gaudy Goldfinch, and the Thrush With tuneful Warblings fill that Bramble-Bush ! In pleasing Consort all the Birds combine, And tempt us in the various Song to join. THE Theology of the ancient Pastoral is so very pretty, that it were pity entirely to change it; but I think that part only is to be retained which is universally known, and the rest to be made up out of our own rustical Superstition of Hob-thrushes, Fairies, Goblins and Witches. The Fairies are capable of being made very entertaining Persons, as they are described by several of our Poets, and particularly by Mr. Pope. About this Spring (if ancient Fame say true) The dapper Elves their Moon-light Sports pursue. Their Pigmy King, and little Fairy Queen, In circling Dances gambol'd on the Green, While tuneful Sprights a merry Consort made, And Airy Musick warbled through the Shade. WHAT hath been said upon the difference of Climate, Soil and Theology, reaches the Proverbial Sayings, Dress, Customs and Sports of Shepherds. The following Examples of our Pastoral Sports are extreamly beautiful. Whilome did I, all as this Poplar fair, Upraise my heedless Head, devoid of Care, 'Mong rustick Routs the chief for Wanton Game; Nor could they merry make till Lobbin came. Who better seen than I in Shepherds Arts, To please the Lads, and win the Lasses Hearts? How deftly to mine Oaten Reed, so sweet, Wont they upon the Green to shift their Feet? And when the Dance was done, how would they yearn Some well devised Tale from me to learn? For many Songs and Tales of Mirth had I, To chase the lingring Sun adown the Sky. \---O now! if ever bring The Laurel green, the smelling Eglantine, And tender Branches from the mantling Vine, The dewy Cowslip that in Meadow grows, The Fountain Violet, and Garden Rose: Your Hamlets strew, and every publick Way, And consecrate to Mirth Albino's Day. My self will lavish all my little Store, And deal about the Goblet flowing ore: Old Moulin there shall harp, young Mico sing, And Cuddy dance the Round admist the Ring, And Hobbinol his antick Gambols play. THE Reason why such Changes from the Ancients should be introduced is very obvious; namely, that Poetry being Imitation, and that Imitation being the best which deceives
