 ANOTHER Quality required is a compleate, Skill in Language. To this I answer, that it is notorious Persons of no Genius have been oftentimes great Linguists. To instance in the Greek , of which there are two Sorts; the Original Greek , and that from which our Modern Authors translate. I should be unwilling to promise Impossibilities, but modestly speaking, this may be learned in about an Hour's time with Fase. I have known one, who became a sudden Professor of Greek , immediately upon Application of the Left-hand Page of the Cambridge Homer to his Eye. It is, in these Days, with Authors as with other Men, the well bred are familiarly acquainted with them at first Sight; and as it is sufficient for a good General to have survey'd the Ground he is to conquer, so it is enough for a good Poet to have seen the Author he is to be Master of. But to proceed to the Purpose of this Paper. Take out of any old Poem, History-books, Romance, or Legend , ( for instance Geffry of Monmouth or Don Belianis of Greece) those Parts of Story which afford most Scope for long Descriptions: Put these Pieces together, and throw all the Adventures you fancy into one Tale. Then take a Hero, whom you may chuse for the Sound of his Name, and put him into the midst of these Adventures: There let him work, for twelve Books; at the end of which you may take him out, ready prepared to conquer or to marry; it being necessary that the Conclusion of an Epick Poem be fortunate . To make an Episode. Take any remaining Adventure of your former Collection, in which you could no way involve your Hero; or any unfortunate Accident that was too good to be thrown away; and it will be of Use, applyed to any other Person; who may be lost and evaporate in the Course of the Work, without the least Damage to the Composition . For the Moral and Allegory. These you may Extract out of the Fable afterwards at your Leisure: Be sure you strain them sufficiently . For those of the Hero, take all the best Qualities you can find in all the best celebrated Heroes of Antiquity; if they will not be reduced to a Consistency, lay 'em all on a heap upon him. But be sure they are Qualities which your Patron would be thought to have; and to prevent any Mistake which the World may be subject to, select from the Alphabet those Capital Letters that compose his Name, and set them at the Head of a Dedication before your Poem. However, do not absolutely observe the exact Quantity of these Virtues, it not being determined whether or no it be necessary for the Hero of a Poem to be an honest Man---For the Under-Characters, gather them from Homer and Virgil, and Change the Names as Occasion serves . Take of Deities, Male and Female, as many as you can use. Separate them into two equal parts, and keep Jupiter in the middle. Let Juno put him in a Ferment, and Venus mollifie him. Remember on all Occasions to make use of Volatile Mercury. If you have need of Devils, draw them out of Milton's Paradise, and extract your Spirits from Tasso. The Use of these Machines is evident; for since no Epick Poem can possibly subsist without, them, the wisest way is to reserve them for your greatest Necessities. When you cannot extricate your Hero by any Human Means, or your self by your own Wit, seek Relief from Heaven, and the Gods will do your Business very readily. This is according to the direct Prescription of Horace in his Art of Poetry . Nec Deus intersit, nisi dignus vindice Nodus Inciderit--- That is to say, a Poet should never call upon the Gods for their Assistance, but when he is in great Perplexity. For a Tempest. Take Eurus, Zephyr, Auster and Boreas, and cast them together in one Verse. Add to these of Rain, Lightning, and of Thunder ( the loudest you can ) quantum sufficit. Mix your Clouds and Billows well together till they foam, and thicken your Description here and there with a Quicksand. Brew your Tempest well in your Head, before you set it a blowing . For a Battel. Pick a large quantity of Images and Descriptions from Homer's Iliads, with a Spice or two of Virgil, and if there remain any Overplus, you may lay them by for a Skirmish. Season it well with Similes, and it will make an Excellent Battel. For a Burning Town. If such a Description be necessary, because it is certain there is one in Virgil, Old Troy is ready burnt to your Hands. But if you fear That would be thought borrowed, a Chapter or two of the Theory of the Conflagration, well circumstanced, and done into Verse, will be a good Succidaneum. As for Similes and Metaphors, they may be found all over the Creation, the most ignorant may gather them, but the danger is in applying them. For this, advise with your Bookseller . ( I mean the Diction). Here it will do well to be an Imitator of Milton, for you'll find it easier to imitate him in this than any thing else . Hebraisms and Grecisms are to be found in him, without the trouble of Learning the Languages. I knew a Painter, who ( like our Poet ) bad no Genius, make his Dawbings be thought Originals by setting them in the Smoak: You may in the same manner give the venerable Air of Antiquity to your Piece, by darkening it up and down with Old English. With this you
