 present Disorder, and take off the Edge of my Chagrin.  I have often told myself, it is much better never to know a Satisfaction, than lose it as soon as acquainted; since nothing can give a Man a greater Damp than a Reflection upon past Pleasures, when he has no View to their return. How much this is my Case, Berina will easily guess, if she has Friendship enough herself to regret the Absence of a Friend. You will say, I am very spightful, when I have told you, the only Pleasure I have had since I left you, was in seeing one of your Sex mortify'd. Certainly the God of Pride himself has not a greater Share of that Quality than a young Lady with a superior Beauty: She thinks all Mankind born to do her Homage, and despises the tasteless Fool that can resist her Charms. One of this sort lives hard by me, who is a Lady of a good Family, but small Fortune, and has been address'd by a Gentleman of a very good Estate: He (contrary to the Advice of all his Friends) would have made her a Jointure of the greatest part of it; and his Folly in every thing shew'd his Love. She, on the other hand, depending upon new Conquests, repuls'd him with Scorn, and (ungenerous as she was) made him a publick Jest where-ever she came; which at last, from many Hands, came to his Ears, and rais'd one Passion to subvert another. He from thence grew indifferent, and forbore his Visits, resolving to try whether Absence could not do what Discretion had attempted in vain. She finding him cool, thought it the greatest Slur upon her Beauty to lose a Slave, and therefore, by a Female Engineer, sent him a little Encouragement; which he turn'd to the right Use, and made subservient to his Revenge. Have I ( said he ) offer'd my Heart and Estate to one, who has, in return, made me ridiculous; and instead of common Civility for my Love, used me with Revilings and Contempt?  Believe me, Madam ( said he ) you shall be a Sharer with me in something; and since you have refus'd what I would so honourably have given you, it is but reason I send back part of what you have forc'd upon me.  While he was thus expostulating with himself, a Relation of hers came in, and told him, he had at last prevail'd with the Lady to comply; which our revolted Lover seem'd pleas'd at, and desir'd the next Day might end all Disputes. A speedy Preparation was accordingly made, and the whole Country, for two or three Miles round, invited to this Wedding: They obey'd the Summons, and were punctual to the Hour; where, after a little time waiting for the Bridegroom, he came booted and spurr'd, with a grave elderly Genwoman, whom he brought to the young Lady, saying, Madam, here is a Person come to teach you Good-nature and Manners; when I hear you are a Proficient in both, you may possibly hear farther from your humble Servant. In the mean time, be a good Girl, and mind your Lesson; I am going from home for some time, and shall be glad, at my return, to find you improv'd. Which said, he paid a Compliment to the Company, and took Horse at the very Door. How much this has mortify'd the Bride Elect, Berina will never guess, because she knows nothing of her Pride and Vanity; but had you seen the Consternation of the Company, and the Looks of the Lady, they wou'd, I dare say, have made the same comical Impression upon your Fancy which they did upon mine. How happy are you and I, who have made the strongest Resolves against the Follies of Love! Be sure, Berina, keep your Friendship inviolate, and you shall find I will keep my Promise, in never desiring more. Yours, ARTANDER . Nov. 1 . Creatures call'd a Prude, who seem'd extremely fond of the instructive Part of Conversation, and being the oldest Lady in the room, took upon her to read us Lectures of Behaviour: Among several Heads upon that Subject, she told us, writing to any Man, except a Husband, a Father, a Brother, or some very near Relation, was an unpardonable Crime, and cou'd not be answer'd to Modesty. Upon which I was going to write Artander one excusive Letter, and desire him to expect no more. But I began to consider, a Friend is not worth calling so, who dares not run the risque of so trifling a Censure, to maintain so noble a Character: and, therefore, bravely scorning all dull Reflection, I have taken my Pen in hand with a design to fight my way thro' all Difficulties, and make good my Friendship in spight of all Opposition. I pity the poor disappointed Lady you writ about, tho' I think she deserv'd her Fate; and the Gentleman's Revenge was very sharp, tho' very innocent. I cou'd send you a Story something like it, but Jilting in our Sex, and Deceit in yours, is so very common, that I think it will want Novelty to make it diverting. The Town is at present taken up with loud Acclamations of Joy for the Birth of a young Prince, and a Vein of Satisfaction seems to run thro' the whole Court and City; the very Grums look pleas'd, and it is much to be hoped, the little Blessing will make another Union. A Gentleman this Morning sent me ten Lines upon his Birth, which I here send Artander .  Come, grateful Britons, sing aloud your Praise, Trophys of Thanks let us to Heaven raise: That Providence divine, to still the Noise Of restless Rebels, and to drown the Voice Of those who vent their Spleen on Foreigner, Has crown'd our Wishes with an English Heir. Sure all must now, internal Transports feel; A Joy like this, shou'd animate our Zeal: Shou'd bare-fac'd Traytors to Obedience bring, And make 'em doubly loyal to their King. There is no danger, I hope, of your thinking those Lines sent to insult you, since by this time, the honest Air you are gotten into, must have work'd off all your poison'd Principles, and substituted a grateful Acknowledgment to Heaven in their room. With how much pleasure shou'd I receive your next Letter, wou'd it but prove a Recantation, and heartily renounce all your former Errors? Why shou'd a Man of Artander's Reason and Goodness, be byass'd by a parcel of Monsters? who have nothing in view, but the Subversion of their Religion and Laws, and the utter Ruin of their native Land. Common Prudence teaches us, if we meet with a Creature whose Out-side only we are acquainted with, to keep our fingers at a distance, till we have inform'd ourselves of the Nature of it; lest a gaudy Feather, or a shining Scale, shou'd draw us into the worst of Ills. No less pernicious can it be to Men of honest designs, to be drawn in by a parcel of Villains, who pretend to gloss over all their Actions with Conscience, tho' it was, long since, sear'd with a hot Iron. Oh! Artander, fly from their infectious Breath, for, the Poison of Asps is under their Tongues ! I have just received a Letter out of the Country, which gives me an Account of a Maiden Lady of sixty five, who has poison'd her self for Love: the Use we are to make of it, is to hug ourselves in the midst of Liberty, and thank those Stars that inclin'd us to Freedom.  I hate a Yoke that galls for Life, but find the greatest pleasure in subscribing my self, Your real Friend, BERINA . Nov. 5 . a Whig . Methinks the very Name, so hated and despis'd, should give your Inclinations a turn: then do but look back to our English Annals, and see the Practice of those Men, from whom the Name first took its Rise: look at the Block, the Ax, the sacred bleeding Head: see the best of Men, the best of Kings, made a Sacrifice to the Malice of Knaves and Fools: behold your persecuted Clergy, your defac'd and demolish'd Churches, your whole Religion become abominable, and nothing but Canting and Hypocrisy left. Then tell me, Berina, when we have consider'd those Things; whether it be not every true Church-man's Business, to dread and crush the like Proceedings? I thank you for the Poetry you sent me, but had a Poem on the same Subject before, written by one who complains the World takes no notice of him, and to eternize his Name, has publish'd burlesque Tautology and false Grammar, upon an Occasion that call'd for the best Pen among you. Where are all you bright Whig Wits? Have they taken a stupifying Dose, or have they run out their Stock in Invectives against the Tories ?  For shame, Berina, rouse 'em up, tell 'em its down-right scandalous to leave so noble a Theme entirely to the hand of a Fool.  Bid the Sot call in his Nonsense, and make the young Hero a Bonfire of 'em: tell him it will be a much better way of shewing his Loyalty, than to expose the Child in Doggrel Verse. Methinks I can't but pity poor Mr. T---k--l, who, in a ridiculous Dedication, is persuaded to defend the Stuff, and, as a Reward for his Service, is promis'd some more of the same kind. But this has amus'd my Pain so long, that I have almost forgot to tell you the Occasion of it. Last night, going to pay my Devoirs to a young Lady, who has been twenty Miles from home, and just return'd from travel, as she calls it; I being very ceremonious, and full of Compliment at the Stairs-head, with an unlucky turn of my Foot, struck it against her prodigious Hoop-petticoat, and threw both her and myself down stairs. The Hoop, like Bladders ty'd under the Arms in swimming, kept her from danger, but I am nothing but Pain and Plaister. You Ladies are very dangerous Company, for if you can't break a Man's Heart with your Eyes, you'll break his Neck with your Dress. I doubt it has spoil'd me for a Courtier, and will make me very negligent to the Fair. How long I am to lie in, I know not; but beg Berina will contribute towards my Cure by writing often: her Letters will amuse my Pain, and turn every thing into Pleasure. How great mine is at the thoughts of her Friendship, none knows, but her own, ARTANDER. Nov. 7 . Heaven had design'd me for what I am) I insensibly found myself in Queen Mary's Reign, where I had so many Objects of Cruelty presented to my view, that I was ready to creep into myself at the dreadful Reflection. How many brave Men, courageous Women, and innocent Children did I see butcher'd, to do God good Service? Our Bishops burning both with Fire and Zeal, to confirm the Reformation so happily begun; while its Enemies, set on by Hell's chief Engineer, depress'd its Growth, and trod it under foot. From thence, I went to the Irish Rebellion, where I saw more than three hundred thousand Souls murder'd in cold Blood, the Clergy's Mouths cut from Ear to Ear, their Tongues pull'd out and thrown to the Dogs, then bid to go preach up Heresy; Mens Guts pull'd out and ty'd to each other's Waists, then whipp'd different ways; some stabb'd, burnt, drowned, impal'd and flea'd alive; Children ripp'd out of their Mother's Womb, and thrown to the Dogs, or dash'd against the Stones; crying, Nits will become Lice, destroy Root and Branch : with a thousand other Barbarities, too tedious as well as too dreadful to repeat, beside what has been transacted abroad. And now, Artander, if those things be true, as we have the same Authority for, that you have for your martyr'd King, tell me, to use your own Words, Whether it be not every true Churchman's Business, to dread and crush the like Proceedings ? How many of our English Kings (to say nothing of those abroad) have been depos'd, and in the cruellest manner murder'd by the Hands of Blood-thirsty Papists? And are we grown so very partial to those Men, to forget or wink at all their Villainies, and only remember a Fault committed by those who acted by (at least) a show of Justice? Not that I approve the Fact, but on the contrary, renounce and detest it: but still, I think there is more Reason to bury one Fault in Oblivion, which was the Result of their Concern for the Reformation, that then lay bleeding with the Irish Protestants, than to keep it up with a Spirit of Malice, to foment and heighten those unhappy Feuds which are already begun, and with so much Industry carry'd on. Believe me, Artander, there are thousands in this Nation who decry the Martyrdom of King Charles, more out of opposition to their Dissenting Brethren, than any real value they have for the Memory of that unhappy Prince: 'tis your only Plea; you have no other handle for your Animosities; drop that once, and like a drowning Wretch, who has just let go the Plank that kept him up, you'll sink for want of something to support you. That good Man's Fate shou'd be remember'd with Sorrow, not with Spite; and we ought to pray to Heaven to forgive his Murderers, rather than call for Fire from thence to destroy those that are left. Oh! Artander, let us always implore the divine Goodness, to preserve us from those Men, whose Mercies are Cruelty and who are now lurking in secret Places for an Opportunity to devour us. I once heard an impudent Papist say, Guy Faux was a Presbyterian, and that it was by them the Gunpowder-Plot was set on foot: I dare say, it wou'd be no hard matter, to persuade half the Tories in the Nation to be of that Opinion.  But now I come to condole with you, for your Misfortune, and shall expect your next Letter with some impatience, because I have Friendship enough to make me interest myself in your Welfare: such an Accident might have been of very ill Consequence, both to the Lady and you; and I am glad you were in a Condition to make some merry remarks upon it.  I am just going to the Play, and to subscribe my self, Yours, BERINA . Nov. 10 . and the Cruelty you speak of, as far as we may trust to tradition, is equally certain: but, Berina, we have always look'd upon that Person's Principles to be very trifling, who accuses another of a Fault, and the very next minute commits it himself. Is it a sufficient Warrant for me to cut a Man's Throat, because I just saw the Fact committed? No, Berina, when we renounced Rome's Errors, we renounced her Cruelties too: but these impudent King- killers, with their legal Proceedings forsooth, plainly shew'd the World they had a mixture of both remaining. Either we believe the Bible to be the Word of God, or we do not? If we do not, we are then in a State of Atheism and Damnation, and we may act as we will; but if we do, why do we run contrary to the Rules there laid down, and refuse to give C aesar his Due ? When we took it for our Standard, we resolv'd to refer ourselves to it, and model our Actions by it. Now do but shew me one Text in either Old or New Testament, that tolerates Rebellion, and I'll recede from all my past Opinions, and become as strenuous a Whig as Berina .  If Kings are such sacred Things, that no Hand, but that of Providence shou'd touch; how shall we answer taking their Lives, and banishing their whole Posterity?  At this rate, we shall soon forbear to do one another common Justice; and shall neither love the Brotherhood, fear God, nor honour the King. For my part, I am for invading no Man's Right, but giving every body what they can lay a just claim to: how far you Whigs have stuck to that honest Principle, I leave the last eight and twenty Years to show; but of that, no more at present. This Afternoon, being quite tir'd of my Chamber, and pretty well recover'd of my Fall, I went to see an old Lady, who had often bespoke a Visit, and began to think me rude for my neglect. The whole Scene was so comical, that I can't forbear sending Berina the Particulars. When I first enter'd, I found the Lady in her Parlour, set in an easy Chair, with her Feet upon a Cricket, which rais'd her Knees almost as high as her Mouth; she was dress'd in a black Cloth Gown, over which she had a dirty Night-rail, and a coarse Diaper Napkin pinn'd from one Shoulder to the other; upon her Head two yellow Scotch -Cloth Pinners, and over them a black Gauze Hood, ty'd under her Chin, one Hand in her Pocket, and t'other scratching her Head. After I had paid my Compliment, receiv'd hers, and gaz'd a while at the Charms of her Dress and Person, I made bold to fancy she was a little craz'd; and turn'd to take a Survey of the Room and Furniture, which was no way inferiour to herself: Upon her Tea-Table, instead of a Set of China, stood a Pasteboard, with a piece of fat Bacon upon it; and on the Seat of the Sash-window, a red earthen Pan, half full of Pease-pudding, which I guess'd to be the Remains of her Dinner.  Upon one of the Silk Cushions were three greasy Plates, and in the Chimney-Corner, a Black-Jack all dropp'd with Candle-grease; upon the Squab lay a great Dog gnawing a Bone, whom she commanded off, and desir'd I wou'd take his Place, but I had too much respect for my Clothes, to accept of her Offer.  However, as I was walking to and fro, watching the Cobwebs that they did not fall into my Wig, I slid over a piece of Bacon- Swerd, which threw me directly into the Lady's Lap, and over-set her Cricket: She grew very merry at the Accident, and I very much out of Countenance. I think your Sex is fatal to me, and had I been cut out for a Lover, shou'd have some dreadful Apprehensions at the Omens; but as I am always safe in Berina's Company, it, and a continuation of her Friendship, is all that is desir'd by ARTANDER. Nov. 13 . seems we have never had a King or Queen since King James the Second, of dreadful Memory; nor never are to have one, till the conscientious Tories can find a hole for the Pretender to creep in at. You always lay a mighty stress upon the power of a King. Methinks it is a little strange that Heaven shou'd make them so very absolute, without any Reserve for the People at all. Suppose God Almighty, for a Punishment of our Sins, shou'd set your Darling upon the Throne, and he shou'd take it into his head to turn Mahometan, and condemn all to Fire and Faggot, that wou'd not renounce Christ? Why, say the Non-resisting Tories, if he shou'd do so, 'tis the Command of our rightful King, and Kings must be obey'd.  'Tis true, the Supposition is not very likely to come to pass, but it is very possible; and how far I am oblig'd to stand neuter, and see the establish'd Laws and Religion of my Country sacrific'd to the Caprice of a whimsical King, let Reason say.  When we swear Allegiance to a King, 'tis conditional; as long as he keeps his Oath, we'll keep ours. When God Almighty commanded our Obedience, he commanded his Care and Love; which if not express'd, is understood: how much of either, King James shew'd the bleeding Laws, imprison'd Bishops and slighted Protestants can witness. And how much of both King George has shew'd, his mild Behaviour, his Views to the Nation's Interest, and his unfeign'd Care of the establish'd Church, can witness too. Has not his Clemency and Good-nature over-look'd a thousand Insults? And among so many bare-fac'd Rebels, not one in forty met with their deserv'd Fate. Is he not daily nos'd with C---m? As if it were a greater Crime in him, than in the whole City beside. Base as we are, he was a Prince before he was our King, tho' the impudent Mob has always used him, like one of themselves. How much does he study the Nation's Interest, by disbanding his Army, and leaving himself hardly any other Guard, than his own Innocence and Goodness? The Church he has always made his Care, has promis'd to protect her, and has most religiously kept that Promise. What Reason then have we to fear Presbytery under his Administration? Do but name one profess'd Dissenter in any publick Trust, and I'll be as canker'd a Tory as the worst of you. If there be so much Duty and Allegiance due to Kings, why must not he have a share? Or will you not own him for your King, tho' both God and the Nation have made him so?  How fain wou'd I snatch Artander from that obstinate dogmatical Crew; a parcel of Men, who stop their Ears to every thing, that does not suit with their own pernicious Principles; and who wou'd, if their Power were equal to their Wills, lay us in immediate Confusion.  But thanks to Heaven for its timely Care of us, for snatching us as a Firebrand out of the Fire, for stopping the raging of the Sea, the noise of its Waves, and the madness of the People. I design'd this Letter for another Subject, but my Zeal has carry'd me to the utmost confines of my Paper; and I have no more room left, than what will serve to tell you, I am, in all Sincerity, Yours, BERINA . Nov. 18 . ourselves into some Misunderstanding, which may not easily be rectify'd; which Consideration, made me, in my last, try to divert the Subject. You cannot suppose, I want matter to furnish this Letter with an Answer of the same kind; but I think nothing a greater Enemy to Friendship, than Disputes: and mine is so firm for Berina, that I wou'd not give way to any thing that could shake it. If yours be so, as I have no reason to doubt; you will comply, when I beg of you to put a stop to this sort of Correspondence; and let your Letters for the future, be fill'd with the innocent Diversions of the Town: 'tis a pity Berina's Temper shou'd be ruffled with Politicks. I am now going to divert you with something of a different kind. Yesterday being in a very philosophick Strain, I was resolv'd to visit Nature in its most private Recesses, and enter the Hollow of an adjacent Rock, of which you have often heard me speak. Curiosity only makes the Vertuoso; and if I go on a little longer, I shall grow a perfect Sir Nicholas Gimcrack .  I took two or three of my Servants with me, and enter'd the Vacuity; which made me fancy myself, something like Quixote going to the Cave of Montisinos . After a few Paces advance, I found the Hollow grow very spacious, and to my great surprize I heard a Dog bark; I immediately consider'd, that sociable Creature never lives alone, and how I shou'd like his Company, I knew not: upon which, my Resolution and Discretion fell together by the ears; one persuaded me to go back, and the other forward; but the latter got the better, and on I went; the nearer we approach'd, the louder the Dog yelp'd; the Sound of which led us to a melancholy Mansion, inhabited only by the aforesaid Animal, and a half- starv'd Female. She look'd wild and frighten'd, but seem'd very tractable, and answer'd us directly to every Question we ask'd her; the first was, how she came there? she said, her Father brought her there when she was but two Years old. I then ask'd her, what and who her Father was? she said, he was a Highway-Man, who had once been condemn'd to die, but made his escape, and had ever since liv'd in that Rock, till about a Month ago, and then he died. And what have you done with his Body? said I . Two or three of his Companions, said she, who used to come often to see him, bury'd him in a Clift of this Rock. Are you not willing, said I, to leave this dismal Dwelling? Yes, said she, if I knew where to go, but I know no body, nor no body me; and I have often wish'd I had died with my Father. I bid her then follow me, which she gladly did, and I carry'd her to my Mother, who has taken her for one of her Servants. The rest have work enough to stare at her; and all look upon her as a Spectre, and dare not sleep without a Candle by them. The poor Girl seems to have a better Notion of Virtue than cou'd be expected from her Education, which makes me conclude Virtue is an innate Qualification, born with, and inseparable from some People.  This, Berina, is the true Account of my Adventure into the Rock; which, I hope, will not only amuse you, but serve for innocent Chat over the Tea-Table, and be a Reprieve, one day, for the Faults of the Absent. For tho' I know you have a Soul above Scandal, I will not answer for the rest of your Sex. I am now going to be very vain, and tell you, a Gentleman has been with me to bespeak me for his Daughter; how to bring myself off with good Manners, I hardly knew; but was at last forc'd to tell him, I found an inward Decay, which put a stop to all thoughts of that kind, and wish'd the Lady a more suitable Husband. A Husband! the very Name makes me almost tremble! and I have once more given it under my Hand, that Marriage shall never spoil my Friendship for Berina : when it does, may I cease to be ARTANDER. Nov. 21 . scrutinizing into, he wou'd never have laid such strict Injunctions on my Pen, and robb'd me of my darling Pleasure; but to let you see how ready I am to relinquish every thing that gives you uneasiness, I have, in compliance with my Friendship, laid by the Subject you dislike, and will, for the future, entertain you with something else. My Uncle has been extremely ill of a Quinsy, and Dr. ...... has not stirr'd from him these three days; from which you will conclude, the Town is very healthy, or the Doctor has not many Patients.  He favour'd me with the Relation of a Journey he had once into the Country, which I shall think well bestow'd upon Artander . I happen'd, said he, some time ago to be in the Country, within some Miles of the Seat of a Peer: He was indispos'd, and hearing of my being there, sent his tatter'd Coach, with a sleepy old Woman in it, to fetch me; but I disliking both the Vehicle and the Messenger, made a Demur, which might have cost my Lord his Life, had not the double Diligence of the old Woman, added to the Advice of my Friends, set me forward. It is not much to be suppos'd, my Journey was very pleasant, because it was almost Night, the Weather extremely cold, and my Company not very agreeable; however, after many a long Wish, and some long Miles, I at last found myself at my Journey's End, and was conducted in by my old Guide; where my Sense of Seeing was quite useless, having not the least Light so much as to help me to a Seat to sit down on. The old Woman, as soon as she had convey'd me into the Kitchen, (if it may be call'd one, where no Victuals is stirring) went to tell my Lord I was come. In the mean time, I stretch'd my Eyes as wide open as I cou'd, and at last discover'd a sort of a glimmering Light, which made way for itself betwixt three or four Fellows who were sate upon a Log of Wood before a Hatfull of Fire. I (as it is very natural for folks in a dark unknown Place) made up to it, and cou'd discern the Fellows to be extremely dirty. Bless me! thought I, where the Devil am I got! among a Company of the Black Guard ? or is this some inchanted Den? I ventur'd to ask the Men some Questions, but their Answers were so intricate, that they only serv'd to confirm me in my former Opinion; and I wou'd freely have given a Twelve-month's Fees to have been at home again.  At last, after I had been brought to such a condition, that I wanted a Cordial more than my Patient, I saw the happy Approach of a Farthing-Candle, stuck in a Wooden Candlestick, and held in the Hand of one, who did not look like an Inhabitant of the Sooty-Region I had been so long confin'd to; his Face being wash'd, his Coat whole, and a clean Neckcloth about his Neck.  He told me, my Lord would see me; but when I came to the Stairs-foot, I did as School-Boys do, when they are going to slide upon Ice, persuade some of the rest to go on first, to try if it will bear; so I desir'd my Guide to go up first, for I did not like their rotten Aspect. When I came into my Lord's Chamber, I found him within a Suit of Moth-eaten red Serge Curtains, where he look'd more like one swinging in a Hammock than lying in a Bed: The ponderous Weight of his own Carcass having sunk the Cords even to the Boards, so that whoever wou'd have seen my Lord, must have peep'd under the Bed. For my part, I was so tir'd with walking and standing, that as soon as I had felt his Lordship's Pulse, I turn'd about to look for a Chair, of which there were four in the Room; one stood upon three Legs, another wanted its Back, a third had lost his Bottom, and the fourth was half cover'd with a red Rag, and the---upon it. But before I had determin'd which to sit upon, my Lord desir'd me to walk down again 'till he had consider'd of my Advice; which I did, and was forc'd to take up with my old Walk again, 'till one of the Gentlemen upon the Log got up, and kindly offer'd me his Seat, of which I as thankfully accepted. But after an Hour's waiting for new Commands, and receiving none, I ask'd my black Companions what I was to have for Supper? They told me, they knew nothing of the matter, for they had none for themselves.  Pray then, said I, will you do me the Favour to shew me my Lodging, that I may lie down a little? which the Fellow, who wanted his Seat, did, and carry'd me into a Room much like an old Goal, where there was a Bed, but no Curtains; Windows, but no Glass; and a Door, but neither Lock, Bolt, or any thing to make it fast with.  I was still apprehensive of some Danger; so drew all the Lumber in the Room to the Door, and then wrapt myself up in my Cloak, and laid me down, with a design to sleep 'till the Moon got up, to light me home; but the Fleas, who wanted their Suppers as much as I did, surrounded me on all sides, and fed so heartily, that they sav'd me Half a Crown to a Surgeon for bleeding me, and that was my Fee. As soon as Dawn of Day appear'd, I left my wretched Bed, and posted home without either Coach or Company; and soon after heard my Lord was dead, which all that lov'd him rejoiced at: He having gamed away his whole Estate, his very Clothes and Furniture of his House. And thus, Madam, continu'd he, I have given you a true Account of my Lordly Patient; which I have not done with a design to expose Quality, but to shew the miserable Effects of that bewitching Vice which ruin'd him.  You see, Artander, what the Gamester wins: From the first Hour of Play, his Woe begins. I stumbled over these two Lines by chance, but am resolv'd, since you will not let me be a Politician, to invoke the Muses, and turn Poetess. Bless me! what Rheams of Paper will you have laid at your feet, cringing for Protection! But the Tea-Kettle boils, which puts me in mind of a Conclusion. Yours, BERINA . Nov. 26 . in Hand defend whate'er she writes. The Doctor's Story I had heard before from another good Hand. Nor is it at all unlikely that (tho' a Man of very good Quality) he shou'd, after a Life spent in Debauchery and Extravagance, go off the Stage in scandalous Circumstances; but let the Dead rest. This Morning, after two hours Study by Candle-light, which sunk and tir'd my Spirits, and made me unfit for that Exercise any longer, I took a Walk into the Fields, where I promis'd myself a quiet Retreat: But Solitude itself is not always a Fence against Impertinence; for as I was going into one of my own Closes, I heard somebody call me; and turning to see who it was, found it a Gentleman who lives within a Mile of me, with a Paper in his Hand. He very concisely told me he was in Love, and had been writing a few Lines to a Friend of his, who wou'd fain persuade him against the Lady, of which he desir'd my Opinion. I wou'd fain have excus'd myself, by urging, Love was a thing entirely out of my way; but he still press'd me to see them, which I at last comply'd with, and, abating for the Subject, found them better than I expected: They must needs be acceptable to you, because you are going to turn Chymer yourself, and have therefore sent them.  All Men have Follies, which they blindly trace Thro' the dark Turnings of a dubious Maze: But few, my Friend, in spite of all their Care, Retreat betimes from Love's inviting Snare: The eldest Sons of Wisdom were not free From the same Failings you condemn in me; They lov'd, and by that glorious Passion led, Forgot what Plato and themselves had said: My Faults, you too severely reprehend, More like a rigid Censor than a Friend. You own'd my Delia once divinely fair, When in the Bud her native Beauties were: Your Praises did her early Charms confess, Yet you'd persuade me now to love her less; Since to her Height of Bloom the Fair is grown, And every Charm in its full Vigour shown: Her whole Composure's of so fine a Frame, Pride cannot hope to mend, nor Envy blame. My Delia's Words still bear the Stamp of Wit, Impress'd too plainly to be counterfeit: Which, with the Weight of massy Reason join'd, Declare the Strength and Quickness of her Mind; Her Thoughts are noble, and her Sense refin'd. Why then, Dear Thirsis, wou'd you strive to move A Heart like mine from its Commander, Love? The very last Word of this Poem, will, I dare say, give you a Disrelish for all the rest: I will not byass your Opinion by giving mine, but leave it wholly to a Judgment which cannot err: Let me know in your next how you like it. And pray let me have a little London News: I mean, such as the Tea-Table affords; for the rest, I refer myself to the publick Prints, and expect nothing from Berina, but what she can answer to Justice and Good-nature; and what I may, without a Breach in either, read. After I had parted with my poetical Neighbour, and was returning home again, I met with a Matter of some Speculation; for casting my Eye towards the top of a Tree, from whence I heard a rustling Noise, I saw a Crow, with a living Fish in his Bill: Pray send the Phaenomenon to the Royal-Society, for, methinks I wou'd fain know how those Creatures, (neither of an amphibious Breed) came together. I intended, when I began, to have been very prolix, but I find my self just seiz'd with a Fit of Chagrin, which makes me a very unfit Correspondent for one of Berina's bright Genius, and therefore make haste to say, I am Always yours, ARTANDER Dec. 1 . from Berina : I grow impatient to know the Cause of your Silence, and have sent this as an earnest Ambassador, to bring me a faithful Account. Have I used some unmannerly Expression in my last? Or has it lost its way? Is Berina's want of Health the Cause? Or is she grown weary of her Friendship and Correspondence? I wish you do not at last play the Woman more than the Platonick, and quit your Friendship for a Husband. It is true, I have very great Hopes of your Sincerity, and cannot easily persuade myself you wou'd lay it by, for any Consideration. But Women, they say, are so like Quick-silver, a Man can never be sure of them, either as a Friend or a Mistress; but as Berina is an Original in every thing else, I will believe her so in Friendship too. My Mother, and a Female Companion of hers, have been diverting themselves with a Tragi-Comedy, as it was acted at a neighbouring Village, where lives a Farmer of some Note, who marry'd a young Woman of the same Town; and for the first three Years made a very thrifty frugal Husband: At the end of which, finding he had no Children, nor hopes of any, he on a sudden run into an extravagant way of living, and let all fly he had been so long a gathering. His Wife grew extremely uneasy at his Proceedings, and used her utmost Efforts to reclaim him, tho' to no purpose; for continual Drinking had stupify'd his Senses, and he stopp'd his Ears to all she said. At last she left off to persuade, and began to take a more noisy Method, which render'd both him and herself ridiculous. However, he persisted in his drunken Resolutions, and the Ale-house had more of his Company than either his Wife or his Business. But last Night, he coming home very drunk, she fell into a violent Rage, told him, she wou'd never endure that Life, but wou'd go that minute and drown herself, to get rid of him. He, good-natur'd Soul, freely gave her both his Assent and Consent, and threw himself cross the Bed, where he fell fast asleep. She left him to enjoy a quiet Nap of three or four Hours; at the end of which, being in his Clothes, and consequently not very easy, he wak'd, and finding himself in the dark, and alone, he call'd his Wife, but got no Answer. Upon which he began to recollect, and had a faint Remembrance of what had pass'd; he immediately rouz'd from the Bed, half frighten'd out of his Wits, and groping about for the Door, after having broke the Looking-Glass, and black'd his Hands and Face in the Chimney, he at last found his way out, and got into the Kitchen, where he lighted a Candle, and went up to a Gentleman, who had left your noisy Town for a quiet Retirement in the Country, and lodg'd there, to get him to go with him to the Water-side, and find his Wife, dead or alive. When (Oh unheard of Misfortune!) he soon found his Journey was at an end, and his Wife laid warm and asleep in the Arms of the London Lodger.  How it will end I know not, but most People think it will cost him his Life; he being now in a raging Condition, which is the only News we are at present full of: As more grows, you may expect it; as I do a Letter by the next Post: of which, if I fail, I shall conclude you have not the least value for the repose of ARTANDER. Decem. 5 . Friendship for Artander, and am still proud of my Correspondence. But during the time of my Silence, I was at Sir John \---, from whence I return'd but this day; and during the whole time of my stay there, I may justly say, I was never Mistress of so much time as wou'd write a Letter. I declare I am quite tir'd with Pleasure, and the Fatigue of constant diversion is more insupportable, than an everlasting want of it; but the Pleasures of this World, lose both their Name and End by being constant: we see by Experience, nothing pleases a great while; those things of which we are extravagantly fond, if once forced upon us, beget first an Indifference, and then an Abhorrence. This Consideration, with some others equivalent, has put you and I upon the Resolve of living single, lest too much of a Husband or a Wife shou'd turn us into just such indifferent things to each other, as I am now to Dancing and Cards. But now, Artander, I am forc'd to call up all the good-nature I am Mistress of, to help me to over-look the cruel Suspicion you seem to have of me, and cou'd be glad to know in what Point I have fail'd, that has given you cause to encourage such a Thought. If I were Mistress of Words that cou'd convince you, I I wou'd immediately dress up my Protestations in 'em; but I have already said all I can upon that Subject, and have nothing to add, but my earnest Request, that you will believe me. By this time, I fancy you begin to expect my Thanks for the Poetry you sent me, which I shou'd very readily have given, had it been upon any other Subject; but Love is a thing so much against my grain, that tho' it be dressed up in a disguise of Wit, I see it thro' the Mask, and hate the base Imposture. Yesterday at dinner, your dear Cousin Milner happen'd to be the Tabletalk, and a Gentleman from that side of the Country gave us very good Diversion at his cost. He has, it seems, for this Month past, had two Mistresses in chace of equal Fortunes, but very different Persons: one being a Woman of tolerable Sense, a good Face and Humour, the other a mere Miss Hoiden, a thing fit for no Conversation above her Maid and Footman, with whom she spends her whole time. To the first of those he address'd himself, and was as well accepted as an old Batchelor cou'd expect, especially by the Father, who had the greatest mind to the Match. After some time spent in this weighty Affair, all things were adjusted, and the Morning come, in which the Knot was to be ty'd: her Fortune was paid down, which the wary Bridegroom told over with great circumspection, and at last (fie upon such Mischances!) he found a Brass Half-Crown, which with some earnestness he return'd to her Father, and desir'd it might be chang'd.  The old Gentleman seeing him so earnest about such a trifle, seem'd a little surpriz'd, and knew not of a sudden how to answer him; but at last told him, he took it for a good one, and hoped it wou'd break no squares if he oblig'd him to do so too.  Sir, said the Bridegroom, your being impos'd upon is no rule for my being so; and you shall either change it, or take the rest again. Upon which, the old Gentleman gather'd up his Coin, and t'other old Gentleman his Stick and Gloves, and so they parted. The latter, (to the shame of his whole Family) went directly to pretty Miss, and her Money proving all Sterling, they were immediately link'd. The Remarks I make upon this Wedding, is, that before the Honey-Moon be half over, she will fret him to Death, or he will beat her to Mummy; for old Batchelors have generally more Ill-nature, than any other Ingredient in their Compound; and his choice is so very ill, that he is like to have extraordinary exercise for it. I am surpriz'd you shou'd expect Teatable Chat, attended with Justice and Good-nature: you forget that we Women as naturally love Scandal, as you Men do Debauchery; and we can no more keep up Conversation without one, than you can live an Age without t'other. The Town goes on as it used to do, full of Party, Pamphlets, Libels, Lampoons, and scurrilous Ballads: but the King's Guards are in mighty Transports, that they have escaped the Reduction of Light Horse. Pardon me, Artander, I had almost forgot your Injunction, and had like to have transgress'd; but there can be no ha rm insaying, I am, Yours, BERINA, Decem. 10 . you, I wou'd forbear writing for a while; but they are so dull, that I rather fear they are a Mortification; so write to tire you that way, in order to make you fit for Diversion again. I wish you cou'd have transmitted some of your superfluous Mirth to me, who am as much in the other Extreme, and want what you despise. I cannot say I was ever so glutted with Pleasure in my Life, as to be weary of it, nor properly speaking, can any body say so; because, when once a Man is tir'd of a thing, it is no longer a Pleasure, but retiring from it is; so that a Person who has power to follow his own Inclinations, is always in Pleasure: but you, it seems, had not that power, your time being none of your own. As much a Tory as I am, I here protest to Berina, I am extremely pleas'd that the King's Corps du Guard are in Statu quo ; and think, since we have made him our King, we ought to use him like his Predecessors, and give him the Honour due to the Kings of England . And now I hope I have pleas'd Berina : I wonder you have never sent me an account of the threescore Witches Mr. Flamsteed has found out in Westminster ; I hear he intends to beg 'em of the King, and roast them by the Blazing-Star next April . I am just going to sink a Vault for a Retreat from its sulphurous Effects, and wou'd have you come and share the Advantage of it before the Conflagration begins. Those Men of Profundity in the occult Sciences, divert themselves with other Peoples Fears, and laugh to see the intimidated World shock'd with Horror at their Prognostications.  Last Winter, when I was at London, I remember the Lords of the Admiralty were very busy with a Gentleman who had for certain found out the Longitude; but having heard nothing of it since, I doubt the Project is dropp'd, and our Ships must sail as formerly.  I hear a troublesome Disturber coming up, which at present puts a period to all, but my best Wishes for Berina, and concludes me eternally hers. ARTANDER. Decem. 14 . nothing but Vexation and Ill-nature; the cause of which, I am going to tell Artander . The minute I received your last Letter, I was going into the City to supper, where Sir Harry Wildair (as you call him) and Mrs. Ha---g---n, were of the Company; you know her so well, I need not give you her Character. I have often heard you say, she is a Lady of good Sense, and for that reason I am still more; ex'd at the Misfortune: but no body is infallible, tho' every body think themselves in the right. At Supper a Dispute arose betwixt her and I, which was in itself very foolish, tho' it admitted of something very sharp on both sides: it is not worth Repetition, neither will a Sheet of Paper spare room for it; but Sir Harry and the rest of Company were so cruel, as to think her in the wrong; which made her very angry, and me very uneasy. I have made her several Overtures of Peace, but find her refractory to all; and I think she is resolv'd to persist in a Coldness, or rather a downright Hatred, not to be remov'd.  I declare, I had not the least thought of incroaching upon her Prerogative of Wit, when I shot my own Fool's Bolt; but an Argument is no Argument without an Opposite, and for talk's sake I took up the Cudgels, with which I got the better of my Adversary, but I broke my own Head into the bargain; since, by that means, I have lost the agreeable Conversation of one for whom I had always the greatest Esteem.  But since I came home, I have heard another cause for her implacable Aversion: they say she loves Artander, and has often made violent signs that way, to an insensible --- as you are. However, I bear all the Brunt, and am, it seems, thought the sole cause of your Indifference; which, if true, I shou'd be sorry for, because I wou'd not play the Dog in the Manger. I cou'd be very glad to know the Truth, but am sure you are too generous to confess. I intend to let her know I will be her Advocate, and use my Interest in her behalf: say, Artander, will you give her hopes, and send the welcome News by me? Or must she despair of your Love, to preserve your Friendship for BERINA. Decemb. 18 . little foolish Sheets of gilt Paper; a Man is forc'd to compound half the Subject for the shining Edges of what incloses it: and therefore for the future, I bespeak a large Sheet of home-spun Paper, that will wear out a Pen of the first rate, to get to the bottom of it; for nothing vexes me so much, as to lose any thing Berina can write. I wonder you wou'd undertake a Dispute with Mrs. Ha---g---n, unless you had a mind to make an everlasting Separation; she being one that cannot bear a Contradiction. Besides, as Mr. Congreve says, Who cares for any body that has more Wit than themselves ? As for her Love, I am an absolute Stranger to it; and she can no way oblige me, but by keeping me in continual Ignorance. I can't but laugh at myself, to think what a sheepish Figure I shou'd make, if I were to tell a Lady I wou'd not have her: but I fancy you only tell me this to try my vanity, which is never much rais'd by Female Favours. Pardon me, Berina, I had almost forgot I was writing to one of that Sex, but it is to one so unlike the rest, that nothing I say of 'em can possibly touch her. Last Night, the Gentleman, whose Poetry I sent you, made an Entertainment, where I was one of the Guests; and after Supper we danc'd till Breakfast, tho' to the ungrateful Scrape of a Country Fiddle: I there saw the lovely Delia, who, when she has given place to Berina, stands fairest for Esteem; and not one of those Encomiums given by her transported Lover, but comes short of her Merit. When I had considered her whole Person, I was forc'd to join with him in two Lines of his Poem:  Her whole Composure's of so fine a Frame, Pride cannot hope to mend, nor Envy blame. Methought I pitied the rest of the Ladies, who were only so many Foils, and stood like Farthing-Candles around a Wax-Taper; the glaring Light of one eclipsing the faint Glimmers of the other. One of the Ladies, seeing the Eyes and Admiration of the whole Company drawn by a magnetick force upon the Taper, fell into such a violent Fit of Vapours, that she fancy'd herself Fourscore, and began to tell us how handsome she was when she was young, and how many Men of Quality admir'd her: another, who had often refused and slighted a present Lover, was forced to put on all her complying Airs to make him take notice of her: a third began her Discourse upon good Manners, and said; where the Company were equal, the Respect ought to be so too.  All which gave me a secret Pleasure, and I thought to myself, such Women as Berina and Delia shou'd (for the Quiet and Repose of the rest of their Sex) be confin'd to one another's Company, where neither can boast a Superiority, because both Nature's Masterpieces. The Gentleman of the House seeing all the Ladies in disorder, and knowing nothing gives them greater pleasure than to hear a fine Woman is married, because then she is out of the way, and no longer taken notice of, told 'em, Delia was his Wife; which like the Sun on an April Day, dispers'd the preceding Cloud; every body assum'd their Gaiety, the Ladies left off to envy, and the Gentlemen to admire. So great is a fine Lady's Misfortune, when once she has given herself away for Life! I cannot but own, I think my Neighbour happy, if it be possible for Matrimony to make him so, which I fancy Berina will hardly allow. Pug gives her humble Service to you, and takes it very ill, you have never in any of your Letters enquir'd after her Health. She, with the rest of our Family, presents you with their best Wishes. I am, Dear Madam, Extremely Yours, ARTANDER . Decem. 26 uneasy at my last Night's Dream, which made so dreadful an Impression upon my Fancy, that I have hardly yet recovered it. I thought I saw Artander blind; and when I wou'd have led him, he pull'd out my Eyes too. Pray Heaven avert the fatality of it, if there be any depending. I had a young Relation came this Morning to breakfast with me, who is just at Age, but so deeply engag'd in an Amour, that poor Coz languish'd over his Tea, and sigh'd over his Bread and Butter like a School-Boy going to face a whipping Master in a Morning without his Exercise. The Lady he dies for, is turn'd of Fourteen, and has left off her Bib and her Babies a considerable time. Her Father is lately dead, and left her 8000 Pounds, which, with herself, is put into the hands of two Guardians, who have each a Son design'd for pretty Miss: they have made Proposals about the Matter to one another, and have offer'd each other a thousand Pounds for his Consent; but they are so much of a mind, that 'tis impossible they should agree, which you will call a Paradox. However, the careful young Lady, who neither lov'd to lose her own time, or see her Guardians fall out, is, to prevent both Misfortunes, just ran away with her Father's Butler; who is a very well bred Man, drinks, whores, and games, and has just as much Estate as will qualify him for a Vote.  Of all the Gods, either Heathens or Poets ever made, there is none so silly as this blinking God of Love: he makes mere Idiots of Mankind, and puts them upon such ridiculous Actions, that one wou'd think we were made for nothing but to laugh at one another.  How happy he, that loves not, lives! Said the ingenious Sir John Denham, who learn'd his Lesson from Experience, and paid the highest Price for't too. Deliver me from Cupid's random Shots, and make my firm Resolution a Racket to repel 'em. I wou'd have all those soft-hearted Ladies that are impress'd like Wax, read Quevedo's Vision of Loving-Fools ; I dare say, some of 'em wou'd find their own Characters very fairly display'd: but then the dismal Effects of not loving, to be call'd Ill- natur'd, and an old Maid, who wou'd not rather chuse to be undone, than lie under such scandalous Epithets? I have dwelt a little longer upon this Subject than I shou'd have done, because I think and fear Artander seem'd in his last Letter to lean a little that way. When once we approve of a thing, we implicitly act it; and if you be brought to think a Man happy in a fine Wife, the next Work will be to get one yourself: which, if you do, poor Berina may say she had a Friend; for Artander is lost past Recovery. I desire, in your next, you will either make a generous Confession, or give me some Assurance my Thoughts are ill grounded. I own, I grow impatient to be satisfy'd; for as I make but few Friends, I wou'd not lose them I have.  You seem not pleas'd I writ no more last time, but you forget Women always talk more than they write, as Men always write more than they think: Your Sex seldom complain for want of Impertinence from ours, it being one of your chiefest Plagues: However, I did design to have fill'd up the empty Space of this Paper, but am interrupted by two or three Ladies who are just come in, and my Correspondence must give place to the Tea-Table; tho' nothing shall ever interrupt the Friendship of BERINA. Dec. 29 . to secure and gain: and if Artander shou'd chance to stumble out of the Road he has so long walk'd in, Berina will be so far from losing a Friend, that she will gain a Lover too. Has any thing but Miracle made me resist your Charms so long? And can any thing but a greater Miracle make me fond of less Deserts than yours? No, Berina, 'tis you alone have Power to break the strongest Resolutions; and let the Witchcraft of your own Eyes answer for the Faults I commit. I have often heard, and with some Impatience, that Love and Friendship, notwithstanding the nice Distinction betwixt them, were inseparable Companions, especially between different Sexes; and 'till I knew Berina, and some time after, I thought all Arguments offer'd upon that Subject weak and trifling; tho' it was not long before I began to feel an Inclination to the same Faith: Yet was forc'd to dissemble it, lest a Confession shou'd have brought a Forfeiture of that happy Friendship along with it, which you had so often and so generously promis'd me.  I protest, Berina, I send you this with more Concern than I ever thought I shou'd have had upon this Occasion; but if it be true, that Love and Friendship are not to be parted, as many wise Men aver, then may I hope your Thoughts are of a piece with mine; and if so, how great wou'd be my Folly, shou'd I lose my Happiness, rather than tell how much I desire it?  Tho' so great has been my Dread they were not, that I have made the most vigorous Defences against my Fate, and set up Bulwarks to oppose the little Thief, tho' I took my Measures by a wrong Handle; and while I with force of Arms thought to repel him, he, by Wheedle and Insinuation, found an Entrance, when I thought myself the most secure: Though the Wound he has given me has such an agreeable Smart, I feel it with Pleasure, and wish for nothing more than an Increase of his Power, that may make Berina own it too. Methinks it fares with the God of Love as with us poor Mortals: Our Faults are laid in our way as mortifying Blocks; but the Good we do, lies bury'd in Oblivion; and the kindhearted World takes it as a Due, without either Notice or Thanks. So Cupid, when he sets an illmatch'd Pair together, has many Out-cries against him; but no body praises him for the Millions of Happy-ones who owe their Bliss to his Management: May he touch Berina's Heart, and add one more to the Number. I have now, Berina, made that very generous Confession you desir'd in your last, tho' I very much dread your Answer; but hope nothing will have Power to remove that Friendship which you always promis'd ARTANDER. Jan. 1 . and open'd it with the same Air of Delight I used to do, but found it like Pandora's Box, full of Poison and Infection. I read it with so much Astonishment, that before I got to the end, I forgot the beginning, and was forc'd to read the displeasing Paper twice, before I cou'd believe my own Opinion of it. However, I gave myself time to reflect a little, and now, that my Surprize is pretty well over, I find myself inclin'd to conclude in your favour, and am persuaded your whole Design was to try Berina's Easiness: And tho' a bare Suspicion of me be more than you can answer to the Friendship you owe me, it is much more pardonable than the other, and I shall be extremely pleas'd to see you own it in your next. What a World of Uncertainty do we live in? and how hard a matter to secure one Satisfaction? Did I ever think I shou'd live to see Artander become an Advocate for a Deity he had so often despis'd? Or find him adulterating Friendship, by mixing it with Love? No, Artander, it cannot be, you only have a mind to let me see you can write upon any Subject; and, Proteus like, turn yourself into every Shape. I confess you are a good Mimick, and act a Lover's Part much better than I expected: And, I do assure you, much better than I desir'd. Methinks you write as if you had a mind to draw me in, as you pretend Love has done you, by Wheedle; and wou'd fain persuade me to be of your new Opinion, viz . That Love and Friendship are so united, they are but one Thing with two Names: I confess, you are better at Argument than I, and therefore, like a cowardly Soldier, I think it safer to fly than fight. But Time, and Berina's Carriage, may convince you of your Mistake. I have often heard Men's Promises are so fabulous, that there's no depending on em; but I little expected Artander wou'd have convinc'd me of what I only disbeliev'd for his sake: That you are guilty of Breach of Promise, you will not sure deny, when I refer you to your own first Letter, which I wou'd have inclos'd, but that I have a mind to keep it for a Testimony against you; however, you may remember the Conclusion in those Words.  Be sure, Berina, keep your Friendship inviolate, and you shall find I will keep my Promise, in never desiring more. He that breaks one Promise, may break a thousand; and if you have deceiv'd me as a Friend, I have little Reason to trust you as a Lover. But I hope your next will end my Doubts; and therefore once more subscribe myself your Real Friend, BERINA . Jan. 3 . must I lose you because I love you? And is it a sufficient Reason to withdraw your Friendship, because mine grows stronger? Don't, Berina, give me Cause to think you lie upon the Catch for an Opportunity to throw Artander off: if you ever were that real Friend you pretended to, you will remember what the Word implies; then ask yourself, if it be possible for one true Friend to see another in Distress without releiving him, if in his power? If not, how many Convulsions of the Mind tear and rack his Heart-strings for want of that Power? How willingly wou'd he undergo any Hardship to extricate his Friend; and when he finds his Assistance can do him no Service, sits down to lessen his Pain, by sympathizing with him: Tells him he was his Partner in Prosperity, and Adversity shall never break the Union.  This, Berina, is my Notion of a true Friend; and if it be in your power to make me easy, and you refuse to do it, you must either call Friendship an empty Name, or own you never had any for Artander .  But then you tax me with a Breach of Promise: Alas! Berina, no Man lies under a Necessity of keeping a Promise any longer than he has it in his power; and so long I was very punctual. But when every Post brought fresh Alarms to Love, and every Line gave Wings to my Inclinations, I soon found it was impossible to secure any Tranquility of Mind without an eternal Possession of the dear Author: It is very natural to desire the Company of those whose Conversation we like, and no body ever stood in competition with Berina : I never so much as bestow'd an empty Wish upon any body else, nor will I ever have any other Companion. Beside, Berina, remember how often you have rais'd my Vanity, by owning yourself pleas'd in my Company. Why then must we spend our Time at such a distance? Wast those Hours in trifling Disputes, which might make us both for ever happy. Can Artander be such an agreeable Friend, yet want the Qualities of a Husband? No, Berina, try me that way too, and you shall find I will out-do your own Wishes, by giving myself up so entirely to your Will, that your least Inclination shall be a Command. And now, Berina, either comply, or own you never had the least Friendship for ARTANDER. Jan. 7 . will stick so close to it, as to make you happy against your own Will, and keep you in a State of Life, where Freedom and Liberty may be enjoy'd. Marry'd! that were to bo both blind indeed. You said once, you took your Measures by the wrong Handle, and so you have done again. I do assure you, the Promise you make of inverting the God of Nature's Rules, and being all Obedience, is no Inducement to me to become a Wife: I shou'd despise a Husband as much as a King who wou'd give up his own Prerogative, or unman himself to make his Wife the Head: We Women are too weak to be trusted with Power, and don't know how to manage it without the Assistance of your Sex, tho' we oftenest shew that Weakness in the Choice of our Advisers. The Notion I have always had of Happiness in Marriage, is, where Love causes Obedience on one side, and Compliance on the other, with a View to the Duty incumbent on both: If any thing can sweeten the bitter Cup, 'tis that. But this I give as my Opinion of Marriage in general, without any design of coming to Particulars, and wou'd fain secure Artander's Friendship, by dissuading him from every Thought on't too. But when once the blind Archer with a random Shot has hit a Heart, the wounded Fool grows stupid, sighs and cries, prays, and begs for Help and Pity, but never offers to pull out the Dart, which causes all his Pain: Wou'd but every body keep their Ground, and stand boldly in their own Defence, how easily might they baffle the Attempts of a Boy? But instead of fighting for their own Liberty and Property, they tamely yield to an arbitrary Power; and, like a Dog used to a Collar, hold down their Heads to take the Yoke. For shame, Artander, shake off your Chains, throw by your Non-resisting Principles, and fight for yourself: Remember your Liberty lies at stake, which every wise Man loves.  But if my Advice be thrown away upon you, and you are still resolv'd to bind yourself Prentice for Life, all I have to beg, is, that I may chuse a Wife for you, one who will not abuse Artander's Good- nature, but mix every Action with Love and Prudence, a Woman of an unlimited Goodness, and one who will make you happy, since nothing but a Wife can do it. I own, Artander, I cannot think of giving you so entirely away, as to see you in the Arms of a Stranger; but if you take my Friend, she will give you leave to retain a little of that Friendship which has been so often promis'd entire to BERINA. Jan. 8 . Wishes, and believe you are already mine; since no body, but Berina, can deserve the Character you give the Lady I am to expect from your Hand. Oh! what foolish Things are we Mortals! resolving against our Fate, which only laughs at our weak Endeavours, and makes a Jest of our broken Resolutions. Just so have all those doating Lovers far'd, who came within the Verge of my Observation: I have often made myself merry at their Sufferings, and thought Affectation had a greater share in their Behaviour than Reality; but now, Berina, I am qualify'd, not only for a pitying Looker-on, but as one who wants that Charity I have so often deny'd to my Fellow-Sufferers.  You have promis'd me Freedom and Liberty, but is it possible to enjoy either, while I am a Slave in Fetters?  Or can any thing release me from that Bondage, but an everlasting Union with Berina ? Who that saw me some Months ago in the midst of Ease and Pleasure, wou'd ever have suppos'd I cou'd become a Votary at Cupid's Altar? Or who that sees Berina's Charms, wou'd not be struck with Amazement at the long Resistance I have made? For once, Berina, call up that Vanity so peculiar to your Sex; let it display the Magick Force of your Eyes, indulge the height of its Suggestions, and then forgive Artander's Adorations: Look upon him as one grown restless and ungovernable; lost to every Joy, to every Satisfaction; no Taste, no Relish left for any thing but Love. Oh! how I cou'd tear my false foolish Heart! as Mr. Cowley call'd his, for betraying me just when I had so firmly resolv'd to subdue every Emotion that tended towards my present Circumstances. Sot that I was, to think it possible for me to withstand such Force! Pardon me, dear Berina, for complaining of any thing you're the Cause of; but when I consider the slender Hopes I have of bringing you over to my Side, it makes me wish for a Power equal to yours, which might give me that Tranquility I must never expect, 'till I can say, Berina loves. I am now dispatching a Hurry of Business with great Precipitation, and often curse Delay, because it retards my Flight, and keeps me from the Centre of my Wishes. A few Days more will, I hope, put an end to it, and then Berina will find a verbal Suppliant at her Feet. Oh! how I long for the happy Minute! How eager are my Wishes to see myself once more bless'd with that Conversation which alone can give new Life, and put an End to all my present Pain.  But then how much I dread to meet Berina's Eyes, lest one indifferent Look from them shou'd, with a Basilisk Force, strike poor Artander dead: The very Dread of losing you, has seiz'd my vital Spirits, and all I am able to add, is, that you will call up that Good-nature (of which you have so great a Share) to help you to pity your dying ARTANDER. Jan. 9 . of your last Letter; I don't believe there's a Man in the World, that defies Love as you do, cou'd ever assume the Lover like you: Why, you mimick it as naturally as if you had serv'd an Apprenticeship to its God: Methinks the very Paper whines, 'tis writ in such a beseeching Stile. I declare, I thought you had been in Earnest, and was going to contrive some Way to comfort you; but I consider'd, it was morally impossible for a Man of Artander's Resolution and Courage to be conquer'd by a Boy. But methinks you are like a half-bred Player; you over-act your Part: The next time you put on the Lover, do it with an easier Air; 'tis quite out of fashion to talk of Dying, and Sighing, and Killing Eyes, and such Stuff; you shou'd say, Damn it, Madam, you are a tolerable sort of a Woman, and, if you are willing, I don't much care if I do you the Honour to marry you.  That's the modern Way of Courtship, you shou'd never let a Woman think she has any Merit, let that be always on your own side; and when you vouchsafe to bestow your Favours, let it look like Generosity or Charity, to give such a Heart to one of that worthless Sex, who can no way possibly deserve it.  And now, Artander, you see I understand something of Love as well as you, tho' I have an easier way of describing it. But tell me how I shou'd have brought myself off, had I been a Woman, whose Heart was susceptible of Love? I might then have gorg'd the Bait, and seen the cunning Angler laughing at the credulous Fool. I am almost angry with you for trying me so far, because Love, like Edg'd-Tools, shou'd never be play'd with. You seem to hint, as if you were to be in Town soon. I confess I cou'd wish that part of your Letter true, and please myself with the Thoughts of sitting down with you, to laugh at all that's past: Whenever Artander comes, or in whatever Shape, he shall always find a kind Reception from his Real Friend, BERINA . Jan. 12 . and ridicule my Complaints? Is Artander fallen so low in your Esteem, as to be thought a Banterer of his dearest Friend? How can you use me thus? Believe me, Madam, if you were merry over my last Letter, I have been the very Reverse on't over yours, and have scann'd every Line with more Concern than I dare tell Berina, lest it shou'd serve to make me yet more ridiculous. However, it has brought me one unspeakable Pleasure, which I thank you for; a Promise of a kind Reception in any Shape.  I have just given Orders
