 of Ulysses with the Cyclops , and many others. But tho' all this be Age , it is the Age of Homer \--- And it may be said for the credit of these fictions, that they are beautiful Dreams , or if you will, the Dreams of Jupiter himself . I spoke of the Odyssey only to show, that the greatest Poets when their genius wants strength and warmth for the Pathetic , for the most part employ themselves in painting the Manners . This Homer has done, in characterizing the Suitors, and describing their way of life; which is properly a branch of Comedy, whose peculiar business it is to represent the manners of men." We must first observe, it is the Sublime of which Longinus is writing: That, and not the nature of Homer's Poem, is his subject. After having highly extoll'd the sublimity and fire of the Iliad, he justly observes the Odyssey to have less of those qualities, and to turn more on the side of moral, and reflections on human life. Nor is it his business here to determine, whether the elevated spirit of the one, or the just moral of the other, be the greater excellence in it self. Secondly, that fire and fury of which he is speaking, cannot well be meant of the general Spirit and Inspiration which is to run through a whole Epic Poem, but of that particular warmth and impetuosity necessary in some parts, to image or represent actions or passions, of haste, tumult, and violence. It is on occasion of citing some such particular passages in Homer , that Longinus breaks into this reflection; which seems to determine his meaning chiefly to that sense. Upon the whole, he affirms the Odyssey to have less sublimity and fire than the Iliad, but he does not say it wants the sublime or wants fire. He affirms it to be narrative, but not that the narration is defective. He affirms it to abound in fictions, not that those fictions are ill invented, or ill executed. He affirms it to be nice and particular in painting the manners, but not that those manners are ill painted. If Homer has fully in these points accomplished his own design, and done all that the nature of his Poem demanded or allow'd, it still remains perfect in its kind, and as much a master-piece as the Iliad. The Amount of the passage is this; that in his own particular taste, and with respect to the Sublime, Longinus preferr'd the Iliad: And because the Odyssey was less active and lofty, he judged it the work of the old age of Homer . If this opinion be true, it will only prove, that Homer's Age might determine him in the choice of his subject, not that it affected him in the execution of it. And that which would be a very wrong instance to prove the decay of his Imagination, is a very good one to evince the strength of his Judgment. For had he (as Madam Dacier observes) composed the Odyssey in his youth, and the Iliad in his age, both must in reason have been exactly the same as they now stand. To blame Homer for his choice of such a subject, as did not admit the same incidents and the same pomp of style as his former; is to take offence at too much variety, and to imagine, that when a man has written one good thing, he must ever after only copy himself. The Battle of Constantine, and the School of Athens, are both pieces of Raphael : Shall we censure the School of Athens as faulty, because it has not the fury and fire of the other? or shall we say, that Raphael was grown grave and old, because he chose to represent the manners of old men and Philosophers? There is all the silence, tranquillity and composure in the one, and all the warmth, hurry and tumult in the other, which the subject of either requir'd: both of them had been imperfect, if they had not been as they are. And let the Painter or Poet be young or old, who designs and performs in this manner, it proves him to have made the piece at a time of life when he was master not only of his art, but of his discretion. Aristotle makes no such distinction between the two Poems: He constantly cites them with equal praise, and draws the rules and examples of Epic writing equally from both. But it is rather to the Odyssey that Horace gives the preference, in the Epistle to Lollius , and in the Art of Poetry. It is remarkable how opposite his opinion is to that of Longinus ; and that the particulars he chuses to extoll, are those very fictions and pictures of the manners which the other seems least to approve. Those fables and manners are of the very essence of the work: But even without that regard, the fables themselves have both more invention and more instruction, and the manners more moral and example, than those of the Iliad. In some points (and those the most essential to the Epic Poem) the Odyssey is confessed to excel the Iliad; and principally in the great end of it, the Moral . The conduct, turn, and disposition of the Fable is also what the Criticks allow to be the better model for Epic writers to follow: Accordingly we find much more of the Cast of this Poem than of the other in the Æ neid , and (what next to that is perhaps the greatest example) in the Telemachus . In the Manners , it is no way inferior: Longinus is so far from finding any defect in these, that he rather taxes Homer with painting them too minutely. As to the Narrations , altho' they are more numerous as the occasions are more frequent, yet they carry no more the marks of old age, and are neither more prolix nor more circumstantial, than the conversations and dialogues of the Iliad. Not to mention, the length of those of Phoenix in the ninth book, and of Nestor in the eleventh (which may be thought in compliance to their characters) those of Glaucus in the sixth, of Æ neas in the twentieth, and some others, must be allow'd to exceed any in the whole Odyssey. And that the propriety of style, and the numbers, in the Narrations of each are equal, will appear to any who compare them. To form a right judgment, whether the Genius of Homer had suffer'd any decay; we must consider, in both his poems, such parts as are of a similar nature, and will bear comparison. And it is certain we shall find in each, the same vivacity and fecundity of invention, the same life and strength of imaging and colouring, the particular descriptions as highly painted, the figures as bold, the metaphors as animated, and the numbers as harmonious and as various. The Odyssey is a perpetual source of Poetry: The stream is not the less full, for being gentle; though it is true (when we speak only with regard to the Sublime ) that a river, foaming and thund'ring in cataracts from rocks and precipices, is what more strikes, amazes and fills the mind, than the same body of water, flowing afterwards through peaceful vales and agreeable scenes of pasturage. The Odyssey (as I have before said) ought to be considered according to its own nature and design, not with an eye to the Iliad. To censure Homer because it is unlike what it was never meant to resemble, is, as if a Gardiner who had purposely cultivated two beautiful trees of contrary natures, as a specimen of his skill in the several kinds, should be blamed for not bringing them into pairs ; when in root, stem, leaf, and flower, each was so entirely different, that one must have been spoil'd in the endeavour to match the other. Longinus , who saw this Poem was " partly of the nature of Comedy ," ought not for that very reason to have consider'd it with a view to the Iliad. How little any such resemblance was the intention of Homer , may appear from hence, that although the character of Ulysses there was already drawn, yet here he purposely turns to another side of it, and shows him not in that full light of glory but in the shade of common life, with a mixture of such qualities as are requisite to all the lowest accidents of it, struggling with misfortunes, and on a level with the meanest of mankind. As for the other persons, none of them are above what we call the higher Comedy: Calypso , tho' a Goddess, is a character of intrigue; the Suitors yet more approaching to it; the Ph aeacians are of the same cast; the Cyclops, Melanthius , and Irus , descend even to droll characters; and the scenes that appear throughout, are generally of the comic kind; banquets, revels, sports, loves, and the pursuit of a woman. From the Nature of the Poem, we shall form an Idea of the Style . The diction is to follow the images, and to take its colour from the complexion of the thoughts. Accordingly the Odyssey is not always cloath'd in the majesty of verse proper to Tragedy, but sometimes descends into the plainer Narrative, and sometimes even to that familiar dialogue essential to Comedy. However, where it cannot support a sublimity, it always preserves a dignity, or at least a propriety. There is a real beauty in an easy, pure, perspicuous description even of a low action . There are numerous instances of this both in Homer and Virgil ; and perhaps those natural passages are not the least pleasing of their works. It is often the same in History, where the representations of common, or even domestic things, in clear; plain, and natural words, are frequently found to make the liveliest impression on the reader. The question is, how far a Poet, in pursuing the description or image of an action, can attach himself to little circumstances , without vulgarity or trifling? what particulars are proper, and enliven the image; or what are impertinent, and clog it? In this matter Painting is to be consulted, and the whole regard had to those circumstances which contribute to form a full, and yet not a confused, idea of a thing. Epithets are of vast service to this effect, and the right use of these is often the only expedient to render the narration poetical. The great point of judgment is to distinguish when to speak simply, and when figuratively: But whenever the Poet is oblig'd by the nature of his subject to descend to the lower manner of writing, an elevated style would be affected, and therefore ridiculous; and the more he was forc'd upon figures and metaphors to avoid that lowness, the more the image would be broken, and consequently obscure. One may add, that the use of the grand style on little subjects, is not only ludicrous, but a sort of transgression against the rules of proportion and mechanicks: 'Tis using a vast force to lift a feather . I believe, now I am upon this head, it will be found a just observation, that the low actions of life cannot be put into a figurative style without being ridiculous, but things natural can. Metaphors raise the latter into Dignity, as we see in the Georgicks ; but throw the former into Ridicule, as in the Lutrin . I think this may very well be accounted for: Laughter implies censure; inanimate and irrational beings are not objects of censure; therefore these may be elevated as much as you please, and no ridicule follows: but when rational beings are represented above their real character, it becomes ridiculous in Art, because it is vicious in Morality. The Bees in Virgil , were they rational beings, would be ridiculous by having their actions and manners represented on a level with creatures so superior as men; since it would imply folly or pride, which are the proper objects of Ridicule. The use of pompous expression for low actions or thoughts is the true sublime of Don Quixote . How far unfit it is for Epic Poetry, appears in its being the perfection of the Mock-Epick. It is so far from being the Sublime of Tragedy , that it is the cause of all Bombaste ; when Poets, instead of being (as they imagine) constantly lofty, only preserve throughout a painful equality of fustian: That continued swell of language (which run indiscriminately even through their lowest characters, and rattles like some mightiness of meaning in the most indifferent subjects) is of a piece with that perpetual elevation of tone which the Players have learned from it; and which is not speaking , but vociferating . There is still more reason for a variation of style in Epic Poetry than in Tragic , to distinguish between that Language of the Gods proper to the Muse who sings, and is inspir'd; and that of Men who are introduced speaking only according to nature. Farther, there ought to be a difference of style observed in the speeches of human persons, and those of Deities; and again, in those which may be called set harangues, or orations, and those which are only conversation or dialogue. Homer has more of the latter than any other Poet: what Virgil does by two or three words of narration, Homer still performs by speeches: Not only replies, but even rejoynders are frequent in him, a practice almost unknown to Virgil . This renders his Poems more animated, but less grave and majestic; and consequently necessitates the frequent use of a lower style. The writers of Tragedy lye under the same necessity, if they would copy nature; whereas that painted and poetical diction which they perpetually use, would be improper even in Orations design'd to move with all the arts of Rhetorick: This is plain from the practice of Demosthenes and Cicero ; and Virgil in those of Drances and Turnus gives an eminent example, how far removed the style of them ought to be from such an excess of figures and ornaments: which indeed fits only that Language of the Gods we have been speaking of, or that of a Muse under inspiration. To read through a whole work in this strain, is like travelling all along on the ridge of a hill; which is not half so agreeable as sometimes gradually to rise, and sometimes gently to descend, as the way leads, and as the end of the journey directs. Indeed the true reason that so few Poets have imitated Homer in these lower parts, has been the extreme difficulty of preserving that mixture of Ease and Dignity essential to them. For it is as hard for an Epic Poem to stoop to the Narrative with success, as for a Prince to descend to be familiar, without diminution to his greatness. The sublime style is more easily counterfeited than the natural ; something that passes for it, or sounds like it, is common in all false writers: But nature, purity, perspicuity, and simplicity, never walk in the clouds; they are obvious to all capacities; and where they are not evident, they do not exist. The most plain Narration not only admits of these, and of harmony (which are all the qualities of style) but it requires every one of them to render it pleasing. On the contrary, whatever pretends to a share of the Sublime, may pass notwithstanding any defects in the rest, nay sometimes without any of them, and gain the admiration of all ordinary readers. Homer in his lowest narrations or speeches is ever easy, flowing, copious, clear, and harmonious. He shows not less invention , in assembling the humbler, than the greater, thoughts and images; nor less judgment , in proportioning the style and the versification to these than to the other. Let it be remember'd, that the same Genius that soar'd the highest, and from whom the greatest models of the Sublime are derived, was also he who stoop'd the lowest, and gave to the simple Narrative its utmost perfection. Which of these was the harder task to Homer himself, I cannot pretend to determine; but to his Translator I can affirm (however unequal all his imitations must be) that of the latter has been much the more difficult. Whoever expects here the same pomp of verse, and the same ornaments of diction, as in the Iliad; he will, and he ought to be disappointed. Were the original otherwise, it had been an offence against nature; and were the translation so, it were an offence against Homer , which is the same thing. It must be allow'd that there is a majesty and harmony in the Greek language which greatly contribute to elevate and support the narration. But I must also observe that this is an advantage grown upon the language since Homer's time; for things are removed from vulgarity by being out of use: And if the words we could find in any present language were equally sonorous or musical in themselves, they would still appear less poetical and uncommon than those of a dead one from this only circumstance, of being in every man's mouth. I may add to this another disadvantage to a Translator, from a different cause: Homer seems to have taken upon him the character of an Historian, Antiquary, Divine, and Professor of Arts and Sciences; as well as a Poet. In one or other of these characters he descends into many particularities, which as a Poet only perhaps he would have avoided. All these ought to be preserv'd by a faithful Translator, who in some measure takes the place of Homer ; and all that can be expected from him is to make them as poetical as the subject will bear. Many arts therefore are requisite to supply these disadvantages, in order to dignify and solemnize these plainer parts, which hardly admit of any poetical ornaments. Some use has been made to this end, of the style of Milton . A just and moderate mixture of old words may have an effect like the working old Abbey stones into a building, which I have sometimes seen to give a kind of venerable air, and yet not destroy the neatness, elegance, and equality requisite to a new work; I mean without rendring it too unfamiliar, or remote from the present purity of writing, or from that ease and smoothness which ought always to accompany Narration or Dialogue. In reading a style judiciously antiquated, one finds a pleasure not unlike that of travelling on an old Roman way: but then the road must be as good , as the way is antient ; the style must be such in which we may evenly proceed, without being put to short stops by sudden abruptnesses, or puzled by frequent turnings and transpositions: No Man delights in surrows and stumbling-blocks: And let our love to Antiquity be ever so great, a fine ruin is one thing, and a heap of rubbish another. The imitators of Milton , like most other imitators, are not Copies but Caricatura's of their original; they are a hundred times more obsolete and cramp than he, and equally so in all places: Whereas it should have been observed of Milton , that he is not lavish of his exotick words and phrases every where alike, but employs them much more where the subject is marvellous vast and strange, as in the scenes of Heaven, Hell, Chaos, & c . than where it is turned to the natural and agreeable, as in the pictures of Paradise, the loves of our first parents, the entertainments of Angels, and the like. In general, this unusual style better serves to awaken our ideas in the descriptions and in the imaging and picturesque parts, than it agrees with the lower sort of narrations, the character of which is simplicity and purity. Milton has several of the latter, where we find not an antiquated, affected, or uncouth word, for some hundred lines together; as in his fifth book, the latter part of the eighth, the former of the tenth and eleventh books, and in the narration of Michael in the twelfth. I wonder indeed that he, who ventur'd (contrary to the practice of all other Epic Poets) to imitate Homer's Lownesses in the Narrative , should not also have copied his plainness and perspicuity in the Dramatic parts: Since in his speeches (where clearness above all is necessary) there is frequently such transposition and forced construction, that the very sense is not to be discovered without a second or third reading: and in this certainly he ought to be no example. To preserve the true character of Homer's style in the present translation, great pains has been taken to be easy and natural. The chief merit I can pretend to, is, not to have been carried into a more plausible and figurative manner of writing, which would better have pleased all readers, but the judicious ones. My errors had been fewer, had each of those Gentlemen who join'd with me shown as much of the severity of a friend to me, as I did to them, in a strict animadversion and correction. What assistance I received from them, was made known in general to the publick in the original Proposals for this work, and the particulars are specify'd at the conclusion of it; to which I must add (to be punctually just) some part of the tenth and fifteenth books. The Reader will now be too good a judge, how much the greater part of it, and consequently of its faults, is chargeable upon me alone. But this I can with integrity affirm, that I have bestowed as much time and pains upon the whole, as were consistent with the indispensable duties and cares of life, and with that wretched state of health which God has been pleased to make my portion. At the least, it is a pleasure to me to reflect, that I have introduc'd into our language this other work of the greatest and most antient of Poets, with some dignity; and I hope, with as little disadvantage as the Iliad. And if, after the unmerited success of that translation, any one will wonder why I would enterprize the Odyssey; I think it sufficient to say, that Homer himself did the same, or the world would never have seen it. I design'd to have ended this Postscript here; but since I am now taking my leave of Homer , and of all controversy relating to him, I beg leave to be indulged if I make use of this last opportunity, to say a very few words about some reflections which the late Madam Dacier bestow'd on the first part of my Preface to the Iliad, and which she published at the end of her translation of that Poem  1 . To write gravely an answer to them would be too much for the reflections; and to say nothing concerning them, would be too little for the Author. It is owing to the industry of that learned Lady, that our polite neighbours are become acquainted with many of Homer's beauties, which were hidden from them before in Greek and in Eustathius . She challenges on this account a particular regard from all the admirers of that great Poet, and I hope that I shall be thought, as I mean, to pay some part of this debt to her memory in what I am now writing. Had these reflections fallen from the pen of an ordinary Critick, I should not have apprehended their effect, and should therefore have been silent concerning them: but since they are Madam Dacier's , I imagine that they must be of weight; and in a case where I think her Reasoning very bad, I respect her Authority. I have fought under Madam Dacier's banner, and have wag'd war in defence of the divine Homer against all the Hereticks of the age. And yet it is Madam Dacier who accuses me, and who accuses me of nothing less than betraying our common Cause. She affirms that the most declared enemies of this Author have never said any thing against him more injurious or more unjust than I. What must the world think of me, after such a judgment pass'd by so great a Critick? the world, who decides so often, and who examines so seldom; the world, who even in matters of literature is almost always the slave of Authority? Who will suspect that so much learning should mistake, that so much accuracy should be misled, or that so much candour should be byass'd? All this however has happen'd, and Madam Dacier's Criticisms on my Preface flow from the very same error, from which so many false criticisms of her countrymen upon Homer have flow'd, and which she has so justly and so severely reprov'd; I mean the error of depending on injurious and unskilful translations . An indifferent translation may be of some use, and a good one will be of a great deal. But I think that no translation ought to be the ground of Criticism , because no man ought to be condemn'd upon another man's explanation of his meaning: Could Homer have had the Honour of explaining his, before that august Tribunal where Monsieur de la Motte presides, I make no doubt but he had escap'd many of those severe animadversions with which some French Authors have loaded him, and from which even Madam Dacier's translation of the Iliad could not preserve him. How unhappy was it for me, that the knowledge of our Island-tongue was as necessary to Madam Dacier in my case, as the knowledge of Greek was to Monsieur de la Motte in that of our great Author; or to any of those whom she styles blind Censurers , and blames for condemning what they did not understand. I may say with modesty, that she knew less of my true sense from that faulty translation of part of my Preface, than those blind censurers might have known of Homer's even from the translation of la Valterie , which preceded her own. It pleas'd me however to find, that her objections were not levell'd at the general Doctrine, or at any essentials of my Preface, but only at a few particular expressions. She propos'd little more than (to use her own phrase) to combate two or three Similes ; and I hope that to combate a Simile is no more than to fight with a shadow, since a Simile is no better than the shadow of an Argument. She lays much weight where I laid but little, and examines with more scrupulosity than I writ, or than perhaps the matter requires. These unlucky Similes taken by themselves may perhaps render my meaning equivocal to an ignorant translator; or there may have fallen from my pen some expressions, which taken by themselves likewise, may to the same person have the same effect. But if the translator had been master of our tongue, the general tenor of my argument, that which precedes and that which follows the passages objected to, would have sufficiently determined him as to the precise meaning of them: And if Madam Dacier had taken up her pen a little more leisurely, or had employ'd it with more temper, she would not have answered Paraphrases of her own, which even the translation will not justify, and which say more than once the very contrary to what I have said in the passages themselves. If any person has curiosity enough to read the whole paragraphs in my Preface, on some mangled parts of which these reflections are made, he will easily discern that I am as orthodox as Madam Dacier her self in those very articles on which she treats me like an Heretick: He will easily see that all the difference between us consists in this, that I offer opinions , and she delivers doctrines ; that my imagination represents Homer as the greatest of human Poets, whereas in hers he was exalted above humanity; infallibility and impeccability were two of his attributes. There was therefore no need of defending Homer against me, who (if I mistake not) had carried my admiration of him as far as it can be carried without giving a real occasion of writing in his defence. After answering my harmless Similes, she proceeds to a matter which does not regard so much the honour of Homer , as that of the times he liv'd in; and here I must confess she does not wholly mistake my meaning, but I think she mistakes the state of the question. She had said, the Manners of those times were so much the better the less they were like ours: I thought this required a little qualification, I confest that in my own opinion the world was mended in some points, such as the custom of putting whole nations to the sword, condemning Kings and their families to perpetual slavery, and a few others. Madam Dacier judges otherwise in this; but as to the rest, particularly in prefering the simplicity of the antient world to the luxury of ours, which is the main point contended for, she owns we agree. This I thought was well, but I am so unfortunate that this too is taken amiss, and call'd adopting or (if you will) stealing her sentiment. The truth is she might have said her words , for I used them on purpose, being then professedly citing from her: tho' I might have done the same without intending that compliment, for they are also to be found in Eustathius , and the sentiment I believe is that of all mankind. I cannot really tell what to say to this whole Remark, only that in the first part of it Madam Dacier is displeas'd that I don't agree with her, and in the last that I do: But this is a temper which every polite man should over-look in a Lady. To punish my ingratitude, she resolves to expose my blunders, and selects two which I suppose are the most flagrant, out of the many for which she could have chastiz'd me. It happens that the first of these is in part the Translator's, and in part her own, without any share of mine: She quotes the end of a sentence, and he puts in French what I never wrote in English . " Homer (I said) open'd a new and boundless walk for his imagination, and created a world for himself in the invention of Fable;" which he translates, Homere crea pour son usage un monde mouvant, en inventant la fable . Madam Dacier justly wonders at this nonsense in me; and I, in the Translator. As to what I meant by Homer's invention of Fable, it is afterwards particularly distinguish'd from that extensive sense in which she took it, by these words. "If Homer was not the first, who introduced the Deities (as Herodotus imagines) into the religion of Greece , he seems the first who brought them into a System of Machinery for Poetry. The other blunder she accuses me of is, the mistaking a passage in Aristotle , and she is pleased to send me back to this Philosopher's treatise of Poetry, and to her Preface on the Odyssey for my better instruction. Now though I am sawcy enough to think that one may sometimes differ from Aristotle without blundering, and though I am sure one may sometimes fall into an error by following him servilely; yet I own that to quote any Author for what he never said is a blunder; (but by the way, to correct an Author for what he never said, is somewhat worse than a blunder.) My words were these. "As there is a greater variety of Characters in the Iliad than in any other Poem, so there is of Speeches. Every thing in it has manners, as Aristotle expresses it; That is, every thing is acted or spoken: very little passes in narration." She justly says that "Every thing which is acted or spoken, has not necessarily manners merely because it is acted or spoken." Agreed: But I would ask the question, whether any thing can have manners which is neither acted nor spoken? if not, then the whole Iliad being almost spent in speech and action, almost every thing in it has Manners: since Homer has been proved before in a long Paragraph of the Preface, to have excelled in drawing Characters and painting Manners, and indeed his whole Poem is one continued occasion of shewing this bright part of his talent. To speak fairly, it is impossible she could read even the translation, and take my sense so wrong as she represents it; but I was first translated ignorantly, and then read partially. My expression indeed was not quite exact; it should have been, "Every thing has manners as Aristotle calls them." But such a fault methinks might have been spared, since if one was to look with that disposition she discovers towards me, even on her own excellent writings, one might find some mistakes which no context can redress; as where she makes Eustathius call Cratisthenes the Phliasian, Callisthenes the Physician 2 . What a triumph might some slips of this sort have afforded, to Homer's , hers and my enemies, from which she was only screen'd by their happy ignorance? How unlucky had it been, when she insulted Mr. de la Motte for omitting a material passage in the  3 speech of Helen to Hector, Il. 6 . if some champion for the moderns had by chance understood so much Greek , as to whisper him, that there was no such passage in Homer ? Our concern, zeal, and even jealousy, for our great Author's honour were mutual, our endeavours to advance it were equal, and I have as often trembled for it in her hands, as she could in mine. It was one of the many reasons I had to wish the longer life of this Lady, that I must certainly have regain'd her good opinion, in spite of all mis-representing Translators whatever. I could not have expected it on any other terms than being approved as great, if not as passionate, an admirer of Homer as her self. For that was the first condition of her favour and friendship; otherwise not one's Taste alone, but one's Morality had been corrupted, nor would any man's Religion have been unsuspected, who did not implicitly believe in an Author whose doctrine is so conformable to holy Scripture. However, as different people have different ways of expressing their Belief, some purely by public and general acts of worship, others by a reverend sort of reasoning and enquiry about the grounds of it; 'tis the same in Admiration, some prove it by exclamations, others by respect. I have observed that the loudest huzza's given to a great man in a triumph, proceed not from his friends, but the rabble; and as I have fancy'd it the same with the rabble of Criticks, a desire to be distinguished from them has turned me to the more moderate, and I hope, more rational method. Tho' I am a Poet, I would not be an Enthusiast; and tho' I am an Englishman, I would not be furiously of a Party. I am far from thinking my self that Genius, upon whom at the end of these remarks Madam Dacier congratulates my country: One capable of "correcting Homer , and consequently of reforming mankind, and amending this Constitution." It was not to Great Britain this ought to have been apply'd, since our nation has one happiness for which she might have preferr'd it to her own, that as much as we abound in other miserable mis-guided Sects, we have at least none of the blasphemers of Homer . We stedfastly and unanimously believe, both his Poem, and our Constitution, to be the best that ever human wit invented: That the one is not more incapable of amendment than the other; and (old as they both are) we despise any French or Englishman whatever, who shall presume to retrench, to innovate, or to make the least alteration in either. Far therefore from the Genius for which Madam Dacier mistook me, my whole desire is but to preserve the humble character of a faithful Translator, and a quiet Subject. 
