 or any just Design; which has been often shewn. That as he is ignorant of the Art of Poetry, and particularly of Epick Poetry, he is profoundly ignorant of Homer, and Virgil, and Boileau; to which latter he very impudently compares himself, and more impudently prefers himself. That there are Ten important Differences, which distinguish Boileau from him. Secondly, That as Prince Alexander is qualify'd to be Sovereign Prince of Dunces, he is highly qualify'd to be King of Kn ---; there being no other Difference between the greatest of Fools and the greatest of Kn ---, than there is between High Probability and Matter of Fact; Reason and good Sense being, next to Religion, the greatest Restraints upon Mankind, and the purest Sources of Probity, Integrity, and Sincerity. That he is qualify'd for this important Office, is shewn, By his unparallel'd Impudence. For as Modesty, which is itself a moral, Virtue, always accompanies the other Virtues; great Impudence always attends great Kn---ry; as villainous Calumnies, audacious Lyes, accusing innocent Persons of the Accuser's Crimes, on purpose to make Men of Sense look little to Fools, and shallow Knaves. Divers of these Calumnies, and these infamous Falshoods, are discover'd and expos'd in this Pamphlet, by several Original Letters, either attesting undeniable Facts, or confounding impudent Calumnies. SIR , I HAVE lately read over the Two Letters which were writ by you, and published in the Daily Journals , and return you my hearty Thanks for the Pleasure which I receiv'd from them. I observed in those Letters an extraordinary Piece of Gratitude in you, in resigning that Throne to P. to which he himself had advanced you, with Ten times more Goodness on his Side than Desert on yours And it was no small Satisfaction to me, to find that you were govern'd so entirely by Justice, as to part with an Empire of so unbounded an Extent, to one who had Right Divine to it, who had by Nature an Hereditary Indefeasible Right to succeed Tom D'Urfey and Settle . One certain Sign of his being even born to be no less than absolute Monarch of all the Dunces over the whole Face of the Earth, was his conferring that Title on you, who have unfortunate Qualities that are so incompatible with it, as Modesty, Humanity, Discernment, Penetration, Sagacity, together with an uncommon Knowledge of Letters, and Skill in the learned Languages: These are Talents which utterly unqualify you to govern a Generation of Mortals, who are not influenced by any of them, and who have not the least Notion of some of them. Whereas P. has one Qualification alone, which gives him an indisputable Right to wear the Imperial Crown of the Dunces; and that is, that soaring matchless Impudence, begot by Pride on Stupidity, which strikes so strongly on the outward Senses, by which Dunces are entirely govern'd. Whereas Genius, and Wit, and Learning, and Truth, and Sense, and Decorum, speak forcibly only to the understanding Few, and have Power over them alone. That high and undaunted Assurance qualified him to set up for an Editor, in spite of Learning, or Art, or Nature, as you have so clearly shewn; and that qualified him to set up for a Versifier, without Numbers; and for a Critick, without Taste or Judgment; as I formerly shew'd so clearly: That soaring and matchless Impudence also gave him plenary Power, to throw out his Titles to the Right and the Left, without any Discernment or Distinction. So that Persons whom God and Nature have plac'd immense Degrees above him, are dubb'd, by him, Fools, Blockheads, Dunces, and Scoundrels, according to his Sovereign Pleasure; which puts me in mind of a little Gentleman, who was in the Court of one of our Kings, a Wit, just such a Wit as Mr. P. is in the Reign of King G. II. This motley Gentleman was wont to salute every one whom he met in the Morning, with Good-morrow, Brother Fool , whether it was Bishop or Archbishop, or President of the Council, or Secretary of State, which often caus'd his lower Parts rudely to suffer for the Licentiousness of the Parts above them. And I wish Mr. P. had been so happy as to take Warning by that Example: F aelix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum. It was long before I had the Happiness to be acquainted with you, who were then very young, that I publish'd Remarks upon the Translation of the Iliad of Homer by P. upon his Windsor Forest , writ in Envy of Sir John Denham's Poem upon Cooper's Hill ; upon the infamous Temple of Fame , writ in Envy of Chaucer's Poem upon the same Subject; and upon the Ode on C aecilia's Day , writ in Envy of Mr. Dryden's Feast of Alexander ; an Ode in which P. very wisely pretends to shew the Power of Musick, by the Story of Orpheus ; that is, by an Allegory. For Horace , who may be allow'd to be pretty good Judge of this Master, tells us, that the whole Story of Orpheus is nothing but an Allegory: Sylvestres homines sacer interpresque Deorum C aedibus, & victu foedo deterruit Orpheus; Dictus ob hoc lenire tigres rapidosque leones. And my Lord Chancellor Bacon , in his Treatise of the Wisdom of the Antients, is of the same Opinion. As I have lately perused all the foresaid Remarks, and some of them after a very long Distance of Time from the first writing and publishing them; so that the warm and partial Conceit of an Author had been a long time extinguish'd: As I have not only done this, but consulted likewise my sincerest and most judicious Friends, both they and I have found, that the Remarks which I submitted to their Censure, were reasonable, just, and solid, and consequently that the Pieces on which they were writ, were infinitely below the Masterpieces, in Envy of which they were published by their scandalous Author. Now, as P. apparently wrote the 'foresaid Pieces, in Envy to the Reputation of their celebrated Authors, neither you nor I can have any Reason to doubt, but that if those Authors had been his Contemporaries, if Time and Death, and impartial Posterity had not given a Sanction to their Writings, he would have put all of them into the Number of his Dunces. For either he must have resolved to be a Foil to them, which his monstrous and impudent Vanity will not let us suppose, or he must have believed that he could surpass them, and consequently we must conclude, that instead of You, he would have placed Dryden , or Denham , or Waller , if they had been now alive, upon the Imperial Throne of his Dunces. As in making these Remarks, I have endeavour'd to shew him an Author without Judgment, or without any thing of that good Sense, which, if we will believe Horace , is the only Source of good Writing in Poetry: Scribendi recte sapere est & pincipium & fons ; Nay, without any Degree of reasonable Meaning: I shall, in sending you Remarks upon some of the prosaick Parts of the Edition of his late Rhapsody in Quarto , [for the Rhimes by their own Vileness are secur'd from Criticism,] endeavour to lay before you, not only his utter Ignorance of the poetical Art, but his Malice, his Impudence, his Falshood, and his want of Honour. But now, Sir, to come to the Preliminaries before his Rhapsody, both that before the Volume in Twelves, and that before the other in Quarto : Oh, the Truth, the Wisdom, the Modesty, the Humility that there is to be found in both! As he formerly writ Rhimes in his own Commendation, and publish'd Mr. Wycherley's Name to them, he has now been dabbling after the same Manner in Prose. He has before each of these Volumes writ his own fulsome Panegyricks: And each of these fulsome Panegyricks is pretended to be writ by others, forsooth, without the least Knowledge or Privacy of this modest Author. Now, Sir, either he imagines, that he can make the impartial World believe this, or he does not. If he does not imagine that he can impose this upon the sensible and impartial World, to what End or Purpose is this noble Fiction? Was it to convince his sensible Readers, that he can out-equivocate, and out-prevaricate the pontifical Scaramouchi, from whom he had his Education and Instruction? or was it contriv'd to make some Addition to the Hundred thousand Fools, who, he says, already admire him? But if he does imagine that he can impose this Falshood upon the sensible and impartial World, can there be a more certain Sign that he has made you an Usurper, and plac'd you upon a Throne to which he himself has an indefeasible Right? Was there ever such an empty, such an impudent Scribler? Did ever any fanatical Æ gyptian of old offer more Incense to one of Pug's Ancestors, than Pug has offer'd to himself, who is at once the Votary and the Priest, and a little mimicking, mischievous, ludicrous God upon the Altar? That he was the Author of both these Preliminaries, is not only a Truth that is in itself apparent, and that carries its own Evidence with it; but 'tis known to half the Town, that he carried or sent both these Panegyricks to the Press himself. That the latter was printed by one Wr---t , who was formerly Operator to Alderman B--- , and who lives in a Place call'd Peter's Hill , between Doctors-Commons and the Thames , a Place in which this Poetaster exceedingly delights, because he has in the Neighbourhood of it, like his Brother Proctor John Littlewit, Addle Hill for his Parnassus , and Puddle-Dock for his Hippocrene ; by drinking large Draughts of which latter, he was inspir'd with that cleanly, that noble, that gallant Invention of Fleet-Ditch ; an Invention so fit to entertain and charm the most delicate Persons of both Sexes. Does not half the Town know, that honest J. W. was the only Dunce that was persecuted and plagu'd by this Impression? that Twenty times the Rhapsodist alter'd every thing that he gave the Printer? and that Twenty times, W. in Rage and in Fury, threaten'd to turn the Rhapsody back upon the Rhapsodist's Hands? Give me Leave, Sir, to say something apart to each of these two Preliminaries, both to that in Twelves, and to that in Quarto . I shall begin with the former, which is superscrib'd, The Publisher to the Reader . The first extraordinary Paragraph in it, has two general Assertions, which, generally taken, are false, and which the Author, to shew his Logical Head, is for proving true by a particular Instance, and, to shew his great Modesty, takes that Instance from himself. The first general Assertion is, That, when any Scandal is vented against a Man of the highest Distinction and Character, either in the State or in Literature, the Publick in general afford it a quiet Reception, and the larger Part accept it as favourably, as if it were some Kindness done to themselves . This is the first general Assertion. Now, Sir, for the particular Instance intended to prove the Truth of it; I will only observe one Fact, says P that every Week for these Two Months past, the Town has been persecuted with Pamphlets, Advertisements, Letters, and weekly Essays, not only against my Wit and Writings, who am a Man of the highest Distinction and Character in Literature, but against my Person and Character. And that of all those Men who have received Pleasure from my Writings, which by a modest Computation [Oh! the charming Beauties of that attractive Virtue, Modesty!] may be about a Hundred thousand in these Kingdoms of England and Ireland, not to mention Jersey and Guernsey, [which you know, says P. are not in England, because they are in Hampshire,] or the Orcades, [which I mention without naming Scotland, sweetly to insinuate, that there is no such thing as Taste of Literature in any Part of North-Britain, unless in that which is next to Greenland,] or the new World, or Foreigners who have translated me into their Languages, not a Man among them has stood up to say one Word in my Defence. Thus, Sir, have I laid before you the first general Assertion, and the particular Instance intended to prove the Truth of it. But now, Sir, as I observ'd before, P 's undistinguishing Noddle has not found out, that his first general Assertion, generally taken, is false; for if by a Man of the highest Distinction and Character, he means one who has highly deserv'd either of his Country or of the Common-wealth of Learning, [But then he must not in anywise mean himself, who has deserved nothing of the latter, and very ill of the former] I may justly affirm, that any Scandal or Calumny published against such a one, must be utterly shocking to any Man of good Sense, or Candour, or Integrity, or Humanity, though perhaps it may be pleasing enough to P's Hundred thousand Admirers: For People of their Capacities are always Levellers, and when they find it impossible for them to raise themselves to an Equality with Merit, they politickly lay hold of any Opportunity to bring Merit down to their Level. Thus have I shewn that this first general Assertion is not prov'd by the particular Instance, not only because no general Conclusion can be drawn from Particulars, but because the Person mention'd in the general Assertion is immensely distant from the Creature mention'd in the particular Instance; as distinct as East from West, or as Earth from Heaven. For if P. has the Misfortune to fancy himself a Person of the highest Distinction and Character in Literature , as he plainly infers that he does, his Pericranium is certainly as much out of Order, and he as much wants to be trepann'd, as if he had declar'd himself Grand Signior , Emperor of China , or the Great Mogul. But now to come to the second general Assertion, which is a blessed one, and is as follows: If a known Scoundrel or Blockhead chance to be but touch'd upon, a whole Legion is up in Arms, and it becomes the common Cause of all Scriblers, Printers, and Booksellers whatsoever . Now the particular Instance or Fact gives the Lye to this general Assertion. For a certain known Scoundrel, and horrible Blockhead, has lately not only been touch'd upon, but dwelt upon, and has been pelted as much and as plentifully as if his Ears had been nail'd to the Pillory, and yet not one of all his Hundred thousand Admirers, whether in Jersey or Guernsey , or the Orcades , or in the new World, not any Man has stood up to say one Word in his Defence. I hope this will convince his Patrons and his Admirers, who have purchas'd, Scurrility and Nonsense at so dear a Rate, that nothing is more easy than to give foul Language, but that 'tis Ten times more excusable in Me than it is in Him; first, because l aesit prior , I only retort the Language he gave; secondly, because in the Remarks which I formerly made upon the several Things he has publish'd, I have given such Reasons, why this Language is his Due, as have convinc'd every sensible impartial Reader, that there is not in any of those Trifles the least Degree of that Solidity, that Morality, and that good Sense, which are the Principles and Fountain of all good Writing in Poetry: I shall pursue the same Method in the Animadversions, which from time to time I shall send you upon the brutal Dunciad ; and before I have done with this first Preliminary, I shall take one Occasion from it, to convince the Reader, that this bouncing Bully of Parnassus , is nothing but a false Brave, a mere bragging pretending Empirick, and utterly ignorant of the first Rudiments of an Art which he has more than Twenty Years professed, and in which he has nothing but Impudence and Ignorance, and Falshood to support him. In order to shew this, let us see the Account that P. himself gives of his Dunciad. It is stil'd, says he, Heroick, as being doubly so, not only with respect to its Nature, which according to the best Rules of the Antients, and strictest Ideas of the Moderns, is critically such; but also with regard to the heroical Disposition, and high Courage of the Writer, who dar'd to stir up such a formidable, irritable, and implacable Race of Mortals. Thus P. all at once makes himself the Hero of his wonderful Rhapsody, and stiles his Folly, his Impudence, his Insolence, and his want of Capacity to discern and to distinguish, high Courage; for want of which Capacity, he must be told, that a Bully is of all Mortals, the most Foolish, the most Impudent, and the most Insolent, but at the same time Cowardly. And here, Sir, give me leave to observe what the scandalous Chronicle reports, That as soon as the Rhapsody was publish'd, P. never dar'd to appear without a tall Irishman attending him, who is so inseparable from him, that one would swear that he owes his Wit as well as his Courage to him. But there is now a Necessity for going back a little, The Dunciad, says P, is stiled Heroick with respect to its Nature, which, according to the best Rules of the Antients, and strictest Ideas of the Moderns, is critically such . Here then let us see what the Proposition of every Epick Poem, whether Serious and Real, or Mock and Ridiculous, ought to be; and then whether P's Proposition is agreeable to it. The Proposition of an Epick Poem, says Bossu, is, That first Part of the Poem, in which the Author proposes briefly, and in general, what he designs to say in the Body of his Work; in which there are two Things to be considered, the one is what the Poet proposes, and the other is the Manner of his proposing it. The Proposition , continues he, ought to contain the Matter of the Poem only; that is to say, the Action of it, and the Persons who execute that Action, whether those Persons are Divine or Human: We find all that in the Iliad, in the Odysses, and in the Æneid. The Action that Homer proposes to sing in the Iliad, is the Revenge that Achilles takes for the Affront that is offered him; that of the Odysses is the Return of Ulysses to Ithaca; and that of the Æneid, is the Empire of Troy transferr'd by Æneas to Italy. We ought not to suffer ourselves to be surprized by the Expression of Homer in the Beginning of his Iliad, where he says that he sings the pernicious Wrath of Achilles, nor believe that he proposes that Wrath as the Subject of his Poem: At that rate be could not relate an Action to his Reader, but a Passion; We ought not to stop there, since he himself has not stopp'd there. He tells us, that he sings the Wrath which caus'd the Greeks to suffer such mighty Losses, and was the Death of so many Heroes. He proposes then an Action, and not a simple Passion for the Matter of his Poem; and that Action is, as we said before, the Revenge that Achilles takes for the Affront that is offered him. Thus in the other two Poems, they propose at first a Man; but the Propositions stop not there, they add, that Ulysses suffered very much in his Endeavour to return into his Country, or that the Design of Æneas's Voyage was to establish himself in Italy. Both the one and the other, then, of the two Poets proposes to sing an Action. But so much for serious and real Epick or Heroick Poems. Let us now come to the Mock and the Comick ones, and we shall find, that this Poem, by changing its Nature, does not change its Manner. Boileau , who was one of the greatest of the French Poets, and one of the most judicious of their Criticks, calls his Lutrin, Poeme Heroique , an Heroical or Epick Poem; and yet in the Proposition to this Poem, which was designed purely for Pleasantry, he proposes to sing an Action, as appears by the Proposition itself. Fe Chante les combats, et ce Prelat terrible, Qui par ses long Travaux et sa Force invincible, Dans une illustre Eglise exercant son grand coeur Fit placer a la fin un Lutrin dans le Choeur. Cest en vain que le Chantre appui ed un vain Titre, Deux fois l'enfit oter par les mains du Chapitre; Ce Prelat sur le Banc de son Rival altier Deux fois le rapportant l'en couvrit tout entier. Which in English Prose is thus, I sing the Combats, and that terrible Prelate, who, by his long Labours, and his invincible Courage, causing his great Soul to be seen by his Actions, in an illustrious Church, caused at length a stately Pulpit to be erected in the Choir. In vain did the Chanter, supported by an empty Title, twice cause it to be taken down by the Hands of the Chapter; and twice did the Prelate, causing it to be carried back again, fix it before the Seat of his proud Rival, and covering him, and hiding him from the Congregation, mortify him severely. Thus Boileau , in the Proposition to a mock Epick, or Heroick Poem, proposes to sing an Action; and accordingly entertains the Reader with it. And though Butler in his Proposition to Hudibras , does not pretend to sing one regular Action [for very little of the Rules of Aristotle was known then in England ] yet still he proposes to sing Action, or Actions, as will appear by the Proposition itself. When Civil Fury first grew high, And Men fell out they knew not why; When hard Words, Jealousies, and Fears, Set Folks together by the Ears, And made them fight like mad or drunk, For Dame Religion, as for Punk; Whose Honesty they all durst swear for, Tho' not a Man of them knew wherefore: When Gospel Trumpeter, surrounded By long-Ear'd Rout, to Battle sounded, And Pulpit Drum Ecclesiastick, Was beat with Fist, instead of a Stick; Then did Sir Knight abandon Dwelling, And out he rode a Colonelling. So that the excellent Author of Hudibras , who had so admirable a Talent for Pleasantry, proposes chiefly to entertain his Reader with the Actions of his Hero. Now let us take a short View of P---'s Proposition to his Dunciad ; and after that you will easily judge how far 'tis Heroick with respect to its Nature, and how far it is critically such, according to the best Rules of the Antients, and strictest Ideas of the Moderns . Books, and the Man; I sing, the first who brings The Smithfield Muses to the Ears of Kings. Let us divest it of its Jingle, since Rhyme is of no use to the Nonsense of such Prose as this, but to render it more ridiculous, and more unintelligible. I sing Books, and I sing the Man, the first Man, who carries the Muses of Smithfield to the Ear of Kings. Thus P. sings Books, and not an Action; and the Author who pretends in an Epick Poem to sing Books instead of singing an Action, is only qualified to sing Ballads. And as Nature has begun to qualify him for that melodious Vocation, by giving him that Face, that Shape, and that Stature; so if Fortune would but finish what Nature has begun, he would be a Nonpareillo in that Employment. As he has for several Months last past, been bringing down a wooden Tempest upon his Carcass, if one Eye and one Leg should suffer severely by the Storm, which may very well happen, do not you think, Sir, that his rare Figure would proclaim him the Prince of Ballad Singers, as, by justly deposing you, he has made himself the King of Dunces? ' P. is so far from singing an Action, that there is no such Thing as Action in his whimsical Rhapsody, unless what proceeds from Dulness, that is, from Privation; a very pretty Principle of Action, and very worthy of P's Invention! The Thing is divided into Three Books. In the First, instead of Action there is Description and Declamation. In the Third, instead of Action we have nothing but a feverish Dream. The Second is made up of Nastiness, Obscenity, and Absurdity; and is so far from being Part of an Action, that it runs counter to the Design of the whole Thing, if there could be any Design in it; for Vigour of Action can never proceed from Dulness, though it may from Madness. The Hero of the Piece does nothing at all, and never speaks but once, unless it be half a Line in the Third Book. In the First Book, indeed, he offers to burn his Works, but is hinder'd by the Goddess: Now those Works are either Good or Bad; if they are Good, they render him incapable of being King of the Dunces; if they are Bad, the Offer to burn them shews his Judgment, and Judgment must be always contrary to Dulness, otherwise P. would be the brightest Creature that ever God made. Whether an Epick Poem, is grave or mock Epick, the Action must have Probability in all its Parts: Both antient and modern Criticks agree in this. Ficta voluptatis caus a sint proxima veris, says Horace, Let every Thing that is invented to give the Reader Pleasure, be attended with Probability : Nay, Boileau makes Probability more necessary than Truth itself, as several of the Antients and Moderns have likewise done. Jamais au spectateur n'offrez rien d'incroyable, Le vrai peut quelque fois n'etre pas vrai semblable. Une merveille absurde est Bour moy sans appas, L'esprit n'est point em u de ce q'il ne croit pas. Never offer any thing that is incredible either to the Reader or the Spectator. Truth sometimes may not have Probability. That which is absurd, at the same Time that 'tis wonderful, has no Charms for me. The Soul is never mov'd with that which it does not believe. And the Reason that he gives for this is very solid, viz . Truth may sometimes have the Appearance of a Lye, but Probability has always the Appearance of Truth. And this mock Probability, Butler in his Hudibras , and Boileau in his Lutrin have preserved inviolably. But what Probability is there in P's Rhapsody? What Probability in the Games which take up a third Part of the Piece? Is it not monstrous to imagine any Thing like that in the Master Street of a populous City; a Street eternally crowded with Carriages, Carts, Coaches, Chairs, and Men passing in the greatest Hurry about Private and Publick Affairs? What Probability in that noble Invention of Fleet Ditch , which, besides its Extravagancy, and its Stupidity, shews the nasty Soul of the Author. Immodest Words admit of no 'Defence, For want of Decency, is want of Sense. For all that is said there, must be excessively shocking to all Men of common Sense, as shewing want of Respect to the Reader, as much as to the Authors mentioned there. Every Man of good Breeding, as well as good Sense, must be mov'd with Indignation, At bawling Infamy, with Language base. Dryden. P. talks of Taylor the Water-Poet, but Taylor is only call'd so from his Profession. P. is properly the Water-Poet, who has Water-Language, which he seems to have lived so many Years at Chiswick and Twickenham , on purpose to learn it from his Daily transitory Masters, the Scullers. I am sorry I have dwelt so long upon this whimsical Trifle, call'd, The Publisher to the Reader ; which could have been writ by neither Christian , nor Turk , nor Jew , nor any one but an Anti-Christian Catholick, educated in Jesuitical Maxims, and Religious Frauds. I appeal to any Man of common Sense, if this whimsical Fraud could have been printed so many times in Duodecimo , as the Author pretends it has been, and inserted at last in the Appendix to the Edition in Quarto, if it had been writ by any one but P. himself. This appears to me to be utterly impossible: And the Truth appears so plainly, and strikes the Reader so strongly through that paltry Artifice, that if P. believes that he conceals himself by it, he shews himself a thousand times more weak, and exposes himself infinitely more than by any thing that he can say in Rhyme; for there are several Persons who believe, that any Sort of Fiction is allowable in Rhyme; but all the World expects, that when a Man writes Prose, he should speak Truth and Reason. As we have shewn that P. knows nothing of the Art of Poetry in general, we now come to shew, that he knows as little of Homer in particular, whether we consider the Qualities and Character of that celebrated Grecian , or the Nature of his Writings; and, in short, as little of the Characters of other Poets, whether ancient or modern. And the impartial Reader will then determine whether the Author who has all these Defects, is qualified to set up for a Translator of Homer , or for a knowing, a just, and a judicious Critick. What P. is pleas'd to call his Preface, is neither a just Dissertation, nor a modest Encomium, but an extravagant hyperbolical Panegyrick on Homer ; a Heap of dogmatical, elaborate, illiterate Pedantry: By which he has equally labour'd to shew the Excellence of Homer , and to expose and detect his own Unworthiness. For there is not in the Translation the least Shadow of those great Qualities which either are, or are pretended to be, in Homer . And yet P. at the same Time that he is extolling him to the Skies, gives infallible Signs that he does not know him, and blindly says more infamous Things of him, than either Terrasson, Le Motte , or Perrault. When the Prefacer tells us, in his very first Paragraph; that Homer is universally allow'd to have had the greatest Invention of any Writer whatever, he is so far from telling us, at the same Time, what Invention is, that he plainly discovers that he knows nothing of it. For he seems to take it for a peculiar Faculty of the Mind, distinct from Memory, Imagination, and Judgment; whereas it is the Effect and Result of the confederate Powers and Operation of all the three. We have a faint Image of these Operations in Hawking: For Memory may be justly compar'd to the Dog that beats the Field, or the Wood, and that starts the Game; Imagination to the Falcon that  1 clips it upon its Pinions after it; and Judgment to the Falconer, who directs the Flight, and who governs the whole. But P. as has been said, takes it for a distinct Faculty; he opposes it to Judgment in this very Paragraph; and in the last Paragraph of the third Page, [ Edit. 2.] he calls it the strong and the ruling Faculty. P. tells us, in the first Page of this wonderful Preface, that whatever Praises may be given to Works of Judgment, there is not a single Beauty in them, but is owing to the Invention. But he ought to have known that this is reciprocal; and that in Works of Invention there is not a single Beauty but is owing to the Judgment; and that is the Reason that none have had great Beauties, but who have had great Judgment; as Homer , and Virgil , and some few others of the ancient Grecian and Roman Poets, and some very few of the English, French , and Italian. In the Beginning of the second Page of the Preface, [Edition the 2d] P. is pleas'd to tell us, That the Reason why most Criticks are inclin'd to prefer a judicious and methodical Genius to a great and fruitful one, is, because they find it easier to pursue their Observations through a uniform and bounded Walk of Art, than to comprehend the vast and various Extent of Nature . Fine Words without any Meaning! As if any one could comprehend the vast and various Extent of Nature, but the great Author of Nature. If this Prefacer had not been superlatively ignorant, he would have known, that the most judicious and methodical Genius's have been the greatest and the most fruitful ones; the most admirable, and the most sublime. The Epick Poems of Homer and Virgil , are infallible Proofs of this. Our Author's Work is a wild Paradise ; [says P. towards the Top of his 2d Page,] where, if we cannot see all the Beauties so distinctly as in an order'd Garden, it is only because the Number of them is infinitely greater. 'Tis like a copious Nursery which contains the Seeds and first Productions of every Kind, out of which, those who follow'd him have but selected some particular Plants, each according to his particular Fancy, to cultivate and beautify. If some Things are too luxuriant, 'tis owing to the Richness of the Soil; and if others are not arriv'd to Perfection or Maturity, it is only because they are over-run and oppress'd by those of a stronger Nature. Now I appeal to you, Sir, if this is not a Paragraph which shews an Ignorance as gross and profund as Æ gyptian Darkness: An Ignorance which may be felt, tho' it cannot be understood. No Indian , no Negro , no Hottentot , knows less of Homer , than P. But what you and I will be pleas'd with, is this, that as the Author of this Paragraph has affronted, abus'd, and slander'd several young Ladies, which alone is sufficient to shew him of a Race different from the human; for even the vilest of Dogs will never abuse a Female of his own Species; so Providence has justly ordain'd that a Lady should revenge the Quarrel of her Sex, and ridicule, and expose, and baffle the Author of the said monstrous Paragraph. I speak of Madam Dacier. What! says she , is Homer's Poem then, according to Mr. Pope , an indigested Heap of Beauties, without Order or Symmetry; a Piece of Ground upon which nothing but Seeds, and nothing perfect or accomplish'd, is to be found; a Production loaded with many superfluous and unprofitable Things, which ought to be retrench'd, and which oppress or disfigure those which ought to be preserv'd? The most inveterate Enemies to Homer, says that judicious Lady , never said any thing more injurious, or more unjust, against that Poet. Mr. P. will pardon me, says she , if I oppose the three Comparisons in this erroneous Preface, which seem to me to be very false, and utterly contrary to what the greatest ancient and modern Criticks have thought. To the Point, then, she continues ; The Iliad is so far from being a wild Paradise, that it is the most regular Garden, and laid out with more Symmetry than ever any Garden was. Monsieur Le Notre 2 , who was the greatest Man of the World in his Art, never observ'd in his Garden a more perfect, or more admirable Symmetry, than Homer has observ'd in his Poems. Every thing that is in them, is not only in the Place in which it ought justly to be, but every thing is formed on Purpose for the Place it possesses. He presents you at first with that which ought first to be seen; he places in the Middle what ought to be only there, and what would be improper either at the Beginning or End; and he places Things at a greater Distance, which ought to be so dispos'd, in order to create a greater and a more agreeable Surprize; and to make use of a Comparison drawn from Painting, He disposes that in the greatest Light, which cannot be too visible; and sinks and hides in the Obscurity of the Shadows, what does not require to be expos'd so fully to Sight. So that we may say, that Homer was the Painter who best knew how to employ the Lights and the Shadows. And it was this beauteous and admirable Order, which Horace admir'd in his Poems, and upon which he founded his Rules for the perfecting the Art of Poetry. The second Comparison, (she continues) is as unjust. How could Mr. P. affirm that one can discover only Seeds, and the immature Productions of every Kind, in the Iliad? when every Beauty in that Poem is so perfect a Beauty, that the following Ages could find nothing to add to any Kind of his Excellencies? And the Ancients have always propos'd Homer as the most perfect Model, in every Kind of Poetry. The third Comparison (she still continues) is every Jot as unjust, and is compos'd of the Errors of the two former. Homer had undoubtedly an incomparable Fertility of Invention, but yet a Fertility which is always restrain'd by a just and sincere Judgment, which made him reject every superfluous Thing which his boundless Imagination could offer to him, in order to retain only what was useful or necessary. Judgment guided the Head of this admirable Gardiner, and was the Pruning-Hook he made use of in cutting off every useless Branch from its Trunk. He has done what Horace speaks of in his Epods, Inutilesque falce ramos amputans Faeliciores inserit. Mr. P, she continues, had in an extraordinary manner oblig'd us, if he had directed us to the superfluous Branches that ought to be cut off from this Tree: If he had instructed us in the Symmetry, which ought to be given to that wild Garden, to render it more regular; if he had given us an Idea of that Perfection which he says is wanting to those several Beauties, of which Homer, he pretends, has only given us a Sketch. It would be happy for the present Age, and glorious to England, to have produced so perfect a Critick. Thus far Madam Dacier has defended Homer ; she next proceeds to defend herself against the senseless Cavil which he has brought against her; which she has done with all the Modesty, the Justness, and the Address which are peculiar to that judicious Lady. You have seen that Defence in the Original. I have nothing to do but to observe here, that the Wretch against whom she writes, has been always infamous for his Ingratitude to that Part of the Fair Sex, to whom he has had most Obligations. I shall now proceed to send you some Remarks of my own upon this Preface. 'Tis in the second Page of it likewise that this Prefacer informs us, That 'tis to the Strength of this amazing Invention, that we are to attribute that unequal'd Fire and Rapture, which is so forcible in Homer, & c. But, by P's Leave, Homer owes his Invention to his Fire, and not his Fire to his Invention: The more warm any one is by Nature, the more inventive is that Person, if the Organs be rightly dispos'd. But P. goes on, What he , that is Homer, writes , [that is, every thing that he writes] is of the most animated Nature imaginable . At the Bottom of this very Page he contradicts this. For, says he, 'tis remarkable that his Fancy, which is every where vigorous, is not discover'd immediately at the Beginning of his Poem, in its fullest Splendour . But let us return to what he says previous to this Contradiction of himself. If a Council be call'd , says P, or a Battle fought, you are not coldly inform'd of what is said or done, as from a third Person; the Reader is hurried out of himself, by the Force of the Poet's Imagination, and turns in one Place to a Hearer, in another to a Spectator . To shew the Absurdity of this, we shall first consider it with Regard to Councils, and afterwards with Regard to Battels. If every thing that is said in Council is of the most animated Nature imaginable, the Characters of those who speak, either cannot be maintain'd, or cannot be diversify'd. And as for Battels, the Reader is as much a Spectator of those of Virgil , as he is of those of Homer . The Muse who presides over Epick Poetry equally relates both. And if she relates the Destruction of Troy by the Mouth of Æ neas , that was not a Battle but a Massacre. And the Necessity of the Action requir'd that Way of relating it; it being impossible to set otherwise before the Eyes of Dido , a thing that was past and done in a different Part of the World. This little Gentleman says, towards the Top of the third Page of the smaller Edition, That exact Disposition, just Thought, correct Elocution, polish'd Numbers, may have been found in a thousand; but this poetical Fire, this Vivida Vis Animi in a very few. If he had studied Twenty Years to be in the Wrong, he could not have blunder'd more confoundedly. The very Reverse of what he asserts is the Truth. Exact Disposition, just Thought, correct Elocution, polish'd Numbers have been found in Homer and Virgil alone, of all that have writ in the Epick Way; but the poetical Fire, the Vivida Vis Animi may have been seen in a Thousand. But let me see how the little Gentleman goes on. Even in Works where all these are imperfect or neglected, this even over powers Criticism, and makes us admire while we disapprove . Admirably said, little Bays , 'i'faith, thou second great Apostle of Nonsense, which thou art sent by thy evil Genius to preach to all thy Hundred thousand Admirers! But, faveamus Linguis , let me see how he goes on, full of the 'foremention'd God, whose missionary Priest he has the Honour to be. Nay, where this [Fire] appears, tho' attended with Absurdities, it brightens all the Rubbish about it, 'till we see nothing but its own Splendor . Now, did Bays the first ever say any thing so full of admirable Judgment as this? Can we sufficiently admire a Fire that brightens all the Rubbish about it, 'till the Rubbish disappears, and is hid by its own Brightness? But in the Name of Nonsense, let him go on. This Fire is discern'd in Virgil, but discern'd as through a Glass, reflected from Homer, more shining than fierce, but every where equal and constant . What Devil possess'd him, when he wrote such Stuff as this? The dullest Devil, and the most egregious Dunce in all the Profund of Hell. What does he mean by, this Fire is discern'd in Virgil , but discern'd as through a Glass, instead of as from a Glass? What does he mean by reflected from Homer ? How is the Fire in the Fourth, the Sixth, the Tenth Eclogue reflected from Homer ? or the Fire of those noble Passages in the Georgicks ; the Death of C aesar ; the Praise of Italy , or a Country Life; or the Plague among the dumb Creation; or the Story of Orpheus ? How comes this trifling Poetaster, without the least Sagacity or Penetration, to make those Distinctions and those Discoveries, which the greatest and the most judicious Criticks could never make? How much Reason have we here to cry out with my Lord Roscommon ; How many Ages since has Virgil writ ? How few are they who understand him yet ? Approach his Altars with Religious Fear; No vulgar Deity inhabits there: Heav'n shakes not more at Jove's imperial Nod Than Poets should before their Mantuan God. Hail, mighty Maro! may that sacred Name Kindle my Breast with thy Coelestial Flame. My Lord Roscommon speaks not of Virgil as of a Poet whose Fire was discern'd as thro a Glass, because my Lord Roscommon , felt the Fire of that admirable Poet. What does this Twickenham Poetaster mean, when he speaks of the Fire of Virgil , as more shining than fierce, and as of a Fire every where equal and constant? The Fire of a great and judicious Poet is caus'd by his Ideas, and therefore can never be equal and constant, because the Ideas cannot possibly be always equal. What? Is the Fire of Virgil every where equal to that Divine Passage of the Cumoean Sybil, in the Sixth Æ neid? Ventum erat ad limen, cum virgo, Poscere fata Tempus, ait: Deus, ecce, Deus. Cui talia fanti Ante fores, subito non vultus, non color unus, Non compt ae mansere comae: sed pectus anhelum, Et rabie fera corda tument; majorque videri, Nec mortale sonans: afflata est numine quando Jam propriore Dei. Which my Lord Roscommon has thus finely imitated, in his admirable Essay on Translated Verse: Have you been led thro' the Cum aean Cave, And heard th' impatient Maid divinely rave? I hear her now; I see her rowling Eyes; And panting; Lo! the God, the God, she cries; With Words not hers, and more than human Sound, She makes th' obedient Ghosts peep trembling thro' the Ground. But now let us come to Milton , in whom, if we will believe this little Gentleman, the poetical Fire glows like a Furnace, kept up to an uncommon Fierceness by the Force of Art . Now, I dare engage that there are not Two Persons in the World who understand what the little Gentleman says there, and I do really believe that there is not one. What? is the Transcendency of Milton's Genius, which has been admire'd by all the capable World, reduced to Art? Pray, how is the Fire of Homer and Virgil kept up? for they seem to me to have vastly more of the poetical Art than Milton . Indeed Milton had more Felicity than they, which threw him upon the Subject of Paradise Lost ; a Subject which often furnish'd him with the greatest Ideas, which supply'd him with the greatest Spirit. But to shew that it was rather Felicity than Art or Skill, that determin'd him to that Choice, he was by no means so happy in the Choice of Paradise Regain'd , a Subject that could supply him neither with the Ideas nor with the Spirit. For Pride and Ambition, Rage and Revenge, and Fury, furnish'd quite another sort of spirit, than Patience, Resignation, Humility, Meekness, Long-suffering, and the rest of those quiet divine Virtues that adorn the Christian Scheme. Besides, Milton's Fire is so very far from being kept always up by Art, that for near a sixth Part of the Poem it's set down for want of Art. For this Poem is so order'd, that the Subject of the Eleventh and Twelfth Books could by no means supply him with the great Ideas, nor consequently with the great Spirit, which the First, Second, and Sixth had done before; and several Parts of the other Books likewise. It would require a Volume to expose all the numerous Errors and Blunders which are to be met with in his Preface. At the Bottom of his Third Page he tells us, That Homer open'd a new and boundless Walk for his Imagination, and created a World for himself in the Invention of Fable: That which Aristotle calls the Soul of Poetry, was first breath'd in it by Homer. And here that Learned and Judicious Lady finds Two Faults in that Assertion. First, she condems the Fustian in it, because it raises no clear and distinct Idea in her Mind; and secondly, she censures the Falsehood in it. There is not , says she, the least Shadow of Truth in asserting, that Homer invented the Fable. It was invented long before his Time; and he found the Use of it wholly establish'd, as I have shewn in my Preface to the Odysses. I shall now leave Madam Dacier for a Moment, in order to return to her again immediately. The fourth and the fifth Pages of the 'foremention'd Edition, are taken up with a most impertinent Division of Fable, into the Probable, the Allegorical, and the Marvellous, which Division I suppose he had from some Popish Pedant, and perhaps, from the sacred Scaramouchi his Preceptor. Now, in the first Place, he makes the Allegorical a distinct Species of Fable, whereas there cannot possibly be any Fable, that is, any Action founded upon a Moral, but what is allegorical. In the second Place, in the Epick Fable [which is of the same Nature with the Æ sopian Fables, and is distinguish'd only by its Length] that is, in the Epick Action founded upon its Moral, these Three Qualities, of Allegorical, Probable, Admirable are united. What Reason then can this Author have to make these Three so many distinct Species of Fable, instead of making them Three distinguish'd Qualities of the Epick Fable, of which alone 'tis his Business to treat here? The Fable of an Epick Poem, is very justly defin'd, a Discourse invented by Art, to form the Manners by the Allegory of an Action, related in an agreeable, a profitable, and a wonderful Manner. In treating of the marvellous Fable [for a Pedant naturally affects obsolete Words,] he speaks of the Machines of Homer , concerning which he is pleas'd to tell us, That whatever Cause there might be to blame them in a philosophical or a religious View, they are so perfect in the poetical, that Mankind have been ever since contented to follow them; none have been able to enlarge the Sphere of Poetry beyond the Limits which he has set. Every Attempt of this Nature has prov'd unsuccessful; and after all the various Changes of Times and Religions, his Gods continue to this Day, the Gods of Poetry. What a monstrous Mixture of Ignorance and Impudence is here? In the Compass of Eight Lines there are no less than Four gross Errors. The first is this, That Mankind have been contented to follow , or [to speak English] to make use of Homer's Machines ever since Homer's Time ; whereas all the World knows, that Tasso, Milton, Cowley , and several more have made use of very different ones. The second Error is this: None have been able to enlarge the Sphere of Poetry beyond the Limits which he has set . I neither understand this, nor can I meet with any one who does understand it: What does P. mean by that Cant and that Fustian, enlarging the Sphere of Poetry , and setting Limits to the Sphere of Poetry ? Now, downright Nonsense is certainly the greatest of all Errors and Blunders. In other Errors Pegasus only trips or stumbles, but in Nonsense, the Beast falls flat down, and flounders in the Mud. Now follows the Third Error. Every Attempt , says P, of this Nature has prov'd unsuccessful . That is, every Attempt to make use of other Machines than what Homer has made use of. Now, but two of the ancient Poets, who have writ in the Epick Way, have succeeded with the heathen Machines, and those are Homer and Virgil , and as many of the Moderns have succeeded without those Machines, and those are Tasso and Milton , whose Machines are almost entirely taken from the Christian Scheme. And their Success is a Proof from Fact of the Fourth Error, and is an incontestable one, that the Gods of Homer do not continue to this Day to be the Gods of Poetry. 'Tis impossible that any one at this Time could write an Epick Poem with heathen Machines successfully. There would be great Folly in attempting it, because the Use of such Machines would be destructive not only of Truth, but of all Probability. As for Homer and Virgil , when they writ, they had Probability on their Side. And it would be high Injustice to condemn them for not foreseeing what 'tis impossible they could foresee, the universal Change of Religion. There is another egregious Blunder of P's , in the Eighth Page of the smaller Edition, which Madam Dacier has with just Severity censur'd. Every thing in the Ilaid, says P, has Manners, as Aristotle, says he, expresses it; that is, every thing is acted or spoken. Nothing , says Madam Dacier, can be more contrary to the Doctrine of that Philosopher . He never said that any thing has Manners, because it is either acted or spoken . On the contrary he tells us, that there are Discourses without Manners, and that, in his Time, there were several Dramatick Pieces without Manners, and that yet there were in those Pieces both Action and Discourse; a certain Sign , says he, that Manners are neither Action nor Discourse, since Action and Discourse may be without Manners. What then are Manners , says she, according to that Philosopher ? Manners then, says Aristotle , are the Things that discover the Inclination of him who speaks, and the Choice that he is bent and determin'd to make on Occasions in which it would not be easy to see what he will follow, and what he will avoid. I come now to the second Preliminary, that I propos'd to take Notice of, which is call'd, A Letter to the Publisher , and sign'd W. C. but was undoubtedly writ by P. himself. For it is so full of Folly, Falshood, and Impudence, and the Flattery to P. is so fulsome and so nauseous, that there is not a Man in England who is Fool enough to offer that Incense to P. but himself. And that he himself is very capable of it, we shall give an undeniable Proof anon. As for Will. Cleland , I know not whether there is such a worthy Person in the World or not. But if there is, he will be certainly oblig'd to me for taking the Fool's Cap from his own Head, and clapping it upon the Pate of P , who is most worthy of it. I have neither Time nor Inclination to go thro' all the Paragraphs; but I shall repeat Two or Three of them, which will be sufficient to shew the vile and filthy Falshood of the rest. The first of them is in the Middle of the Sixth Page, of the Edition in Quarto , and begins with these Words: I perceiv'd that most of these Authors had been [doubtless very wisely] the first Aggressors : Both you and I, Sir, have the Honour to know several of them, of whom we know this to be false. But give me leave to acquaint you with what has pass'd between that little envious mischievous Creature and myself. At his first coming to Town, he was very importunate with the late Mr. Henry Cromwell to introduce him to me: The Recommendation of Mr. Cromwell engaged me to be about thrice in Company with him; after which I went into the Country, and neither saw him nor thought of him, 'till I found myself most insolently attack'd by him; in his very superficial Essay upon Criticism, which was the Effect of his impotent Envy and Malice, by which he endeavour'd to destroy the Reputation of a Man who had publish'd Pieces of Criticism, and to set up his own. I was mov'd with Indignation to that Degree, at so much Baseness, that I immediately writ Remarks upon that Essay, in order to expose the Weakness and the Absurdity of it; which Remarks were publish'd, as soon as they could be printed. I afterwards writ and publish'd Remarks upon Part of his Translation of Homer , upon his windsor Forest , and his infamous Temple of Fame . When I had done this, I thought I had Reason to be satisfied with the Revenge I had taken. As these several Remarks had made great Impressions upon the Minds of Persons of undoubted Sense, and so esteem'd by the Publick, P. began to repent of the Affront he had offer'd me, and the Injury he had attempted to do me: And to give some Proofs of his Repentance, he subscrib'd to the Two Volumes of Select Works, almost in spite of my Friend Mr. Henry Cromwell , in whose Hands he found the Proposals. He likewise subscrib'd afterwards to the Two Volumes of Letters, which engag'd me to strike out several very just and severe Reflections against him, which were scatter'd up and down in those Letters. In Acknowledgment of which, he sent me the following Letter, together with the second Payment: SIR , I Call'd to receive the Two Books of your Letters from Mr. Congreve , and have left with him the little Money I am in your Debt. I look upon myself to be much more so, for the Omissions you have been pleas'd to make in those Letters in my Favour, and sincerely join with you in the Desire, that not the least Traces may remain of that Difference between us which indeed I am sorry for. You may therefore believe me, without either Ceremony or Falseness, SIR , Your most Obedient, Humble Servant , A. POPE. May 3, 1721. And now, Sir, perhaps you may be of Opinion that I had Reason to be satisfied, and to regard Mr. P. as a Friend. I indeed from that Hour ceas'd to be his Enemy, but could not put an entire Confidence in him, as often as I reflected on a Piece of monstrous Perfidy, which he had been guilty of seven Years before; of which I shall give you as short an Account as I can. The great Success of Mr. Addison's Cato fermented his Envy, and provok'd his Malice exceedingly. To discharge some Part of his Spleen, he goes to Mr. Lintot the Bookseller, and persuades him to engage me to write some Remarks upon Mr. Addison's Play. He prevail'd upon the Bookseller, and the Bookseller upon me. I need not acquaint you that I wrote and publish'd such Remarks. But his Gratitude for my complying with his Request, may, perhaps, be a Piece of News, that will not a little surprize you: He writes a very scurrilous and impertinent Pamphlet, in which he acquaints his Reader, that I was in the Hands of Dr. Norris , a Curer of mad People, at his House in Hatton Garden , tho' at the same Time I appear'd publickly every Day both in the Park and in the Town. The Manuscript of this Pamphlet he offer'd to shew to Mr. Addison before it was printed, who had too much Honour, and too much good Sense to approve of so black a Proceeding. He was so far from approving of it, that he immediately engag'd Sir Richard Steele to write the following Letter to Lintot. Mr. Lintot, August 4, 1713. Manner of Treating Mr. Dennis in a little Pamphlet, by way of Dr. Norris's Account. When he thinks fit to take Notice of Mr. Dennis's Objections to his Writings, he will do it in a Way Mr. Dennis shall have no just Reason to complain of. But when the Papers above-mentioned, were offer'd to be communicated to him, he said he could not, either in Honour or Conscience, be privy to such a Treatment, and was sorry to hear of it. I am, SIR, This Letter was sent by Sir Richard Steele to Mr. Lintot , and by the latter transmitted to me. As soon as I had perus'd it, I thought it concern'd me to preserve the Original with the utmost Care, which I shall not fail to communicate to you, the very first Time I wait on you. Thus, Sir, have I given you the Reasons why upon the receiving Mr. P's Letter, I could not resolve to be his Friend, nor to hold any Correspondence with one of his perfidious Nature, tho' from that Time I ceas'd to be his Enemy, till he gave me a fresh Provocation, by publishing his chimerical Profund and his filthy Dunciad , and so became a second Time the Aggressor; and as he has been twice so to me, he has been so to several others, in Spight of the Assertion of sagacious Will. Cleland , alias Matt. Scribbler , alias Alexander P . For all Persons of Honour and Integrity like his, love exceedingly to go by an alias. Having said so much of the Falseness of his Assertions with Regard to my self, I beg Leave to mention some more of them, before I come to the two Paragraphs, that in the 13th and that in the 14th Page of The Letter to the Publisher . He is pleas'd to say somewhere in his 4  to Edition, that the Character which Mr. Jacob gives of me in his Lives of the English Poets , is my own: In Contradiction to which, I here send you a Letter which I lately receiv'd from that Gentleman, by the Perusal of which, you will be pleas'd to see, how apt flagitious and abandon'd Men are to throw their own Crimes in the Faces of innocent Persons. Before you begin it, I solemnly declare, before God, that I neither solicited it, or expected it, before he acquainted me that he had writ it. Thursday April 24, 1729. SIR , Additions , I find he has done me the Honour to make me your great Friend and Second, in many Places of that extraordinary Piece; an Honour I could not expect: But as he has therein charg'd me with Facts of which I am innocent, on account of my Lives of the Poets , and violently attack'd the Reputations of several ingenious Gentlemen, endeavouring to render me the Author of his Scandal, I am to clear up these Matters, which are of some Importance, by a just Vindication of my self and others, and a thorough Detection of this great Slanderer. I shall begin with an Enquiry into Pope's Calumny against you. He, in his Dunciad , Book the 2d, would persuade the Publick that your self had a Hand in the small Encomium on your Character inserted in the Ist Volume of my Lives of the English Poets , where I say in general, That you are a Person of sound Learning, Master of a great deal of Penetration and Judgment, and perfectly regular in all your Performances ; with a few particular Observations, on the Justness of the Design, Copduct , and Moral of your Plays : The least, give me Leave to tell you, that could be said in your Behalf, by any impartial Writer, who had any Knowledge of you, or your Works: But this scanty Praise of you, is thought a great deal too much, by the selfish Mr. Pope ; wherefore he at length insinuates, that you are the Author of it, which is a malicious and scandalous Insinuation, without the least Foundation of Truth; for I do solemnly declare [without any previous Sollicitation whatsoever] that you knew nothing at all thereof, till the Book was printed, and publish'd by the Bookseller. Now to demonstrate how far the invidious Charge, which he endeavours to fix upon you, and other Poets, belongs to himself only, I shall here relate the true secret History concerning himself. In The Lives of the Poets , Vol. II. p. 145, 146, 151, & c. the Sentences following are by his Authority: This excellent Poet , [Alexander Pope] whose Fame exceeds not his Merit , was born, & c. There is great Ease, Strength, Wit, and Judgment, in his Compositions; all his 'Pieces are universally applanded, and the great Sheffield asserted his Work. His private Character is the best , being summ'd up in a good Companion, and a firm Friend. Mr. Pope has Fire and Spirit equal to that great Undertaking, his Translation of Homer: And he is excellent in Prose as well as Verse ,  &c. That these high Praises and Commendations of himself were by him particularly approv'd of, in a printed Proof of his Life and Character, which I transmitted to him for his Correction, I am ready to make Oath of, if requir'd; and by his Alterations and Additions therein, he entirely made the Compliment his own; which now I understand he, in his abundant Modesty, judges too little, tho' his great Superiors, in any Accounts of them, would have been very well contented with less. I did every Thing in my Power, by Mr. Pope , who was generally thought to be a rising Genius, to honour and oblige him; much more than by Mr. Prior , and Mr. Congreve , whose Favour and Friendship I happily procur'd, and which continued till their Deaths. But Pope is not a Prior , nor a Congreve , and I may venture to say, never will be: For as he is evidently deficient of their poetical Talents and Abilities, so he is a perfect Stranger to their Gratitude, Honour, and great Humanity, the most shining Parts of these excellent Mens Characters. The Reward of my good Offices by Pope , has been the greatest Abuse he could invent. It seems the envious little Gentleman is angry with me for presuming to say any thing in Favour of others. Here's the Center and Fountain of his Malice. Truly he can bear no Character in Competition with his own, especially since the above mention'd Poets have been dead, in whose Life-times he dared not to publish his Impudence and Nonsense: Tho' now he fancies himself Lord over all , and, like King Bambridge , late Warden of the Fleet Prison, he endeavour'd to exercise the most tyrannick Government within his imaginary Jurisdiction. He has done all in the Compass of his Malice, to defame, injure, and beat down every one he knew, except his Friend and Confederate the ingenious John Gay , on Pretence of my accusing of whom, for telling the Truth of that extraordinary Gentleman, I have the great and disproportion'd Share of his violent Invectives which run thro' his Dunciad. By Pope's Shakespear lately printed, and some of his Translations, one might imagine he intended to claim the sole Prerogative of Blundering to himself. His Blunders in most of his Performances, are very manifest! And therefore he calls others Blunderers, and Fools, in so polite a Manner, as not to be parallell'd or imitated. The Lines upon me in his stupid Poem, are very harmless, tho' very maliciously aim'd; for as to my being a Blunderbuss of Law, this cannot go for any thing, even with the weakest of his Readers and Admirers; because they, with others, will, I think, be oblig'd to own, that the great Poet Alexander Pope , is no Judge of Law, nor can he make it appear that what he hath said of me, was ever esteem'd any Part of my Character. So that on this just Reasoning I am clear of his Satire, (which ought to subsist on some Grounds of Truth) altho' not of his Abuse. I do not pretend to say how long Mr. Pope was writing of his Dunciad ; but his great Malice against me, has been ten Years hatching and laying up, so as not to be brought to Light till the Beggars Opera , by Mr. Gay and Company was acted in the Theatre; which low and licentious dramatical Piece, design'd for the Encouragement of Gentlemen on the Highway, and their female Associates, in Drury Lane , by its extraordinary Novelty, happening to strike the giddy Humour of the Town, has introduc'd a new Species of the vilest Farce, and turn'd the Heads of both Pope and Gay (who clubb'd their Wit in that Performance) since which, their Pride is become intolerable to all Men of common Sense. But these great poetical Champions in the Cause of Newgate , will be justly pourtraited in a Supplement to my Account of them in The Lives of the Poets. When I writ and publish'd my Historical Register in my Lives of the English Poets , which is so long ago as 1719, I endeavour'd to act the candid Part by every Author I could get easy Intelligence of; and whatever mean Opinion Mr. Pope may have at any Time have conceiv'd of me, he had once some Regard for my poor Judgment, otherwise he would not have enter'd into any Correspondence with me by Letter, or subscrib'd two Guinea's for one small Book in Octavo , to SIR, I need not observe to you, Sir, that there are three Things remarkable in this Letter. The first, which I hinted at in the Introduction to it, is, that there are Persons in the World who are impudent and unjust to that Degree, as to throw their own Crimes in the Faces of innocent Persons. The second, which I likewise hinted at above, is that Mr. P. is prov'd by Facts attested by a Person of great Sincerity, to be his own Trumpeter. The third is, that Mr. P. has a very great Soul, a Soul exalted as much above Gratitude, as above Justice or Modesty. The Gentleman who wrote this Letter, in Complaisance to Mr. P , gives him a Character which they both very well knew that he was far from deserving. Mr P , by Way of Acknowledgment for this Favour, acquaints the World, the very first Opportunity, that Mr. Jacob is a Blunderbuss of Law, of which P. does not understand one Syllable, as appears both by his Actions, and by his Writings; which are all of them as contrary to Law, as they are to Reason and Equity. If P. had call'd him a Blunderer in Criticism, Men of Sense would have been apt to have believ'd him, before they had perus'd Mr. Jacob's Letter. As Mr. P. has been pleas'd in several Places of his wonderful Rhapsody , to declare that I wrote such and such Things in Concert with the late Mr. Gildon , I here solemnly declare, upon the Word and Honour of a Gentleman, that I never wrote so much as one Line, that was afterwards printed, in Concert with any one Man whatsoever. I here send you the Copies of two Letters, which I receiv'd formerly from Mr. Gildon , by which it will plainly appear to one of your Discernment, that we are not Writers in Concert with each other. Dear SIR , Aug. 11, 1721. I This Minute receiv'd your Letter, which has given me an infinite Satisfaction: For the Height of my Ambition was to please Men of the best Judgment. And finding that I have entertain'd my Master agreeably, I have the Extent of the Reward of my Labour. I am sorry I have not pleas'd you in what I have said of Mr. Wycherley ; because I am sensible that by not pleasing you, I am so far in the wrong, and am so far prepossess'd against my self, that before-hand I plead guilty to your Charge. I should be extreamly glad to hear you in my little Room; which will very much oblige, SIR, Your most Humble Servant. The second Letter is as follows: SIR , Jan. 10, 1721-22. Opportunity of hearing your excellent Pamphlet till this Day. I am infinitely satisfy'd and pleas'd with it, and hope that you will meet with that Encouragement and Reward, which your admirable Performance most evidently deserves. What I have more to say to you upon that Head, I shall keep till I have the Happiness of your Conversation; who am, SIR, Now, Sir, is it not plain that any one who sends such Compliments to another, has not been us'd to write in Partnership with him to whom he sends them? I come now to the two Paragraphs in the 13th and the 14th Pages of Will. Cleland's Letter to the Publisher, which, as we observ'd above, was certainly writ by P. himself; who, like a very modest Gentleman, not only compares himself to Boileau , but likewise prefers himself to that great and artful Poet. He might as well have comp r'd himself, and preferr'd himself, to Alexander the Great , because he is call'd Sawny . But there are the following trifling Differences between that great Frenchman , and our little English Bard. I. Boileau has as much or more of the Principles of good Writing in Poetry, than any French Poet whatever. The Principles of good Writing according to Horace , are good Sense, Judgment, and Moral Philosophy. P. has less of these good Qualities than any English Poet whatever; there being no such Thing as Judgment or good Sense to be found in his trifling Productions. II. Boileau has a great deal of Art, as well as Genius; P. has neither Art nor Genius. Art is always the Effect of Judgment; and there never was a great Genius for Poetry, without great Judgment. III. The Censures of Boileau are always just, and therfore his are just and legitimate Satires. The Censures of P. are unjust to the very Height of Impudence, and therefore P 's Invectives are malicious and infamous Libels. IV. Boileau praises as many of the French Poets as he satirizes, and not only those who died before he wrote, as Marot, St. Gelais, Malherbe, Racan, Reigner , but likewise his Contemporaries, as Corneille, Racine, Moliere, La Fontaine, Segrais, Beaserade , and likewise the principal Writers of Prose that liv'd in his Time, as the great Monsieur Pascall, Ablancourt, Patru , and La Bruyere . But Pope never commended any of his Contemporaries, unless two or three contemptible Wretches in his own Cabal, but like an Indian that runs a Muck, endeavours to assassinate both Friend and Foe, 'till he meets with the Indian's Fate. V. Boileau speaks always of himself, with Humility, Modesty, and Discretion. Pope speaks of himself with the utmost Pride and Folly, and arrogant Impudence. VI. Boileau has generously commended an Author that was very poor, as Patru , who was a fine, though unfortunate Genius. Nay, he not only generously commended that Author, so far celebrated for the Delicacy of his Writings, but acted by him more generously than he spoke. And when he was reduced by the Cruelty of his Creditors, to part with his choice Library, which he had been so long in collecting; Boileau most honourably laid down the Price of it, and gave Patru the Enjoyment of it, for the rest of his Life. But neither the Action nor the Commendation is in Pope 's little and sordid Soul, or his envious, malicious, and insolent Nature. VII. Boileau has Numbers, Pope has none. The Pegasus of Boileau has all its Paces: The Pegasus of Pope , like a Kentish Post Horse, is always upon the Canterbury , as has been observ'd formerly. VIII. Boileau allows those whom he satirizes to have their Merit, and their good Qualities, and had more of the Gentleman as well as the fine Writer in him, than to call them either Dunces, or Blockheads, or Fools. Such Language becomes none but the Boors and Clowns of Parnassus ; and therefore neither Quinaut , nor St. Amant , nor Brebeuf , nor Scudery , nor Chapelain had any such from him, nor any other Writer whom he has attack'd in his Satires. The following Passage in one of his Prefaces is a convincing Proof of this. 'I shall content myself with putting the Reader in Mind of one thing, which 'tis convenient he should know; which is, that, by attacking in my Satires, the Defects of many of the Writers of the Age in which we live, I never pretended by doing that, to deprive these Writers of the Merit and the good Qualities which they may otherwise have. I never pretended, I say, that Chapelain , tho' a wretched Poet enough, did not formerly write, I know not by what means, an Ode that was not contemptible, and that there was neither Wit nor Agreeableness in the Works of Monsieur Quinaut , tho' very far remov'd from the Perfection of Virgil . I am oblig'd to add concerning the latter, that at the Time in which I wrote against him we were both very young, and that he afterwards publish'd several Works, which got him just Reputation. I am likewise ready to own, that there is Genius in the Writings of St. Amant , of Brebeuf , of Scudery , and of several others, whom I have criticiz'd, and who, as well as myself, richly deserve to be criticiz'd. In a Word, with the same Sincerity with which I have rallied them for their Defects, I am willing to allow whatever they may have that is excellent. And thus, I hope, I have done them Justice, and have convinc'd the Reader, that it was not a Spirit of Envy or Calumny that caus'd me to write against them. IX. Boileau has not made scandalons Reflections upon the Lives of innocent Persons, as P. has done, which the ingenious and sagacious Author of Pope Alexander's Supremacy has very justly observ'd. X. Boileau was plac'd, by his great Qualities, highly above those whom he satiriz'd, whereas P. is many Degrees below several of those whom he has libell'd: below Philips as a Writer of Pastorals; below You as a Critick, an Editor, a modern Dramatick Poet, or a Translator of ancient Poetry. For if your Translation of Æ schylus is equal to the Specimen which I have seen of it, of which I make no doubt; it may make him blush for his Translation of Homer . And if neither of you have had a Subscription adequate to your Merits, 'tis because in this wise and judicious Age, the Age of Opera's , of Beggars Opera's , of Dunciads , and Hurlothrumbo's , 'tis not in the Nature of Things at present, and consequently an Impossibility, that any Author can have a generous Subscription to a Work that highly deserves it. FINIS. 
