 But He would express the same Sense; and it is to Your everlasting Honour, that He could not express it in the same Words. What a Glory is it Thus to want a Right Hand, after having atchieved such glorious Things with it! But if he could not apply That Expression to Your Lordship; He would not fail to allot You a future Place in his Elysium among Those illustrious, happy Spirits, \--- Ob Patriam pugnando Vulnera passos : He would do Justice to Your Behaviour in the Course of so long, bloody, and important a War, in so many renowned Battles, particularly That immortal One of Hockstadt ; and then make a Transition from the Field to the Senate ; from Your Bravery in the One, to Your Debates in the Other. And as He distinguishes the Character of Æ neas by his Concern for the Religion of his Country, so (were He now Living, and of our Religion) He would not omit Your Concern for our most excellent Church, Your Affection to it, and Your Defence of it. These Things, my Lord, He would insist upon; tho' I scarce dare so much as mention them. And as little would He forget Your elegant Learning, and elegant Conversation: Especially Your familiar Acquaintance with the ancient Classic Writers, which would still render His Address to You the more proper, and pertinent. But, my Lord, I fear the Mention of This last Qualification turns against my self: It would render an Address from Him to Your Lordship the more proper, and pertinent; but it renders Mine the more bold, and presumptuous. A Thought, which would give me no small Uneasiness; did I not consider, that, in such a Person, the Censure of the accurate Judge is tempered and softened by the Politeness of the Nobleman, and the Generosity of the Hero. Among all the old illustrious Romans , I love and honour the Memory of None, so much as That of Scipio Africanus Junior ; tho' the other Scipio 's (especially Africanus the Elder, who was eminent for much the same Accomplishments with the Younger) claim little less of our Admiration and Esteem. Considering his high Birth, and Quality, joined with his Virtue; His Learning, particularly in Poetry, with his Courage, and Conduct; His Triumphs of War, with his exquisite Skill in the Arts of Peace: What a Constellation of Glories do they all make in the Character of That Great Man! My Lord, I do not apply This: Nor need I tell Others how I came to mention it. I only add This general Observation, that Nothing Human is comparable to Virtue, and Learning, in conjunction with Nobility, and Valour: And that the brightest Encomium which can be given of a Man of Quality is, That Loving , and Understanding Poetry, He truly deserves to be celebrated by it. I very well know the common Vice of Dedications, especially Poetical ones: And No body living can more heartily detest it, than I do. But I must insist, that tho' there be such a Thing as Flattery , there are
