 Design of doing me an Injury; I impute it only to an idle, childish Levity, which possesses too many Minds, and makes them report their Conjectures as Matters of Fact, without weighing the Proof, or considering the Consequence. But as to the former of these, my Readers will do well to examine their own Talents very strictly, before they are too thoroughly convinced of their Abilities to distinguish an Author's Style so accurately, as from that only to pronounce an anonymous Work to be his: And as to the latter, a little Reflection will convince them of the Cruelty they are guilty of by such Reports. For my own part, I can aver, that there are few Crimes, of which I should have been more ashamed, than of some Writings laid to my charge. I am as well assured of the Injuries I have suffered from such unjust Imputations, not only in general Character, but as they have, I conceive, frequently raised me inveterate Enemies, in Persons to whose Disadvantage I have never entertained a single Thought; nay, in Men whose Characters, and even Names have been unknown to me. Among all the Scurrilities with which I have been accused, (tho' equally and totally innocent of every one) none ever raised my Indignation so much as the Causidicade: this accused me not only of being a bad Writer, and a bad Man, but with down- right Idiotism, in flying in the Face of the greatest Men of my Profession. I take therefore this Opportunity to protest, that I never saw that infamous, paultry Libel, till long after it had been in Print; nor can any Man hold it in greater Contempt and Abhorrence than myself. The Reader will pardon my dwelling so long on this Subject, as I have suffered so cruelly by these Aspersions in my own Ease, in my Reputation, and in my Interest. I shall however henceforth treat such Censure with the Contempt it deserves; and do here revoke the Promise I formerly made; so that I shall now look upon myself at full Liberty to publish an anonymous Work, without any Breach of Faith. For tho' probably I shall never make any use of this Liberty, there is no reason why I should be under a Restraint, for which I have not enjoyed the purposed Recompence. A third, and indeed the strongest Reason which hath drawn me into Print, is to do justice to the real and sole Author of this little Book; who, notwithstanding the many excellent Observations dispersed through it, and the deep Knowledge of Human Nature it discovers, is a young Woman; one so nearly and dearly allied to me, in the highest Friendship as well as Relation, that if she had wanted any Assistance of mine, I would have been as ready to have given it her, as I would have been just to my Word in owning it: but in reality, two or three Hints which arose on the reading it, and some little Direction as to the Conduct of the second Volume, much the greater Part of which I never saw till in Print, were all the Aid she received from me. Indeed I believe there are few Books in the World so absolutely the Author's own as this. There were some Grammatical and other Errors in Style in the first Impression, which my Absence from Town prevented my correcting, as I have endeavoured, tho' in great Haste, in this Edition: By comparing the one with the other, the Reader may see, if he thinks it worth his while, the Share I have in this Book, as it now stands, and which amounts to little more than the Correction of some small Errors, which Want of Habit in Writing chiefly occasioned, and which no Man of Learning would think worth his Censure in a Romance; nor any Gentleman, in the Writings of a young Woman. And as the Faults of this Work want very little Excuse, so its Beauties want as little Recommendation: tho' I will not say but they may sometimes stand in need of being pointed out to the generality of Readers. For as the Merit of this Work consists in a vast Penetration into human Nature, a deep and profound Discernment of all the Mazes, Windings and Labyrinths, which perplex the Heart of Man to such a degree, that he is himself often incapable of seeing through them; and as this is the greatest, noblest, and rarest of all the Talents which constitute a Genius; so a much larger Share of this Talent is necessary, even to recognize these Discoveries, when they are laid before us, than falls to the share of a common Reader. Such Beauties therefore in an Author must be contented to pass often unobserved and untasted; whereas, on the contrary, the Imperfections of this little Book, which arise, not from want of Genius, but of Learning, lie open to the Eyes of every Fool, who has had a little Latin inoculated into his Tail; but had the same great Quantity of Birch been better employ'd, in scourging away his Ill-nature, he would not have exposed it in endeavouring to cavil at the first Performance of one, whose Sex and Age entitle her to the gentlest Criticism , while her Merit, of an infinitely higher kind, may defy the severest. But I believe the Warmth of my Friendship hath led me to engage a Critic of my own Imagination only: for I should be sorry to conceive such a one had any real Existence. If however any such Composition of Folly, Meanness and Malevolence should actually exist, he must be as incapable of Conviction, as unworthy of an Answer. I shall therefore proceed to the more pleasing Task of pointing out some of the Beauties of this little Work. I have attempted in my Preface to Joseph Andrews to prove, that every Work of this kind is in its Nature a comic Epic Poem, of which Homer left us a Precedent, tho' it be unhappily lost. The two great Originals of a serious Air, which we have derived from that mighty Genius, differ principally in the Action, which in the Iliad is entire and uniform; in the Odyssey , is rather a Series of Actions, all tending to produce one great End. Virgil and Milton are, I think, the only pure Imitators of the former; most of the other Latin , as well as Italian, French , and English Epic Poets, chusing rather the History of some War, as Lucan and Silius Italicus ; or a Series of Adventures, as Ariosto, &c. for the Subject of their Poems. In the same manner the Comic Writer may either fix on one Action, as the Authors of Le Lutrin , the Dunciad, &c. or on a Series, as Butler in Verse, and Cervantes in Prose have done. Of this latter kind is the Book now before us, where the Fable consists of a Series of separate Adventures detached from, and independent on each other, yet all tending to one great End; so that those who should object want of Unity of Action here, may, if they please, or if they dare, fly back with their Objection, in the Face even of the Odyssey itself. This Fable hath in it these three difficult Ingredients, which will be found on Consideration to be always necessary to Works of this kind, viz. that the main End or Scope be at once amiable, ridiculous and natural. If it be said, that some of the Comic Performances I have above mentioned differ in the first of these, and set before us the odious instead of the amiable; I answer , that is far from being one of their Perfections; and of this the Authors themselves seem so sensible, that they endeavour to deceive their Reader by false Glosses and Colours, and by the help of Irony at least to represent the Aim and Design of their Heroes in a favourable and agreeable Light. I might farther observe, that as the Incidents arising from this Fable, tho' often surprizing, are every where natural, (Credibility not being once shocked through the whole) so there is one Beauty very apparent, which hath been attributed by the greatest of Critics to the greatest of Poets, that every Episode bears a manifest Impression of the principal Design, and chiefly turns on the Perfection or Imperfection of Friendship; of which noble Passion, from its highest Purity to its lowest Falshoods and Disguises, this little Book is, in my Opinion, the most exact Model. As to the Chracters here described, I shall repeat the Saying of one of the greatest Men of this Age, That they are as wonderfully drawn by the Writer, as they were by Nature herself . There are many Strokes in Orgueil, Spatter, Varnish, Le-vif , the Balancer , and some others, which would have shined in the Pages of Theophrastus, Horace , or La Bruyere . Nay, there are some Touches, which I will venture to say might have done honour to the Pencil of the immortal Shakespear himself. The Sentiments are in general extremely delicate; those particularly which regard Friendship, are, I think, as noble and elevated as I have any where met with: Nor can I help remarking, that the Author hath been so careful, in justly adapting them to her Characters, that a very indifferent Reader, after he is in the least acquainted with the Character of the Speaker, can seldom fail of applying every Sentiment to the Person who utters it. Of this we have the strongest Instance in Cynthia and Camilla , where the lively Spirit of the former, and the gentle Softness of the latter, breathe through every Sentence which drops from either of them. The Diction I shall say no more of, than as it is the last, and lowest Perfection in a Writer, and one which many of great Genius seem to have little regarded; so I must allow my Author to have the least Merit on this Head: Many Errors in Style existing in the first Edition, and some, I am convinced, remaining still uncured in this ;
