 the means by which the comic writers attain their end, without considering that the various methods of exhilarating their audience, not being limited by nature, cannot be comprised in precept. Thus, some make comedy a representation of mean, and others of bad men; some think that its essence consists in the unimportance, others in the fictitiousness, of the transaction. But any man's reflections will inform him, that every dramatic composition which raises mirth is comic; and that, to raise mirth, it is by no means universally necessary, that the personages should be either mean or corrupt, nor always requisite, that the action should be trivial, nor ever, that it should be fictitious. effects upon the mind, some absurdities might have been prevented, with which the compositions of our greatest poets are disgraced, who, for want of some settled ideas and accurate distinctions, have unhappily confounded tragic with comic sentiments. They seem to have thought, that as the meanness of personages constituted comedy, their greatness was sufficient to form a tragedy; and that nothing was necessary to dignity and seriousness, but that they should croud the scene with monarchs, and generals, and guards; and make them talk, at certain intervals, of the downfal of kingdoms, and the rout of armies. They have not considered, that thoughts or incidents in themselves ridiculous, grow still more grotesque by the solemnity of such characters; that reason and nature are uniform and inflexible; and that what is despicable and absurd, will not, by any association with splendid titles, become rational or great; that the most important affairs, by an intermixture of an unreasonable levity, may be made contemptible; and that the robes of royalty can give no protection to nonsense or to folly. " COMEDY ," says Horace , "sometimes raises her voice;" and tragedy may likewise on proper occasions abate her dignity; but as the comic personages can only depart from their familiarity of stile, when the more violent passions are put in motion, the heroes and queens of tragedy should never descend to trifle, but in the hours of ease, and intermissions of danger. Yet in the tragedy of Don Sebastian , when the king of Portugal is in the hands of his enemy, and having just drawn the lot, by which he is condemned to die, breaks out into a wild boast that his dust shall take possession of Africk , the dialogue proceeds thus between the captive and his conqueror : What shall I do to conquer thee ! Impossible ! Souls know no conquerors. I'll shew thee for a monster thro' my Africk No, thou canst only shew me for a man : Afric is stor'd with monsters; man's a prodigy Thy subjects have not seen. Thou talk'st as if Still at the head of battle. Thou mistak'st, For there I would not talk. Sure he would sleep. not to be comick, because it wants the probability necessary to representations of common life, and degenerates too much towards buffoonry and farce. enforcing his orders for the death of Sebastian , vents his impatience in this abrupt threat : \--- No more replies, But see thou do'st it: Or,--- To which Dorax answers, Choak in that threat: I can say Or as loud. A THOUSAND instances of such impropriety might be produced, were not one scene in Aureng-Zebe sufficient to exemplify it. Indamora, a captive queen, having Aureng-Zebe for her lover, employs Arimant , to whose charge she had been intrusted, and whom she had made sensible of her charms, to carry a message to his rival. ARIMANT, with a letter in his hand : INDAMORA. And I the messenger to him from you? Your empire you to tyranny pursue: You lay commands, both cruel and unjust, To serve my rival, and betray my trust. You first betray'd your trust in loving me: And should not I my own advantage see? Serving my love, you may my friendship gain: You know the rest of your pretences vain. You must, my Arimant , you must be kind: 'Tis in your nature, and your noble mind. I'll to the king, and strait my trust resign. His trust you may, but you shall never mine. Heav'n made you love me for no other end, But to become my confident and friend : As such; I keep no secret from your sight, And therefore make you judge how ill I write: Read it, and tell me freely then your mind, If 'tis indited, as I meant it, kind. I ask not heav'n my freedom to restore , [Reading. But only for your sake \--- I'll read no more. And yet I must --- Less for my own, than for your sorrow sad \--- [Reading. Another line, like this, would make me mad--- Heav'n! she goes on---yet more---and yet more kind! [As Reading. Each sentence is a dagger to my mind. See me this night \--- [Reading. Thank fortune, who did such a friend provide ; For faithful Arimant shall be your guide . Not only to be made an instrument, But pre-engag'd without my own consent! Unknown t'engage you, still augments my score, And gives you scope of meriting the more. The best of men Some int'rest in their actions must confess; None merit, but in hope they may possess. The fatal paper rather let me tear, Than, like Bellerophon , my own sentence bear. You may; but 'twill not be your best advice : 'Twill only give me pains of writing twice. You know you must obey me, soon or late: Why should you vainly struggle with your fate? I thank thee, heav'n! thou hast been wond'rous kind! Why am I thus to slavery design'd, And yet am'cheated with a freeborn mind? Or make thy orders with my reason suit, Or let me live by sense, a glorious brute--- [She frowns. You frown, and I obey with speed, before That dreadful sentence comes, See me no more . wild absurdity of the expedient; the contemptible subjection of the lover; the folly of obliging him to read the letter only because it ought to have been concealed from him; the frequent interruptions of amorous impatience; the faint expostulations of a voluntary slave; the imperious haughtiness of a tyrant without power; the deep reflection of the yielding rebel upon fate and free-will; and his wise wish to lose his reason as soon as he finds himself about to do what he cannot persuade his reason to approve, are surely sufficient to awaken the most torpid risibility.
