 as beautiful; that nothing stand single or independent so as that it may be taken away without injuring the rest; but that from the foundation to the pinnacles one part rest firm upon another. frequently neglected; but the failures of those, whose example can have no influence, may be safely overlooked, nor is it of much use to recall obscure and unregarded names to memory for the sake of sporting with their Infamy. But if there is any writer whose genius can embellish impropriety, and whose authority can make error venerable, his works are the proper objects of critical inquisition. To expunge faults where there are no excellencies, is a task equally useless with that of the chemist, who employs the arts of separation and refinement upon ore in which no precious metal is contained to reward his operations. performance of the great author of Paradise lost , and opposed with all the confidence of triumph to the dramatick performances of other nations. It contains indeed just sentiments, maxims of wisdom, and oracles of piety, and many passages written with the antient spirit of choral poetry, in which there is a just and pleasing mixture of Seneca 's moral declamation with the wild enthusiasm of the Greek writers. It is therefore worthy of examination, whether a performance thus illuminated with genius, and enriched with learning, is composed according to the indispensable laws of Aristotelian criticism; and, omitting at present all other considerations, whether it contains a beginning, a middle, and an end; abruptness, and proceeding naturally to a mournful recital of facts necessary to be known. Samson. A little onward lend thy guiding hand To these dark steps, a little farther on; For yonder bank hath choice of sun and shade; There I am wont to sit when any chance Relieves me from my task of servile toil, Daily in the common prison else enjoin'd me.--- \---O wherefore was my birth from heav'n foretold Twice by an angel?--- \---Why was my breeding order'd and prescrib'd, As of a person separate to God, Design'd for great exploits; if I must die Betray'd, captiv'd, and both my eyes put out? \---Whom have I to complain of but myself? Who this high gift of strength, committed to me, In what part lodg'd, how easily bereft me, Under the seat of silence could not keep, But weakly to a woman must reveal it. His soliloquy is interrupted by a chorus or company of men of his own tribe, who condole his miseries, extenuate his fault, and conclude with a solemn vindication of divine justice. So that at the conclusion of the first act there is no design laid, no discovery made, nor any disposition formed towards the subsequent event. son, and, being shown him by the chorus, breaks out into lamentations of his misery, and comparisons of his present with his former state, representing to him the ignominy which his religion suffers, by the festival this day celebrated in honour of Dagon , to whom the idolaters ascribed his overthrow. \--- Thou bear'st Enough, and more, the burthen of that fault; Bitterly hast thou paid, and still art paying That rigid score. A worse thing yet remains, This day the Philistines a pop'lar feast Here celebrate in Gaza ; and proclaim Great pomp and sacrifice, and praises loud To Dagon , as their God, who hath deliver'd Thee, Samson , bound and blind into their hands, Them out of thine, who slew'st them many a slain. Samson , touched with this reproach, makes a reply equally penitential and pious, which his father considers as the effusion of prophetick confidence, Samson \------God be sure, Will not connive or linger thus provok'd, But will arise and his great name assert: Dagon must stoop, and shall e'er long receive Such a discomfit, as shall quite despoil him Of all these boasted trophies won on me. Manoah. With cause this hope relieves thee, and these words I as a prophecy receive; for God, Nothing more certain, will not long defer To vindicate the glory of his name. Samson , cannot, I think, be censured as wholly superfluous; but the succeeding dispute, in which Samson contends to die, and which his father breaks off, that he may go to sollicit his release, is only valuable for its own beauties, and has no tendency to introduce any thing that follows it. graces, artifices, and allurements. This produces a dialogue, in a very high degree elegant and instructive, from which she retires, after she has exhausted her persuasions, and is no more seen or heard of; nor has her visit any effect but that of raising the character of Samson . never been mentioned before, and who has now no other motive of coming than to see the man whose strength and actions are so loudly celebrated. Harapha. ]---Much I have heard Of thy prodigious might, and feats perform'd, Incredible to me; in this displeas'd, That I was never present in the place Of those encounters, where we might have tried Each others force in camp or listed fields: And now am come to see of whom such noise Hath walk'd about, and each limb to survey, If thy appearance answer loud report. Samson challenges him to the combat, and after an interchange of reproaches, elevated by repeated defiance on one side, and imbittered by contemptuous insults on the other, Harapha retires; we then hear it determined, by Samson and the chorus, that no consequence good or bad will proceed from their interview. He will directly to the lords, I fear, And with malicious counsel stir them up Some way or other farther to afflict thee. He must allege some cause, and offer'd fight Will not dare mention, lest a question rise, Whether he durst accept the offer or not; And that he durst not, plain enough appear'd. the festival of Dagon , with a summons, by which Samson is required to come and entertain them with some proof of his strength. Samson , after a short expostulation, dismisses him with a firm and resolute refusal, but during the absence of the messenger, having a while defended the propriety of his conduct, he at last declares himself moved by a secret impulse to comply, and utters some dark presages of a great event to be brought to pass by his agency under the direction of providence. Be of good courage; I begin to feel Some rousing motions in me, which dispose To something extraordinary my thoughts. I with this messenger will go along, Nothing to do, be sure, that may dishonour Our law, or stain my vow of nazarite, If there be ought of presage in the mind, This day will be remarkable in my life By some great act, or of my days the last. hopes of success in his sollicitation, upon which he confers with the chorus till their dialogue is interrupted, first by a shout of triumph, and afterwards by screams of horror and agony. As they stand deliberating where they shall be secure, a man who had been present at the show enters, and relates how Samson having prevailed on his guide to suffer him to lean against the main pillars of the theatrical edifice, tore down the roof upon the spectators and himself. \------ Those two massy pillars With horrible confusion to and fro, He tugg'd, he took, till down they came and drew
