 age, new errors to be rectify'd, and new prejudices to be opposed. False taste is always busy to mislead those that are entering upon the regions of learning; and the traveller, uncertain of his way, and forsaken by the sun, will be pleased to see a fainter orb arise on the horizon, that may rescue him from total darkness, though with weak and borrowed lustre. topicks of criticism, has barely touched upon the versification; not probably because he thought the art of numbers unworthy of his notice, for he knew with how minute attention the ancient criticks considered the disposition of syllables, and had himself given hopes of some metrical observations upon that great Roman poet; but being the first who undertook to display the beauties, and point out the defects of Milton , he had many objects at once before him, and passed willingly over those which were most barren of ideas, and required labour, rather than genius. necessary to a poet. Every other power by which the attention is fixed, the understanding enlightened, or the imagination enchanted, may be exercised in prose. But the poet has this peculiar superiority, that to all the powers which the perfection of every other composition can require, he adds the faculty of joining musick with reason, and of acting at once upon the senses and the passions. I suppose there are few who do not feel themselves touched by poetical melody, and who will not confess that they are more or less moved by the same thoughts, as they are conveyed by different sounds, and more affected by the same words in one order, than in another. The perception of harmony is indeed conferred upon men in degrees very unequal, but there are none who do not perceive it, or to whom a regular series of proportionate sounds cannot give delight. understood, and shall therefore studiously decline the dialect of grammarians; though, indeed, it is always difficult and sometimes scarcely possible to deliver the precepts of an art without the terms by which the peculiar ideas of that art are expressed, and which had not been invented but because the language already in use, was insufficient. If therefore I shall sometimes seem obscure, may it be imputed to this voluntary interdiction, and to a desire of avoiding that offence which is always given by unusual words. pure or mixed. It is pure when the accent rests upon every second syllable through the whole line. Courage uncertain dangers may abate, But who can bear th' approach of certain fate. Here love his golden shafts employs, here lights His constant lamp, and waves his purple wings, Reigns here, and revels; not in the bought smile Of harlots, loveless, joyless, unendear'd. The accent may be observed in the second line of Dryden , and the second and fourth of Milton , to repose upon every second syllable. complete harmony of which a single verse is capable, and should therefore be exactly kept in distichs, and generally in the last line of a paragraph, that the ear may rest without any sense of imperfection. is not only very difficult but tiresome and disgusting; for we are soon wearied with the perpetual recurrence of the same cadence. Necessity has therefore enforced the mixed measure, in which some variation of the accents is allowed; this, though it always injures the harmony of the line considered by itself, yet compensates the loss by relieving us from the continual tyranny of the same sound, and makes us more sensible of the harmony of the pure measure. Milton seldom has two pure lines together, as will appear if any of his paragraphs be read with attention merely to the musick. Thus at their shady lodge arriv'd both stood, Both turn'd and under open sky adorn'd The God that made both sky, air, earth, and heav'n, Which they beheld; the moon's resplendent globe, And starry pole: thou also mad'st the night , Maker omnipotent! and thou the day, Which we in our appointed work employ'd Have finish'd, happy in our mutual help, And mutual love, the crown of all our bliss Ordain'd by thee; and this delicious place, For us too large; where thy abundance wants Partakers, and uncrop'd falls to the ground, But thou hast promis'd from us two a race To fill the earth, who shall with us extol Thy goodness infinite, both when we awake, And when we seek, as now, thy gift of sleep. In this passage it will be at first observed, that all the lines are not equally harmonious, and upon a nearer examination it will be found that only the fifth and ninth lines are regular, and the rest are more or less licentious with respect to the accent. In some the accent is equally upon two syllables together, and in both strong. As Thus at their shady lodge arriv'd, both stood , Both turn'd , and under open sky ador'd The God that made both sky, air, earth , and heav'n. In others the accent is equally upon two syllables, but upon both weak. \---a race To fill the earth, who shall with us extol Thy goodness in finite , both when we wake, And when we seek, as now, thy gift of sleep. In the first pair of syllables the accent may deviate from the rigour of exactness without any unpleasing diminution of harmony, as may be observed in the lines already cited, and more remarkably in this \--- Thou also mad'st the night, Maker omnipotent! and thou the day. But, excepting in the first pair of syllables, which may be considered as arbitrary, a poet who, not having the invention or knowledge of Milton , has more need to allure his audience by musical cadences, should seldom suffer more than one aberration from the rule in any single verse. \---This delicious place, For us too large; where thy abundance wants Partakers, and uncrop'd falls to the ground. Here the third pair of syllables in the first, and fourth pair in the second verse, have their accents retrograde or inverted; the first syllable being strong or acute, and the second weak. The detriment which the measure suffers by this inversion of the accents is sometimes less perceptible, when the verses are carried one into another, but is remarkably striking in this place, where the vicious verse concludes a period; and is yet more offensive in rhyme, when we regularly attend to the flow of every single line. This will appear by reading a couplet in which Cowley , an author not sufficiently studious of harmony, has committed the same fault. \---His harmless life Does with substantial blessedness abound, And the soft wings of peace cover him round. In these the law of metre is very grossly violated by mingling combinations of sound directly opposite to each other, as Milton expresses it in his sonnet, by committing short
