 etiam disjecti membra poet ae , some harmony will still remain, and the due proportions of sound will always be discovered. This measure therefore allowed great variety of pauses, and great liberties of connecting one verse with another, because wherever the line was interrupted, either part singly was musical. But the ancients seem to have confined this privilege to hexameters; for in their other measures, though frequently longer than the English heroick, those who wrote after the refinements of versification venture so seldom to change their pauses, that every variation may be supposed rather a compliance with necessity than the choice of judgment. harmonious in the utmost perfection; the single parts, therefore, into which it was to be sometime; broken by pauses, were in danger of losing the very form of verse. This has, perhaps, notwithstanding all his care, sometimes happened. As harmony is the end of poetical measures, no part of a verse ought to be so separated from the rest as not to remain still more harmonious than prose, or to shew, by the disposition of the tones, that it is part of a verse. This rule in the old hexameter might be easily observed, but in English will very frequently be in danger of violation; for the order and regularity of accents cannot well be perceived in a succession of fewer than three syllables, which will confine the English poet to only five pauses; it being supposed, that, when he connects one line with another, he should never make a full pause at less distance than that of three syllables from the beginning or end of a verse. perhaps cannot be granted; something may be allowed to variety, and something to the adaptation of the numbers to the subject; but it will be found generally necessary, and the ear will seldom fail to suffer by its neglect. united to the line with which the sense connects it, or be sounded alone. If it be united to the other line, it corrupts its harmony; if disjoined, it must, with regard to musick, be superfluous; for there is no harmony in a single sound, because it has no proportion to another. Hypocrites austerely talk Defaming as impure what God declares Pure ; and commands to some, leaves free to all. want some associate sounds to make them harmonious. \---Eyes--- \---more wakeful than to drouze Charm'd with arcadian pipe, the past'ral reed Of Hermes , or his opiate rod. Meanwhile To re-salute the world with sacred light Leucothea wak'd. He ended, and the sun gave signal high To the bright minister that watch'd: he blew His trumpet First in his east the glorious lamp was seen, Regent of day; and all th' horizon round Invested with bright rays, jocund to run His longitude through heav'n's high road; the gray Dawn, and the pleiades, before him danc'd, Shedding sweet influence. the second syllable from the beginning. The race Of that wild rout that tore the Thracian bard In Rhadope , where woods and rocks, had ears, To rapture, 'till the savage clamour drown'd Both harp and voice; nor could the muse defend Her son . So fail not thou, who thee implores. is better preserved, but as the third and seventh are weak syllables, the period leaves the ear unsatisfied, and in expectation of the remaining part of the verse. He, with his horrid crew, Lay vanquish'd, rolling in the fiery gulph, Confounded though immortal . But his doom Reserv'd him to more wrath; for now the thought Both of lost happiness and lasting pain Torments him . God,---with frequent intercourse, Thither will send his winged messengers On errands of supernal grace. So sung The glorious train ascending . a-period should be made for the most part upon a strong syllable, as the fourth and sixth; but those pauses which only suspend the Sense may be placed upon the weaker. Thus the rest in the third line of the first passage satisfies the ear better than in the fourth, and the close of the second quotation better than of the third. The evil soon Drawn back, redounded (as a flood) on those From whom it sprung ; impossible to mix With blessedness . \---What we by day Lop overgrown, or prune, or prop, or bind One night or two with wanton growth derides, Tending to wild . The paths and bow'rs doubt not but our joint hands Will keep from wilderness with ease as wide As we need walk, till younger hands ere long Assist us . and third, that the syllable is weak. Beast now with beast' gan war, and fowl with fowl, And fish with fish, to graze the herb all leaving, Devour'd each other : Nor stood much in awe Of man, but sled him , or with countenance grim, Glar'd on him passing . upon the fourth and sixth syllables, which are both strongly sounded in a pure and regular verse, and at either of which the line is so divided, that both members participate of harmony. But now at last the sacred influence Of light appears , and from the walls of heav'n Shoots far into the bosom of dim night A glimmering dawn : here nature first begins Her farthest verge and chaos to retire. rest upon the sixth syllable, which taking in a complete compass of sound, such as is sufficient to constitute one of our lyrick measures, makes a full and solemn close. Some passages which conclude at this stop, I could never read without some strong emotions of delight or admiration. Before the hills appear'd, or fountain flow'd, Thou with the eternal wisdom didst converse, Wisdom thy sister; and with her didst play In presence of the almighty father, pleas'd With thy celestial Song Or other worlds they seem'd, or happy isles, Like those Hesperian gardens fam'd of old, Fortunate fields, and groves, and flow'ry vales, Thrice happy isles! But who dwelt happy there, He staid not to inquire . He blew His trumpet, heard in Oreb since, perhaps When God descended; and, perhaps, once more To sound at general doom .
