 have more of genius but less of truth; they often please, but they never convince. of my acquaintance, who had discovered that the qualities requisite to conversation are very exactly represented by a bowl of punch. and acid juices, sugar and water. The spirit volatile and fiery, is the proper emblem of vivacity and wit, the acidity of the lemon will very aptly figure pungency of raillery, and acrimony of censure; sugar is the natural representative of luscious adulation and gentle complaisance; and water is the proper hieroglyphick of easy prattle, innocent and tasteless. merriment; and instead of quenching thirst will inflame the blood. Thus wit too copiously poured out agitates the hearer with emotions rather violent than pleasing; every one shrinks from the force of its oppression, the company sits intranced and overpowered; all are astonished, but nobody is pleased. palate. Conversation would become dull and vapid, if negligence were not sometimes roused, and sluggishness quickened, by due severity of reprehension. But acids unmixt will distort the face and torture the palate; and he that has no other qualities than penetration and asperity, he whose constant employment is detection and censure, who looks only to find faults, and speaks only to punish them, will soon be dreaded, hated, and avoided. itself. Thus meekness and courtesy will always recommend the first address, but soon pall and nauseate, unless they are associated with more spritely qualities. The chief use of sugar is to temper the taste of other substances, and softness of behaviour in the same manner mitigates the roughness of contradiction, and allays the bitterness of unwelcome truth. necessary to sustenance and growth, by which thirst is quenched, and all the wants of life and nature are supplied. Thus all the business of the world is transacted by artless and easy talk, neither sublimed by fancy, nor discouloured by affectation, without either the harshness of satire, or the lusciousness of flattery. By this limpid vein of language curiosity is gratified, and all the knowledge is conveyed which one man is required to impart for the safety or convenience of another. Water is the only ingredient of punch which can be used alone, and with which man is content till fancy has framed an artificial want. Thus while we only desue to have our ignorance informed we are most delighted with the plainest diction; and it is only in the moments of idlenese or pride, that we call for the gratifications of wit or flattery. sugar of civility, and allaying the heat of wit with the frigidity of humble chat, can make the true punch of conversation; and as that punch can be drank
