 forgotten. Affectation, however opposite to ease, is sometimes mistaken for it, and those who aspire to gentle elegance, collect female phrases and fashionable barbarisms, and imagine that style to be easy which custom has made familiar. Such was the idea of the Poet who wrote the following verses to a Countess cutting Paper . Pallas grew vap'rish once and odd , She would not do the least right thing Either for Goddess or for God, Nor work, nor play, nor paint, nor sing. Jove frown'd and "Use (he cry'd) those eyes So skillful, and those hands so taper; Do something exquisite and wise"--- She bow'd, obey'd him, and cut paper. This vexing him who gave her birth, Thought by all heav'n a burning shame , What does she next , but bids on earth Her Burlington do just the same? Pallas , you give yourself strange airs ; But sure you'll find it hard to spoil The sense and taste, of one that bears The name of Savile and of Boyle . Alas! one bad example shown, How quickly all the sex pursue! See, madam! see, the arts o'erthrown Between John Overton and you . language lasts; but modes of speech, which owe their prevalence only to modish solly, or to the eminence of those that use them, die away with their inventors, and their meaning, in a few years, is no longer known. but ease, tho' it excludes pomp, will admit greatness. Many lines in Cato's Soliloquy are at once easy and sublime. 'Tis the Divinity that stirs within us; 'Tis heav'n itself that points out an hereafter, And intimates eternity to man. \---If there's a pow'r above us, And that there is all Nature cries aloud Thro' all her works, he must delight in virtue, And that which he delights in must be happy. Nor is ease more contrary to wit than to sublimity; the celebrated stanza of Cowley , on a Lady elaborately dressed, loses nothing of its freedom by the spirit of the sentiment. Th' adorning thee with so much art Is but a barb'rous skill, 'Tis like the pois'ning of a dart Too apt before to kill. Cowley seems to have possessed the power of writing easily beyond any other of our Poets, yet his pursuit of remote thoughts led him often into harshness of expression. Waller often attempted, but seldom attained it; for he is too frequently driven into transpositions. The Poets, from the time of Dryden , have gradually advanced in embellishment, and consequently departed from simplicity and ease. oppress him with too hard a task. It is less difficult to write a volume of lines swelled with epithets, brightened by figures, and stiffened by transpositions, than to produce a few couplets graced only by naked elegance and simple purity, which require so much care and
