 perhaps is equivalent to this power and advantage of leading the mind on, till attention is totally engaged. What is done by Painting, must be done at one blow; curiosity has received at once all the satisfaction it can ever have. There are, however, other intellectual qualities and dispositions which the Painter can satisfy and affect as powerfully as the Poet; amongst those we may reckon our love of novelty, variety, and contrast; these qualities, on examination, will be found to refer to a certain activity and restlessness, which has a pleasure and delight in being exercised and put in motion; Art therefore only administers to those wants and desires of the mind. have stated actually subsist in the human mind. Variety reanimates the attention which is apt to languish under a continual sameness. Novelty makes a more forcible impression on the mind, than can be done by representation of what we have often seen before; and contrasts rouse the power of comparison by opposition. All this is obvious; but, on the other hand, it must be remembered, that the mind, though an active principle, has likewise a disposition to indolence; and though it loves exercise, loves it only to a certain degree, beyond which it is very unwilling to be led, or driven; these qualities therefore may be carried to excess. When variety entirely destroys the pleasure proceeding from uniformity and repetition, and when novelty counteracts, and shuts out the pleasure arising from old habits and customs, opposes too much the indolence of our disposition; the mind therefore can bear with pleasure but a small portion of novelty at a time. The main part of the work must be in the mode to which we have been used; an affection to old habits and customs I take to be the predominant disposition of the mind, and that novelty comes as an exception; where all is novelty, the attention, the exercise of the mind is too violent. disagreeable as a violent and perpetual opposition; it gives to the senses in their progress, a more sudden change than they can bear with pleasure. perfection of Art, when kept within certain bounds, if they are carried to excess, become defects, and require correction; a work then will not proceed better and better as it is more varied; variety can never be the ground-work and principle of the performance, it must be only employed to recreate and relieve. ours in particular. In a composition, when the objects are scattered and divided into many equal parts, the eye is perplexed and fatigued from not knowing where to rest, where to find the principal action, or which is the principal figure; for where all are making equal pretensions to notice, all are in equal danger of neglect. wants repose ; a word which perfectly expresses a relief of the mind from that state of hurry and anxiety which it suffers, when looking at a work of this character. one groupe or mass of light only, would be as defective as an heroic poem without episode, or any collateral incidents to recreate the mind with that variety which it always requires. characters totally opposite to each other in every respect, but in nothing more than in their mode of composition and management of light and shadow. Rembrant's manner is absolute Unity; he often has but one groupe, and exhibits little more than one spot of light in the midst of a large quantity of shadow; if he has a second mass, that second bears no proportion to the principal. and his figures are often too much dispersed, without sufficient attention to place them in groupes. expected from their general stile and character; the works of Poussin being as much distinguished for simplicity, as those of Rembrant for combination. Even this conduct of Poussin might proceed from too great an affection to simplicity of another kind ; too great a desire to avoid that ostentation of art, with regard to light and shadow, on which Rembrant so much wished to draw the attention; however, each of them ran into contrary extremes, and it is difficult to determine which is the most reprehensible, both being equally distant from the demands of Nature, and the purposes of Art. The same just moderation must be observed in regard to ornaments; nothing will contribute more to destroy Repose than Profusion, of whatever kind, whether it consists in the multiplicity of objects, or the variety and brightness of colours. which it makes pretensions, has rather the appearance of poverty. The degree to which ornaments are admitted, must be regulated by the professed stile of the work; but we may be sure of this truth, that the most ornamental stile requires Repose to set off even its ornaments to advantage. I cannot avoid mentioning here an instance of repose in that faithful and accurate painter of nature Shakespear; the short dialogue between Duncan and Banquo, whilst they are approaching the gates of Macbeth's castle. Their conversation very naturally turns upon the beauty of its situation, and the pleasantness of the air; and Banquo observing the martlets nests in every recess of the cornish, remarks, that where those birds most breed and haunt, the air is delicate. The subject of this quiet and easy conversation gives that repose so necessary to the mind, after the more tumultuous bustle of the preceding scenes, and perfectly contrasts the scene of horror that immediately succeeds. It seems as if Shakespear asked himself, What is a Prince likely to say to his attendants on such an occasion? Whereas the modern writers seem, on the contrary, to be always searching for new thoughts, such as never could occur to men in that situation. This is also frequently the practice of Homer, who, from the midst of battles and horrors, relieves and refreshes the mind of the reader, by introducing some quiet rural image, or picture of familiar domestic life. The writers of every age and country, where taste has begun to decline, paint and adorn every object they touch; are always on the stretch; never deviate or sink a moment from the pompous and the brilliant. Lucan, Statius, and Claudian, (as a learned critic observed) are examples of this bad taste and want of judgment, they never soften their tones, or condescend to be natural; all is exaggeration and perpetual splendor, without affording repose of any kind. say a few words upon Simplicity; which, in one of the senses in which it is used, is considered as the general corrector of excess; we shall at present forbear to consider it as implying that exact conduct proceeding from an intimate knowledge of simple unadulterated nature, as it is then only another word for Perfection, which neither stops short of, nor oversteps reality and truth. we can best explain what is right, by shewing what is wrong; and, indeed, in this case it seems to be absolutely necessary, Simplicity being only a negative Virtue, cannot be described or defined. We must therefore explain its nature, and shew the advantage and beauty which is derived from it, by shewing the deformity which proceeds from its neglect. practice, we should not expect to find in the works of critics, precepts that bid defiance to Simplicity, and every thing that relates to it. Du Piles recommends to us Portrait Painters, to add Grace and Dignity to the characters of those, whose Pictures we draw; so far he is undoubtedly right, but, unluckily, he descends to particulars, and gives his own idea of Grace and Dignity. If , says he, you draw persons of high Character and Dignity, they ought to be drawn in such an attitude, that the Portrait must seem to speak to us of themselves, and, as it were, to say to us, "stop, take notice of me, I am that invincible King, surrounded with majesty:" "I am that valiant commander, who struck terror every where:" "I am that great minister who knew all the springs of politicks:" "I am that magistrate of consummate wisdom and probity ." He goes on in this manner, with all the characters he can think on. We may contrast the tumour of this presumptuous loftiness, with the natural unaffected air of the portraits of Titian, where dignity seeming to be natural and inherent, draws spontaneous reverence, and instead of being thus vainly assumed, has the appearance of an unalienable adjunct; whereas such pompous and laboured insolence of grandeur is so far from creating respect, that it betrays vulgarity and meanness, and new-acquired consequence. the ideas contained in those precepts. The portraits of Rigaud are perfect examples of an implicit observance of those rules of Du Piles; so that though he was a Painter of great merit in many respects, yet, that merit is intirely overpowered by a total absence of Simplicity in every sense. the works of History Painters, I shall mention only one, a Picture which I have seen, of the Supreme Being, by Coypell. represent, however indecent the attempt, and however obvious the impossibility of any approach to an adequate representation: but here the air and character, which the Painter has given, and he has doubtless given the highest he could conceive, are so degraded by the idea of dignity, such as Du Piles has recommended, that one is enraged at the folly and presumption of the Painter, and considers it as little less than profanation. Simplicity; we must acknowledge, at the same time, they have produced great examples of it in Poussin and Le Seur. But as we are speaking of the most refined and subtle idea of perfection, may we not enquire, whether a curious eye cannot discern some faults, even in those great men? I can fancy, that even Poussin, by abhorring that affectation, and that want of Simplicity, which he observed in his countrymen, has, in certain particulars, fallen into the contrary extreme, so far as to approach to a kind of affectation, to what, in writing, would be called Pedantry. herself; that is, when an Artist seems to value himself solely upon this quality; such an ostentatious display of Simplicity becomes then as disagreeable and nauseous as any other kind of affectation; yet he is, in this case, likely enough to sit down contented with his own work, for though he finds the world look at it with indifference or dislike, as being destitute of every quality that can recreate, or give pleasure to the mind; yet he consoles himself, that it has Simplicity, a beauty of too pure and chaste a nature, to be relished by vulgar minds. enthusiastic admiration of his virtue, if that virtue consisted only in an absence of vice; something more is required; a man must do more than merely his duty to be a hero. something besides mere Simplicity to recommend them. The Apollo, the Venus, the Laacoon, the Gladiator, have a certain Composition of Action, have contrasts sufficient to give grace and energy in a high degree; but it must be confessed of the many thousand antique statues which we have, that their general characteristic is bordering at least on inanimate insipidity. difficulties of Art, is a very suspicious virtue. has been ever justly held. It is our barrier against that great enemy to truth and nature, Affectation, which is ever clinging to the pencil, and ready to drop in and poison every thing it touches; our love and affection to Simplicity, proceeds in a great measure from our aversion to every kind of affectation. virtue, the propensity which Artists have to fall into the contrary extreme; we therefore set a guard on that side that is most assailable. When a young Artist is first told that his composition and his attitudes must be contrasted, that he must turn the head contrary to the position of the body, in order to produce grace and animation; that his outline must be unadulating, and swelling, to give grandeur; and that the eye must be gratified with a variety of colours. When he is told this with certain animating words, of Spirit, Dignity, Energy, Grace, greatness of Stile, and brilliancy of Tints, he becomes suddenly vain of his new acquired knowledge, and never thinks he can carry those rules too far. It is then that the aid of Simplicity is called in, to correct the exuberance of youthful ardor. particularly applied to flesh. An Artist in his first essay of imitating nature, would make the whole mass of one colour, as the oldest Painters did; till he is taught to observe not only the variety of Tints, which are in the object itself, but the differences produced by the gradual decline of light to shadow: he then immediately puts his instruction in practice, and introduces a variety of distinct colours. variety, yet the effect of the whole upon the eye, must have the union and Simplicity of the colouring of nature. a great resemblance to the progress and advancement of the Art itself. Want of Simplicity would probably be not one of the defects of an Artist who had studied nature only, as it was not of the old masters, who lived in the time preceeding the great Art of Painting; on the contrary, their works are too simple and too inartificial. and simple. But this kind of barbarous Simplicity, would be better named Penury, as it proceeds from mere want; from want of knowledge, want of resources, want of abilities to be otherwise; their Simplicity is the offspring not of choice, but necessity. the most sensible of the want, were the best judges of the measure of the supply. There were Painters who emerged from poverty without falling into luxury. Their success induced others, who, probably never would of themselves have had strength of mind to discover the original defect to endeavour at the remedy by an abuse, and ran into the contrary extreme. But however they may have strayed, we cannot recommend to them to return to that Simplicity which they have justly quitted; but to deal out their abundance with a more sparing hand, with that dignity that makes no parade, either of its riches, or of its art. It is not easy to give a rule which may serve to fix this just and correct medium; because, when we may have fixed, or nearly fixed, the middle point, taken as a general principle, circumstances may oblige us to depart from it, either on the side of Simplicity, or on that of Variety and Decoration. Art addresses itself, that will enable the Artist to distinguish between those rules that require implicit obedience, and those which are of less consequence, and may be more easily dispensed with. difficulties of the Art from which this knowledge must extricate him, may be reckoned the nice judgment required to choose the least evil, when an Artist finds himself in that situation, that whatever he does must be in a certain degree wrong. belong to another stile, as I have already enlarged on this subject in a former discourse, speaking of the difference between the Roman and Venetian schools: I will only observe now, in order to refer it to the present purpose, that we expect to find in Art, what we find in life and manners, a uniformity of character. mentioning one rule, which indeed may be said to comprehend all the rest, the importance of pleasing at first sight; a Painter produces his work in vain if it does not invite attention. of the sublime and ornamental stile of Painting, in order to excite your attention to the more manly, noble, and dignified manner, to leave perhaps an impression too contemptuous of those ornamental parts of our Art, for which many have valued themselves, and many works are much valued and esteemed. the disposition of young men more inclinable to splendid negligence, than perseverance in laborious application to acquire correctness; and therefore did as we do in making what is crooked straight when it is bent the contrary way, in order that it may remain straight at last. may here add, that it is not enough a work be learned; it must be pleasing; the Painter must add grace to strength, if he desires to secure the first impression in his favour. absence of the lesser elegancies of the Art are not perceived; we even sometimes go greater lengths, and carry our enthusiastic admiration so far, as to despise those ornamental qualities, without considering perhaps sufficiently our own imbecillity, or recollecting how few can have any title or pretension to such neglect. sublime; both those qualities of the mind are to have their proper consequence, as far as they do not counteract each other; for that is the grand error which much care ought to be taken to avoid. continues no longer than while we are in a state of childhood. One of the first rules that I believe every Master would give to a young Pupil, respecting his conduct and management of light and shadow, for instance, would be what Leonardo Da Vinci has actually given, that you must oppose a light ground to the shadowed side of your Figure, and a dark ground to the light side. If Leonardo had lived to see the superior splendor and effect which has been since produced by the exactly contrary conduct, joining light to light, and shadow to shadow, though without doubt he would have admired it; yet, as it ought not, so probably it would not be the first rule with which he would have begun his instructions. they shall contrast each other according to the rules generally given; that if one figure opposes his front to the spectator, the next figure is to have his back turned, and that the limbs of each individual figure be contrasted; that is, if the right leg be put forward, the right arm is to be drawn back. the young students should be informed that some research is to be made, and be habituated to consider every excellence as reduceable to principles. Besides, it is the natural progress of instruction to teach first what is obvious and perceptible to the senses, and from thence proceed gradually to notions large, liberal, and compleat, such as comprise the more refined and higher excellencies in Art. of character and expression are produced without contrast; nay more, that this contrast would ruin and destroy them. affected academical contrast of limbs, stands equally on both legs, and both hands are in the same attitude: add contrast, and the whole energy and unaffected grace of the figure is destroyed. Elymas the Sorcerer stretches both hands forward in the same direction which gives perfectly the expression intended. boy affected contrasts. Whatever contrast there is, appears without any seeming agency of Art, by the natural chance of things. in Statues or Pictures of single figures only; to them it may in a considerable degree be applicable; in a composition it will be apt to destroy that natural energy of men engaged in real action, unsolicitous of grace. of rules, and how they operate on those faculties to which they are addressed; by knowing their general purpose and meaning, he will often find that he need not confine himself to the literal sense, it will be sufficient if he preserves the spirit of the Law. Figure of a Subject must appear in the midst of the Picture, under the principal light, to distinguish it from the rest . A Painter who should think himself obliged strictly to follow this rule, would incumber himself with needless difficulties; he would be confined to great uniformity of composition, and be deprived of many beauties which are incompatible with its observance. The meaning of this rule extends, or ought to extend, no further than this--- That the principal Figure should be immediately distinguished at the first glance of the eye; but there is no necessity that the principal light should fall on the principal figure, or that the principal figure should be in the middle of the picture. It is sufficient that it be distinguished by its place, or by the attention of other figures pointing it out to the spectator. So far is this rule from being indispensable, that it is very seldom practised, other considerations of greater consequence standing in the way. Examples in opposition to this rule, are found in the Cartoons in Christ's Charge to Peter, the preaching of St. Paul, and Elymas the Sorcerer, who is undoubtedly the principal object in that picture. In none of those compositions is the principal figure in the midst of the picture. In the very admirable composition of the Tent of Darius, by Le Brun, Alexander is not in the middle of the picture, nor does the principal light fall on him; but the attention of all the rest immediately distinguishes him, and distinguishes him more properly; the greatest light falls on the Daughter of Darius, who is in the middle of the picture, where it is more necessary the principal light should be placed. description of this picture, but indeed such a description as may be rather called panegyric than criticism, thinking it necessary (according to the precept of Fresnoy) that Alexander should possess the principal light, has accordingly given it to him; he might with equal truth have said he was placed in the middle of the picture, as he seemed resolved to give this piece every kind of excellence which he conceived to be necessary to perfection. His generosity is here unluckily misapplied, as it would have destroyed in a great measure the beauty of the composition. to the management of light. Tho' the general practice is to make a large mass about the middle of the picture surrounded by shadow, the reverse may be practised, and the spirit of the rule still exist. Examples of this principle reversed may be found very frequently in the works of the Venetian School. In the great composition of Paul Veronese, the Marriage at Cana, the figures are for the most part in half shadow, the great light is in the sky; and indeed, the general effect of this Picture which is so striking, is no more than what we often see in landscapes, in small pictures of fairs and country feasts; but those principles of light and shadow being transferred to a large scale, to a space containing near a hundred figures as large as life, and conducted to all appearance with as much facility, and with an attention as steadily fixed upon the whole together , as if it was a small picture immediately under the eye, the work justly excites our admiration, the difficulty being encreased as the extent is enlarged. consist of one large groupe in the middle of the picture, and the smaller groupes on each side; or a plain space in the middle, and the groupes of figures ranged round this vacuity. Whether this principal broad light be in the middle space of ground, as in the School of Athens; or in the sky, as in the Marriage at Cana; in the Andromeda, and in most of the Pictures of Paul Veronese; or whether the light be on the groupes; whatever mode of composition is adopted, every variety and licence is allowable; this only is indisputably necessary, that to prevent the eye from being distracted and confused with a multiplicity of objects of equal magnitude, those objects, whether they consist of lights, shadows, or figures, must be disposed in large masses and groupes properly varied and contrasted; that to a certain quantity of action, a proportioned space of plain ground is required; that light is to be supported by sufficient shadow; and, we may add, that a certain quantity of cold colours is necessary to give value and lustre to the warm colours: what those proportions are cannot be so well learnt by precept as by observation on Pictures, and in this knowledge bad Pictures will instruct as well as good. Our enquiry, why Pictures have a bad effect, may be as advantageous as the enquiry why they have a good effect; each will corroborate the principles that are suggested by the other. must take this opportunity of mentioning one of the means of producing that great effect which we observe in the works of the Venetian Painters, as I think it is not generally known or observed. It ought, in my opinion, to be indispensably observed, that the masses of light in a Picture be always of a warm mellow colour, yellow, red, or a yellowish-white; and that the blue, the grey, or the green colours be kept almost entirely out of these masses, and be used only to support and set off these warm colours; and for this purpose, a small proportion of cold colours will be sufficient. colours warm, as we often see in the works of the Roman and Florentine Painters, and it will be out of the power of art, even in the hands of Rubens, or Titian, to make a Picture splendid and harmonious. particularly in what may be called Academical Merit, but were both deficient in this management of Colours; the want of observing this rule is one of the causes of that heaviness of effect which is so observable in their works. The principal light in the Picture of Le Brun, which I just now mentioned, falls on Statira, who is dressed very injudiciously in a pale blue drapery; it is true, he has heightened this blue with gold, but that is not enough; the whole Picture has a heavy air, and by no means answers the expectation raised by the Print. Poussine often made a spot of blue drapery, when the general hue of the Picture was inclinable to brown or yellow; which shews sufficiently, that harmony of colouring was not a part of the Art that had much engaged the attention of this great Painter. celebrated, and justly, for the harmony of colouring. To Ariadne is given (say the Critics) a red scarf, to relieve the figure from the sea which is behind her. It is not for that reason, but for another of much greater consequence, for the sake of the general harmony and effect of the Picture. The figure of Ariadne is separated from the great groupe, and is dressed in blue, which added to the colour of the sea, make that quantity of cold colour which Titian thought necessary for the support and brilliancy of the great groupe, which groupe is composed, with very little exception, entirely of mellow colours. But as the Picture in this case would be divided into two distinct parts, one half cold, and the other warm, it was necessary to carry some of the mellow colours of the great groupe, into the cold part of the Picture, and a part of the cold into the great groupe; accordingly Titian gave Ariadne a red scarf, and to one of the Bacchante, a little blue drapery. though white may be used for the principal light, as was the practice of many of the Dutch and Flemish Painters, yet it is better to suppose that white illumined by the yellow rays of the setting sun, as was the manner of Titian. The superiority of which manner is never more striking, than when in a Collection of Pictures we chance to see a Portrait of Titian's hanging by the side of a Flemish Picture, even though that should be of the hand of Vandyke, which, however admirable in other respects, becomes cold and grey in the comparison. that are in the shade; what I have recommended therefore is no more, than that the same conduct be observed in the whole, which is acknowledged to be necessary in every individual part. It is presenting to the eye the same effect as that which it has been accustomed to feel, which in this case, as in every other, will always produce beauty; no principle therefore in our Art can be more certain, or be derived from a higher source. her drapery red, gives me occasion here to observe, that this favourite quality of giving objects relief, and which De Piles and all the Critics have considered as a requisite of the utmost importance, was not one of those objects which much engaged the attention of Titian: Painters of an inferior rank have far exceeded him in producing this effect. This was a great object of attention when Art was in its infant state, as it is at present with the vulgar and ignorant, who feel the highest satisfaction in seeing a figure, which as they say, looks as if they could walk round it. But however low I may rate this pleasure of deception, I should not oppose it, did it not oppose itself to a quality of a much higher kind, by counteracting entirely that fullness of manner which is so difficult to express in words, but which is found in such perfection in the best works of Corregio, and we may add of Rembrant. This manner is produced by melting and losing the shadows into a ground still darker than those shadows; whereas that relief is produced by opposing and separating the ground from the figure either by light, or shadow, or colour. This conduct of in-laying, as it may be called, figures on their ground in order to produce relief, was the practice of the old Painters, such as Andrea Mantegna, Pietro Perugino, and Albert Durer; and to these we may add, the first manner of Lionardo da Vinci- Giorgione, and even Corregio; but these three were amongst the first who begun to correct themselves in this dryness of style, by no longer considering relief as a principal object. As those two qualities, relief, and fullness of effect, can hardly exist together, it is not very difficult to determine to which we ought to give the preference. hand, by which he must determine the value of different qualities, that when some fault must be committed, he may choose the least. Those Painters who have best understood the Art of producing a good effect, have adopted one principle that seems perfectly conformable to reason, that a part may be sacrificed for the good of the whole. Thus, whether the masses consist of light or shadow, it is necessary that they should be compact and of a pleasing shape; to this end, some parts may be made darker and some lighter, and reflections stronger than nature would warrant. Paul Veronese took great liberties of this kind. It is said, that being once asked, why certain figures were painted in shade, as no cause was seen in the Picture itself? he turn'd off their enquiry by answering, una nuevola che passa , a cloud is passing which has overshadowed it. which I have of Rubens; it is a representation of a Moon-light. Rubens has not only diffused more light over the Picture than is in nature, but has bestowed on it those warm glowing colours by which his Works are so much distinguished. It is so unlike what any other Painters have given us of Moon-light, that it might be easily mistaken, if he had not likewise added Stars, for a fainter setting Sun.---Rubens thought the eye ought to be satisfied in this case, above all other considerations; he might indeed have made it more natural, but it would have been at the expence of what he thought of much greater consequence---the harmony proceeding from the contrast and variety of colours. This same Picture will furnish us with another instance, where we must depart from nature for a greater advantage. regard to its lightness over the object which it illumines, as it does in nature; this is likewise an intended deviation, and for the same reason. If Rubens had preserved the same scale of gradation of light between the Moon and the objects as is in nature, the Picture must have consisted of one small spot of light only, and at a small distance from the Picture nothing but this spot would be seen. It may be said indeed, that this being the case, it is a subject that ought not to be painted: but then, for the same reason, armour, nor any thing shining, ought ever to be painted; for tho' pure white is used in order to represent the greatest light of shining objects, it will not in the picture preserve the same superiority over flesh, as it has in nature, without keeping that flesh colour of a very low tint. Rembrant, who thought it of more consequence to paint light, than the objects that are seen by it, has done this in a picture which I have of Achilles. The head is kept down to a very low tint, in order to preserve this due gradation and distinction between the armour and the face. The consequence of which is, that upon the whole the picture is too black;---surely too much is sacrificed here to this narrow conception of nature, allowing the contrary conduct a fault, yet it must be acknowledged a less fault than making a picture so dark as cannot be seen without a peculiar light, and then with difficulty. The merit or demerit of the different conduct of Rubens and Rembrant in those instances which I have given, are not to be determined by the narrow principles of nature, separated from its effect on the human mind. Reason and common sense tell us, that before, and above all other considerations it is necessary, that the work should be seen, not only without difficulty or inconvenience, but with pleasure and satisfaction, and every obstacle which stands in the way of this pleasure and convenience must be removed. is not so much to place the Artist above rules, as to teach him their reason; to prevent him from entertaining a narrow confined conception of Art; to clear his mind from a perplexed variety of rules and their exceptions, by recommending the attention of the Artist to an acquaintance with the passions and affections of the mind, from which all rules arise, and to which they are all referable. Art effects its purpose by their means; an intimate knowledge therefore of those passions and affections is necessary to him who desires to effect them upon sure and solid principles. and the eternal and immutable dispositions of our passions, would be indeed going at once to the foundation of Criticism; but I am too well convinced what extensive knowledge, what subtle and penetrating judgment would be required to engage in such an undertaking: it is enough for me, if, in the language of Painters, I have produced a slight sketch of a part of this vast composition, but that sufficiently distinct to shew the usefulness of such a Theory, and its practicability. now before us. I have observed, that every candidate has copied the celebrated invention of Timanthes in hiding the face of Agamemnon in his mantle; indeed such lavish encomiums have been bestowed on this thought, and that too by men of the highest character in critical knowledge---Cicero, Quintilian, Valerius Maximus, and Pliny,---and since re-echoed by almost every modern that has wrote on the Arts, that your adopting it can neither be wondered at nor blamed. Indeed it appears now to be so much connected with the subject, that the spectator would be disappointed in not finding united in the Picture what he always united in his mind, and considered as indispensably belonging to the subject. But it may be observed, that those who praise this circumstance were not Painters. They use it as an illustration only of their own Art; it served their purpose, and it was certainly not their business to enter into the objections that lye against it in another Art. imagination which make so very considerable and refined a part of Poetry. It is a doubt with me, whether they should be even attempted. The chief, if not the only occasion which the Painter has for this artifice, is, when the subject is improper to be more fully represented, either for the sake of decency, or to avoid what would be disagreeable to be seen; and this is not to raise or encrease the passions, which is the reason that is given for this practice, but on the contrary to diminish their effect. works, give this pleasure of imagination to a high degree. From a slight undetermined drawing, where the idea of the composition and character are, as I may say, only just touched upon, the imagination supplies more than the Painter himself, probably, could produce, and we accordingly often find, that the finished work disappoints the expectation that was raised from the sketch; and this power is one of the causes of the great pleasure we have in viewing a collection of drawings of great Painters. These general ideas, which are expressed in sketches, correspond very well to the Art in Poetry. A great part of the beauty of the celebrated description of Eve in Milton's Paradise Lost, consists in using only general indistinct expressions, every man making out the detail according to his own particular imagination, his own idea of beauty, grace, expression, dignity, or loveliness; but a Painter, when he represents Eve on a canvas, is obliged to give a determined form, and his own idea of beauty distinctly expressed. undetermined manner, or vague ideas of any kind, in a compleat and finished Picture. This idea, therefore, of leaving any thing to the imagination, opposes a very fixed and indispensable rule in our Art, that every thing shall be carefully and distinctly expressed, as if the Painter knew, with correctness and precision, the exact form and character of whatever is introduced into the Picture. This is what with us is called Science, and Learning, which must not be sacrificed and given up for a beauty so uncertain and doubtful, which not naturally belonging to our Art, will probably be sought for without success. of Pliny, that the circumstance of covering the face of Agamemnon was probably not in consequence of any fine imagination of the Painter; this he considers as a discovery of the critics; but that he merely copied the description of the sacrifice, as he found it in Euripides. Agamemnon saw Iphigenia advance towards the fatal altar; he groaned, he turned aside his head, he shed tears, and covered his face with his robe. Timanthes; not only because it is not his invention, but because he thinks meanly of this trick of concealing, except in instances of blood, where the objects would be too horrible to be seen; but, says he, in an afflicted Father, in a King, in Agamemnon, you, who are a Painter, conceal from me the most interesting circumstance, and then put me off with sophistry and a veil. You, says he, are a feeble Painter, without resources; you don't know even those of your Art: I care not what veil it is, whether closed hands, arms raised,
