 fasten on their affections, they see grosser defects, and the very images and allusions which shocked their taste; yet they do not appear as puerile or extrinsic in one as the other. Why? Because they did not appear so to the author. It may sound paradoxical, after observing that those productions want vigour that are the work of imitation, in which the understanding violently directed, if not extinguished, the blaze of fancy, to assert, that though genius be allowed to be only another word for a strong imagination, the first observers of nature exercised their judgment much more than their imitators. But they exercised it to discriminate things, whilst their followers were busy borrowing sentiments and arranging words. Boys who have received a classical education load their memory with words, and the correspondent ideas are, perhaps, never distinctly comprehended. As a proof of this assertion I must mention as a fact, that I have known many young people who could write tolerably smooth verses, and string epithets prettily together, when their prose themes showed the barrenness of their minds; or, more justly speaking, how superficial the cultivation must have been, which their understanding had received. Dr. Johnson, I know, has taken some pains to prove, that a strong mind, accidentally led to some particular study in which it excels, is a genius. Not to stop to investigate the causes which produced this happy strength of mind, it is sufficient to remark, that the world has agreed to denominate those men of genius, who have pursued a particular art of science, after the bent of nature has been displayed in obstinate perseverance or fond attachment to a favourite study. Dr. Johnson, in fact, appears sometimes to be of the same opinion; especially when he observes "that Thomson looked on nature with the eye which she only gives to a poet." But though it should be allowed that books conned at school may lead some youths to write poetry, I fear they will never be the poets who charm our cares to sleep, or extort admiration. They may diffuse taste, and polish the language, but I am apt to conclude that they will seldom have the energy to rouse the passions which amend the heart. And, to return to the first object of discussion, the reason why most people are more interested by a scene described by a poet than by a view of nature, probably arises from the want of a lively imagination. The poet contrasts the prospect, and selecting the most picturesque parts in his camera, the judgment is directed, and the whole attention of the languid faculty turned towards the objects which excited the most forcible emotions in the poet's heart, firing his imagination; the reader consequently feels the enlivened description, though he was not able to receive a first impression from the operations of his own mind. Besides, it may be farther observed, that uncultivated minds are only to be moved by forcible representations. To rouse the thoughtless, objects must be contrasted, calculated to excite tumultuous emotions. The unsubstantial picturesque forms which a contemplative man gazes on, and often follows with ardour till mocked by a glimpse of unattainable excellence, appear to them the light vapours of a dreaming enthusiast, who gives up the substance for the shadow. It is not within that they seek amusement, their eyes are rarely turned back on themselves; of course, their emotions, though sometimes fervid, are always transient, and the nicer perceptions which distinguish the man of taste are not felt, or make such a slight impression as scarcely to excite any pleasurable sensations. Is it surprising, then, that fine scenery is often overlooked, by those who yet may be delighted by the same imagery concentrated and contrasted by the poet? But even this numerous class is exceeded by witlings, who, anxious to appear to have wit and taste, do not allow their understandings, or feelings, any liberty: for instead of cultivating their faculties and reflecting on their operations, they are busy collecting prejudices, and are pre-determined to admire what the suffrage of time announces excellent; not to store up a fund of amusement for themselves, but to enable them to talk. These hints will assist the reader to trace some of the causes why the beauties of nature are not forcibly felt, when civilization and its canker- worm, luxury, have made considerable advances. Those calm emotions are not sufficiently lively to serve as a relaxation to the voluptuary, or even for the moderate pursuers of artificial pleasures. In the present state of society, the understanding must bring back the feelings to nature, or the sensibility must have attained such strength, as rather to be sharpened than
