 how continually thei are faine to writhe their wittes in and out, in puttyng to, in chaungyng, in blottyng out, in laiyng theyr woorke aside, in oueruewyng it againe, in shewyng it to some for a prouffe, and yet kepyng it in theyr handes whole nyne yeres togethers, so that they are neuer satisfied with theim selues, whiles they goe about to purchase so vaine a rewarde as praise is, yea and that geuin theim by a few, onely so dearely bought with many nightes labors, and losse of slepe, the sweetest thyng that can be, and with so many trauailes, and beatyng of theyr braines about it: besides the hurt thei susteine in their bodies, decaie of beautie, marryng of theyr eiesight, or also blindnesse, together with pouertee, enuie, forbearyng of pleasures, vntimely age, hasted death, and suche like disaduantages, whiche natheles these wisemen sticke not at, so they maie haue theyr writynges allowed at one or two of these blereied bokewormes handes. But my Scribes on the other side, haue not a little more commoditee and pleasure of their folie. Wheras takyng no great leysure in pennyng of theyr mattier, naie rather what so euer toie lighteth in their head, or falleth in their thought, be it but theyr dreame, they doe put the same straight in writyng, with small dispence or none, sauyng waste of paper? knowyng (I warrant you) what will come of it, that the fonder the trifles be, whiche thei entreate of, the more commendacion shall thei gette of most men, fooles as thei & vnlearned. And what maistrie is it for them to set light store by two or three of those learned mens repriues, if so be yet they rede theyr woorkes? Or what auaileth theim, so few wysemens allowaunce? where so great a multitude of fooles on the other syde will disalow it. That in case thei haue the feate to set furth other mens doynges for theyr owne, and can be contented to beare the name of that, whiche others toke the peines about, marie sir than I thynke they haue good skille: for though it chaunce theim at laste to be taken with the maner, yet for a season thei maie kepe theyr reputacion. And it is a pleasure to marke how muche these men esteeme theim selues, whan they are praised so of the people, and whan they are poincted out in a great company, as, this is the wonderous felow ye here of : and whan in euery bokebynders shoppe theyr woorkes are set to the sale, and whan they rede theyr names, surnames , and bynames , set in the fyrst fruntes of euery boke, whiche titles also they dooe counterfeicte, and tourne into some contrarie language, as strange as maie be deuised. Yet, I praie you, whan all is dooen, what be they els but names? and how few shall know those names, hauyng regard to the worldes wydenesse? and how many lesse commende theim? namely suche diuersitee beyng in iudgementes: yea amonges vnlearned men also? But what saie you to this, that not seeldome they feigne those names, or borow theim out of olde Autours? for one of theim ioyeth to be named Telemachus, an other Stelenus, or Laertes, he Polycrates, he Thrasymachus, and suche lyke. So that now it skilleth not how they entitle theyr bookes, for by as good reason myght they call it a goorde, or a radisshe roote , or name it A, or B, as philosophers dooe by theyrs. But this is the best sporte of all, to see theim present eche others with epistles, with verses, and with mattiers of praise, sent from fooles, to fooles: and from asses, to asses. Here, he in his iudgement is as good a Poete as Alceus was, and hym doeth he likewyse compare to Callimachus. The one is holden for more eloquent than Tullius Cicero: that other, for better learned than Plato. Yea and not seeldome leuyng this fayre plaie, thei 4 fall to foule, in sekyng theim out some aduersaries, to the ende that in contendyng togethers, theyr fame maie be the wyder blowne abrode. In the meane tyme, one learned man taketh his parte, an other taketh his, till at last bothe the Capitaines hauyng buckled manfully togethers, wolde be taken for Victours, and both partes pretende to Triumph therfore. These thynges of wysemen are counted to be mere folies, as in deede thei are, who can denie it? But yet therewhile through my benefite they lede a pleasaunt and glorious life, as not willyng to chaunge theyr Triumphes, skarcely (I beleue) with those of the Scipions. How be it, suche as are learned in deede, are not a little also beholdyng vnto me, whiles with great pleasure they maie laugh at the other, and take fruicion of their madnesse, whiche they can not againe saie, vnlesse they be to vnkinde, and the veriest chorles of all. 
