 to fauour and support vertue in any other, yea, as Tullie the moste famous Oratour dooeth saie, euen to loue those who we neuer sawe, but by good fame and brute beutified to vs. For the encrease of vertue, God dooeth nobilitate with honour worthie menne, to be aboue other in dignitie and state, thereupon vertue doeth encrease your Lordshipps honor, beyng a louer of vertue and worthie nobilitie . enstructe the studentes thereof, with all facilitee to grounde in them, a moste plentious and riche vein of eloquence. No man is able to inuente a more profitable waie and order, to instructe any one in the exquisite and absolute perfeccion, of wisedome and eloquence, then Aphthonius Quintilianus and Hermogenes. Tullie also as a moste excellente Orator, in the like sorte trauailed, whose Eloquence and vertue all tymes extolled, and the ofspryng of all ages worthilie aduaunceth. And because as yet the verie grounde of Rhetorike, is not heretofore intreated of, as concernyng these exercises, though in fewe yeres past, a learned woorke of Rhetorike is compiled and made in the Englishe toungue[illeg.], of one, who floweth in all excellencie of arte, who in iudgement is profounde, in wisedome and eloquence moste famous. In these therefore my diligence is emploied, to profite many, although not with like Eloquence, beutified and adorned, as the matter requireth. I haue chosen out in these Oracions soche questions, as are right necessarie to be knowen and redde of all those, whose cogitacio pondereth vertue and Godlines. I doubte not, but seyng my trauaile toucheth vertuous preceptes, and vttereth to light, many famous Histories, the order of arte obserued also, but that herein the matter it self, shall defende my purpose againste the enuious, whiche seketh to depraue any good enterprise, begon of any one persone. The enuious manne though learned, readeth to depraue that, which he readeth, the ignoraunt is no worthie Iudge, the learned and godlie pondereth vprightly & sincerely, that which he iudgeth, the order of these Oracions followeth afterward, and the names of the. Nature hath indued euery man, with a certain eloquence, and also subtilitie to reason and discusse, of any question 1 or proposicion propounded, as  Aristotle the Philosopher, in his Booke of Rhetorike dooeth shewe. These giftes of nature, singuler doe flowe and abounde in vs, accordyng to the greate and ample indumente and plentuousnes of witte and wisedome, lodged in vs, therefore Nature it self beyng well framed, and afterward by arte and order of science, instructed and adorned, must be singularlie 2 furthered, helped, and aided to all excellencie, to exquisite inuencion, and profounde knowledge, bothe in  Logike and 3 Rhetorike. In the one, as a Oratour to pleate with all facilitee, 4 and copiouslie to dilate any matter or sentence: in the other to grounde profunde and subtill argument, to fortifie  & make stronge our assercion or sentence, to proue and defende, by the force and power of arte, thinges passyng the compasse & reach  5 of our capacitee and witte. Nothyng can bee more excellently giuen of nature then Eloquence, by the which the florishyng  6 state of commonweales doe consiste: kyngdomes vniuersally are gouerned, the state of euery one priuatlie is maintained. The commonwealth also should be maimed, and debilitated, except the other parte be associate to it.  Zeno the Philosopher 7 comparing  Rhetorike and Logike, doeth assimilate and liken them to the hand of man. Logike is like saith he to the fiste, for 8 euen as the fiste closeth and shutteth into one, the iointes and partes of the hande,  & with mightie force and strength, wrappeth  9 and closeth in thynges apprehended: So  Logike for the deepe and profounde knowlege, that is reposed and buried in it, in soche sort of manicion and strength fortified, in few wordes taketh soche force and might by argumente, that excepte like equalitee in like art and knowledge doe mate it, in vain the disputacion shalbe, and the repulse of thaduersarie readie. 10 Rhetorike is like to the hand set at large, wherein euery part and ioint is manifeste, and euery vaine as braunches of trees sette at scope and libertee. So of like sorte, Rhetorike in moste ample and large maner, dilateth and setteth out small thynges or woordes, in soche sorte, with soche aboundaunce and plentuousnes, bothe of woordes and wittie inuencion, with soche goodlie disposicion, in soche a infinite sorte, with soche pleasauntnes of Oracion, that the moste stonie and hard hartes, can not but bee incensed, inflamed, and moued thereto. 11 These twoo singular giftes of nature, are absolute and perfect in fewe; for many therebe, whiche are exquisite and profound in argument, by art to reason and discusse, of any question or proposicion propounded, who by nature are disabled,  & smallie adorned to speake eloquently, in whom neuertheles more aboundaunt knowlege doeth somtymes remaine then in the other, if the cause shalbe in controuersie ioined, and examined to trie a manifeste truthe. But to whom nature hath giuen soche abilitee, and absolute excellencie, as that thei can bothe  12 copiouslie dilate any matter or sentence, by pleasauntnes and swetenes of their wittie and ingenious oracion, to drawe vnto theim the hartes of a multitude, to plucke doune and extirpate affeccios and perturbacions of people, to moue pitee and compassion, to speake before Princes and rulers, and to perswade theim in good causes and enterprises, to animate and incense them, to godlie affaires and busines, to alter the cousaill of kynges, by their wisedome and eloquence, to a better state, and also to be exquisite in thother, is a thing of all most  13 noble and excellent. The eloquence of Demosthenes, Isocrates, Tisias, Gorgias, Eschines, were a great bulwarke and staie to Athens and all Grece, Rome also by the like vertue of Eloquence, in famous and wise orators vpholded: the wise and eloquente Oracions of Tullie againste Catiline. The graue and sentencious oracions of Cato in the Senate, haue been onelie the meane to vpholde the mightie state of Rome, 14 in his strength and auncient fame and glorie. Also the Chronicles of auncient time doe shewe vnto vs, the state of Rome could by no meanes haue growen so meruailous mightie, but that God had indued the whole line of Cesars, with singuler vertues, with aboundaunt knowlege  & singuler Eloquence. Thusidides the famous Historiographer sheweth,  15 how moche Eloquence auailed the citees of Grece, fallyng to dissencio. How did the Corcurians saue them selues from the  16 inuasio and might, of the Poloponesians, their cause pleated  17 before the Athenians, so moche their eloquence in a truthe preuailed. The Ambassadours of Corinth, wanted not their  18 copious, wittie, and ingenious Oracions, but thei pleated before mightie, wise, and graue Senators, whose cause, accordyng to iudgemet, truthe, and integritee was ended. The eloquet Embassages of the Corinthias, the Lacedemonias,  19 & the Mituleneans, the Athenians, who so readeth shall sone see that of necessitee, a common wealth or kyngdome must be fortefied, with famous, graue, and wise counsailours. How often did Demosthenes saue the comon wealthes of Athens,  20 how moche also did that large dominion prospere and florish by Isocrates. Tullie also by his Eloquet please, Cato, Crassus,  21 Antonius, Catulus Cesar, with many other, did support and vphold the state of that mightie kyngdo. No doubte, but that Demosthenes made a wittie, copious, and ingenious oracions, when the Athenians were minded to giue and betake to the handes of Philip kyng of the Macedonians, their  22 pestiferous enemie moste vile and subtell, the Orators of Athens. This Philip forseyng the discorde of Grece, as he by subtill meanes compassed his enterprices, promised by the faith of a Prince, to be at league with the Athenians, if so be thei would betake to his handes, the eloquente Oratours of 23 Athens, for as long saith he, as your Oratours are with you declaryng, so longe your heddes and counsaill are moued to variaunce and dissencion, this voice ones seased emong you, 24 in tranquilitee you shalbee gouerned. Demosthenes beyng eloquente and wise, foresawe the daungers and the mischieuous intent of him, wherevpon he framed a goodly Oracion vpon a Fable, whereby he altered their counsaile, and repulsed the enemie. This fable is afterward set forth in an Oracion, after the order of these exercises, profitable to Rhetorike. 25 Firste it is good that the learner doe vnderstand what is a fable, for in all matters of learnyng, it is the firste grounde, as Tullie doeth saie, to knowe what the thing is, that we may the better 26 perceiue whervpo we doe intreate. A fable is a forged tale, cotaining in it by the colour of a lie, a matter  27 of truthe. The moralle is called that, out of the whiche some godlie precepte, or admonicion to vertue is giuen, to frame and instruct our maners. Now that we knowe what a fable is, it is good to learne also, how manifolde or diuers thei be,  28 I doe finde three maner of fables to be. The first of theim is,  29 wherein a man being a creature of God indued with reason, is onely intreated of, as the Fable of the father and his children, he willing the to concorde, and this is called  Rationalis fabula, whiche is asmoche to saie, as a Fable of men indued 30 with reason, or women. The second is called a morall fable, but I see no cause whie it is so called, but rather as the other is called a fable of reasonable creatures, so this is contrarilie named a fable of beastes, or of other thinges wanting reason or life, wanting reason as of the Ante and the Greshopper, or  31 of this the beame caste doun, and the Frogges chosyng their king. The thirde is a mixt Fable so called, bicause in it bothe man hauyng reason, and a beaste wantyng reason, or any other thing wanting life, is ioyned with it, as for the example,  32 of the fable of the woodes and the housebandman, of whom he desired a helue for his hatchet. Aucthours doe write, that Poetes firste inuented fables, the whiche Oratours also doe vse in their perswasions, and not without greate cause, both 33 Poetes and Oratours doe applie theim to their vse. For, fables dooe conteine goodlie admonicion, vertuous preceptes  34 of life. Hesiodus the Poete, intreatyng of the iniurious dealyng of Princes and gouernours, against their subiectes, admonished  35 them by the fable of the Goshauke, and the Nightyngale in his clause. Ouid also the Poete intreated of diuers  36 fables, wherein he giueth admonicion, and godly counsaile. Demosthenes the famous Oratour of Athens, vsed  37 the fable of the Shepeherdes, and Wolues: how the Wolues on a tyme, instauntlie required of the Shepeherdes their bande dogges, and then thei would haue peace and concorde with theim, the Shepeherdes gaue ouer their Dogges, their Dogges deliuered and murdered, the shepe were immediatly deuoured: So saieth he, if ye shall ones deliuer to Philip, the king of the Macedonians your Oratours, by whose learnyng, knowlege and wisedome, the whole bodie of your dominions is saued, for thei as Bandogges, doe repell all mischeuous enterprises and chaunses, no doubte, but that rauenyng Wolfe Philip, will eate and consume your people, by this Fable he made an Oracion, he altered their counsailes and heddes of the Athenians, from so foolishe an enterprise. Also the same Demosthenes, seyng the people careles, slothfull, and lothsome to heare the Oratours, and all for the florishing state of the kingdome: he ascended to the place or pulpet,  38 where the Oracions were made, and began with this fable. Ye men of Athens, saied he, it happened on a tyme, that a certaine man hired an Asse, and did take his iourney from Athens to Megara, as we would saie, fro London to Yorke, the owner also of the Asse, did associate hymself in his iourney, to brynge backe the Asse againe, in the voyage the weather was extreame burning hotte, and the waie tedious the place also for barenes and sterilitee of trees, wanted shadowe in this long broyle of heate: he that satte one the Asse, lighted and tooke shadowe vnder the bellie of the Asse, and because the shadowe would not suffice bothe, the Asse beyng small, the owner saied, he muste haue the shadowe, because the Asse was his, I deny that saieth the other, the shadowe is myne, because I hired the Asse, thus thei were at greate contencion, the fable beyng recited, Demosthenes descended fro 39 his place, the whole multitude were inquisitiue, to knowe the ende about the shadowe, Demosthenes notyng their follie, ascended to his place, and saied, Oye foolishe Athenians, whiles I and other, gaue to you counsaill and admonicio, of graue and profitable matters, your eares wer deafe, and your mindes slombred, but now I tell of a small trifeling matter, you throng to heare the reste of me. By this Fable he nipped their follie, and trapped them manifestlie, in their owne doltishenes. Herevpon I doe somwhat long, make copie of wordes,  40 to shewe the singularitee of fables well applied. In the tyme of Kyng Richard the thirde, Doctour Mourton, beyng Bishop of Elie, and prisoner in the Duke of Buckynghams house in Wales, was often tymes moued of the Duke, to speake his minde frelie, if king Richard wer lawfully king, and said to him of his fidelitee, to kepe close and secret his sentence: but the Bishop beyng a godlie man, and no lesse wise, waied the greate frendship, whiche was sometyme betwene the Duke  & King Richard, aunswered in effect nothyng, but beyng daily troubled with his mocions & instigacions, spake a fable of Esope: My lorde saied he, I will aunswere you, by a Fable of Esope. The Lion on a tyme gaue a commaundement, that all horned beastes should flie from the woode, and  41 none to remain there but vnhorned beastes. The Hare hearing of this commaundement, departed with the horned beastes from the woodde: The wilie Foxe metyng the Hare, demaunded the cause of his haste, forthwith the Hare aunswered, a commaundemente is come from the Lion, that all horned beastes should bee exiled, vpon paine of death, from the woode: why saied the Foxe, this commaundement toucheth not any sorte of beast as ye are, for thou haste no hornes but knubbes: yea, but said the Hare, what, if thei saie I haue hornes, that is an other matter, my lorde I saie no more: what he ment, is euident to all men. In the time of king Hery theight (a prince of famous memorie) at what time as the small houses of religio, wer giuen ouer to the kinges hand, by the Parliament house: the bishop of Rochester, Doctour Fisher by name stepped forthe, beyng greued with the graunt, recited before them, a fable of Esope to shewe what discommoditee would followe in the Clergie. My lordes and maisters saieth he, Esope recited a fable: how 42 that on a tyme, a housebande manne desired of the woodes, a small helue for his hatchet, all the woodes consented thereto waiyng the graunt to be small, and the thyng lesse, therevpo the woodes consented, in fine the housbande man cut doune a small peece of woodde to make a helue, he framyng a helue to the hatchette, without leaue and graunt, he cut doune the mightie Okes and Cedars, and destroyed the whole woodd, then the woodes repented them to late. So saith he, the gift of these small houses, ar but a small graunt into the kinges hades: but this small graunt, will bee a waie and meane to pull doune the greate mightie fatte Abbees,  & so it happened. But there is repentauce to late: & no profite ensued of the graunte. other, bee these, ------ Of euery one of these, a goodlie Oracio maie be made these excercises are called of the Grekes Progimnasmata, of the Latines, profitable introduccions, or fore exercises, to attain greater arte and knowlege in Rhetorike, and bicause, for the easie capacitee and facilitee of the learner, to attain greater knowledge in Rhetorike, thei are right profitable and necessarie: Therefore I title this booke, to bee the foundacio of Rhetorike, the exercises being Progimnasmata. I haue chosen out the fable of the Shepeherdes, and the Wolues, vpon the whiche fable, Demosthenes made an eloquente, copious, and wittie Oracion before the Athenians, whiche fable was so well applied, that the citee and common wealth of Athens was saued. A fable. These notes must be observed, to make an Oracion by a Fable. 1\. Firste, ye shall recite the fable, as the aucthour telleth it. 2\. There in the seconde place, you shall praise the aucthoure who made the fable, whiche praise maie sone bee gotte of any studious scholer, if he reade the aucthours life and actes therin, or the Godlie preceptes in his fables, shall giue abundant praise. 3\. Then thirdlie place the morall, whiche is the interpretacion annexed to the Fable, for the fable was inuented for the moralles sake. 4\. Then orderlie in the fowerth place, declare the nature or thynges, conteined in the Fable, either of man, fishe, foule, beaste, plante, trees, stones, or whatsoeuer it be. There is no man of witte so dulle, or of so grosse capacitee, but either by his naturall witte, or by reading, or sences, he is hable to saie somwhat in the nature of any thyng. 5\. In the fifte place, sette forthe the thynges, reasonyng one with an other, as the Ant with the Greshopper, or the Cocke with the precious stone. 6\. The in the vj.place, make a similitude of the like matter. 7\. Then in the seuenth place, induce an exaple for the same matter to bee proued by. 8\. Laste of all make the Epilogus, whiche is called the conclusion, and herein marke the notes folowyng, how to make The Wolues on a tyme perswaded the Shepeherdes, that thei would ioyne amitee, and make a league of concord and vnitee: the demaunde pleased the Shepeherdes, foorthwith the Wolues requested to haue custodie of the bande Dogges, because els thei would be as thei are alwaies, an occasion to breake their league and peace, the Dogges beyng giuen ouer, thei were one by one murthered, and then the Shepe were wearied. The posteritee of tymes and ages, muste needes praise the wisedome and industrie, of all soche as haue lefte in monumentes of writyng, thynges worthie fame, 44 what can bee more excellently set foorthe: or what deserueth chiefer fame and glorie, then the knowledge of artes and sciences, inuented by our learned, wise, and graue aucestours: and so moche the more thei deserue honour, and perpetuall commendacions, because thei haue been the firste aucthours, and beginners to soche excellencies. The posteritee praiseth and setteth forth the wittie and ingenious workes of Apelles,  45 Parthesius, and Polucletus, and all soche as haue artificially set forth their excellent giftes of nature. But if their praise for fame florishe perpetuallie, and increaseth for the worthines of theim, yet these thynges though moste excellent, are inferiour to vertue: for the ende of artes and sciences, is vertue  46 and godlines. Neither yet these thynges dissonaunt from vertue, and not associate, are commendable onely for vertues sake: and to the ende of vertue, the wittes of our auncestours were incensed to inuent these thynges. But herein Polucletus, Apelles, and Perthesius maie giue place, when greater  47 vertues come in place, then this my aucothour Esope, for his godly preceptes, wise counsaill and admonicion, is chiefly to bee praised: For, our life maie learne all goodnes, all vertue, 48 of his preceptes. The Philosophers did neuer so liuely sette forthe and teache in their scholes and audience, what vertue  49 and godlie life were, as Esope did in his fables, Citees, and common wealthes, maie learne out of his fables, godlie concorde and vnitee, by the whiche meanes, common wealthes florisheth, and kingdoms are saued. Herein ample matter riseth to Princes, and gouernours, to rule their subiectes in all  50 godlie lawes, in faithfull obedience: the subiectes also to loue and serue their prince, in al his affaires and busines. The father maie learne to bring vp, and instructe his childe thereby. The child also to loue and obeie his parentes. The huge and monsterous vices, are by his vertuous doctrine defaced and extirpated: his Fables in effect contain the mightie volumes and bookes of all Philosophers, in morall preceptes,  & the infinite  51 monumetes of lawes stablished. If I should not speake of his commendacion, the fruictes of his vertue would shewe his commendacions: but that praise surmounteth all fame of  52 glory, that commendeth by fame it self, the fruictes of fame in this one Fable, riseth to my aucthour, whiche he wrote of the Shepeherd, and the Wolues. Wherein Esope wittely admonisheth all menne to beware and take heede, of cloked and fained frendship, of the wicked and vngodlie, whiche vnder a pretence and offer of frendship or of benefite, seeke the ruin, dammage, miserie or destruccion of man, toune, citee, region, or countree. Of all beastes to the quantitee of his bodie, the 53 Wolue passeth in crueltee and desire of bloode, alwaies vnsaciable of deuouryng, neuer contented with his pray. The Wolfe deuoureth and eateth of his praie all in feare, and therefore oftentymes he casteth his looke, to be safe from perill and daunger. And herein his nature is straunge fro all beastes: the iyes of the Wolfe, tourned from his praie immediatlie, the praie prostrate vnder 54 his foote is forgotten, and forthwith he seeketh a newe praie, so greate obliuion and debilitee of memorie, is giuen to that beaste, who chieflie seketh to deuoure his praie by night. The Wolues are moche inferior to the bandogges in strength, bicause  55 nature hath framed the in the hinder parts, moche more weaker, and as it were maimed, and therefore the bandogge doocth ouermatche theim, and ouercome them in fight. The Wolues are not all so mightie of bodie as the Bandogges, of diuers colours, of sight more sharpe, of lesse heddes: but in  56 smellyng, the nature of a Dogge passeth all beastes and creatures, whiche the historie of Plinie dooe shewe, and Aristotle in his booke of the historie of beastes, therein you shall knowe their excellente nature. The housholde wanteth not faithfull and trustie watche nor resistaunce, in the cause of the maister, the Bandogge not wantyng. Plinie sheweth out of  57 his historie, how Bandogges haue saued their Maister, by their resistaunce. The Dogge of all beastes sheweth moste loue, and neuer leaueth his maister: the worthines of the badogge is soche, that by the lawe in a certaine case, he is counted accessarie of Felonie, who stealeth a Bandogge from his maister, a robberie immediatly folowing inthe same family. As concernyng the Shepe, for their profite and wealthe, 58 that riseth of theim, are for worthines, waiyng their smalle quantitie of bodie, aboue all beastes. Their fleshe nourisheth purely, beyng swete and pleasaunt: their skinne also serueth  59 to diuers vses, their Wolles in so large and ample maner, commodious, seruyng all partes of common wealthes. No state or degree of persone is, but that thei maie goe cladde and adorned with their wolles. So GOD in his creatures, hath created and made man, beyng a chief creatour, and moste excellent  60 of all other, all things to serue him:and therefore the Stoicke Philosophers doe herein shewe the excellencie of man  61 to be greate, when all thinges vpon the yearth, and from the yearth, doe serue the vse of man, yet emong men there is a diuersitee 62 of states, and a difference of persones, in office and codicion of life. As concernyng the shepherde, he is in his state and condicion of life, thoughe meane, he is a righte profitable and necessarie member, to serue all states in the commo wealthe, not onely to his maister whom he serueth: for by his diligence, and warie keping of the, not onely from rauenyng beastes, but otherwise he is a right profitable member, to all  63 partes of the common wealth. For, dailie we feele the comoditie, wealth and riches, that riseth of theim, but the lesse we feele not, except flockes perishe. In the body of man God hath created  & made diuerse partes, to make vp a whole and absolute man, whiche partes in office, qualite and worthinesse, are moche differing. The bodie of man it self, for the execellent workemanship of God therein, & meruailous giftes of nature  64 and vertues, lodged and bestowed in the same bodie, is called of the Philosophers  Microcosmos, a little worlde. The body of man in all partes at cocord, euery part executing his funccion & office, florisheth, and in strength prospereth, otherwise  65 thesame bodie in partes disseuered, is feeble and weake, and thereby falleth to ruin, and perisheth. The singuler Fable of Esope, of the belie and handes, manifestlie sheweth thesame  66 and herein a florishing kingdom or common wealth, is compared to the body, euery part vsing his pure vertue, stregth & operacion. Menenius Agrippa, at what time as the Romaiwere  67 at division against the Senate, he vsed the Fable of Esope, wherewith thei were perswaded to a concorde, and vnttee.  68 The vilest parte of the bodie, and baseste is so necessarie, that the whole bodie faileth and perisheth, thesame wantyng although nature remoueth them from our sight, and shame fastnes also hideth theim: take awaie the moste vilest parte of the bodie, either in substaunce, in operacion or function, and forthwith the principall faileth. So likewise in a kyngdome, or common wealth, the moste meane and basest state of man taken awaie, the more principall thereby ceaseth: So God to a mutuall concorde, frendship, and perpetuall societie of life, 69 hath framed his creatures, that the moste principall faileth, it not vnited with partes more base and inferiour, so moche the might and force of thynges excellente, doe consiste by the moste inferiour, other partes of the bodie more amiable and pleasaunt to sight, doe remain by the force, vse and integritee of the simpliest. The Prince and chief peres doe decaie, and al the whole multitude dooe perishe: the baseste kinde of menne wantyng. Remoue the Shepeherdes state, what good followeth,  70 yea, what lacke and famine increaseth not: to all states the belie ill fedde, our backes worse clad. The toilyng housebandman  71 is so necessarie, that his office ceasyng vniuersallie the whole bodie perisheth, where eche laboureth to further and aide one an other, this is a common wealth, there is prosperous state of life. The wisest Prince, the richest, the mightiest and moste valiauntes, had nede alwaies of the foolishe, the weake, the base and simplest, to vpholde his kingdomes, not onely in the affaires of his kyngdomes, but in his domesticall thinges, for prouisio of victuall, as bread, drinke, meat clothyng, and in all soche other thynges. Therefore, no office or state of life, be it neuer so meete, seruyng in any part of the common wealthe, muste bee contemned, mocked, or skorned  72 at, for thei are so necessarie, that the whole frame of the common wealth faileth without theim: some are for their wicked behauiour so detestable, that a common wealthe muste seeke meanes to deface and extirpate theim as weedes, and rotten members of the bodie. These are thefes, murtherers, and adulterers, 73 and many other mischiuous persones. These godly Lawes, vpright and sincere Magistrates, will extirpate and cutte of, soche the commo wealth lacketh not, but rather abhorreth as an infectiue plague and Pestilence, who in thende through their owne wickednesse, are brought to mischief. Read Plato in his booke, intiteled of the common wealth 74 who sheweth the state of the Prince, and whole Realme, to stande and consiste by the vnitee of partes, all states of the comon 75 wealth, in office diuers, for dignite and worthines, bearing not equalit ee in one consorciate and knit, doe raise a perfite frame, and bodie of kingdome or common wealthe. 76 Aristotle the Philosopher doeth saie, that a comon welth is a multitude gathered together in one Citee, or Region, in state and condicion of life differing, poore and riche, high and low, wise, and foolishe, in inequalit ee of minde and bodies differyng, for els it can not bee a common wealthe. There must be nobles and peres, kyng and subiect: a multitude inferiour  77 and more populous, in office, maners, worthines alteryng. Manne needeth no better example, or paterne of a common wealthe, to frame hymself, to serued, in his state and callyng, then to ponder his owne bodie. There is but one hedde, and many partes, handes, feete, fingers, toes, ioyntes, veines, sinewes, belie, and so forthe: and so likewise in a comon welth there muste be a diuersitee of states. Thus might the Wolues reason with them selues, of their Embassage: The Wolues dailie molested and wearied, with the fearce ragyng Masties, and ouercome in fight, of their power and might: one emong the reste, more politike 78 and wise then the other, called an assemble and counsaill of Wolues, and thus he beganne his oracion. My felowes and compaignions, sithe nature hath from the beginnyng, made vs vnsaciable, cruell, liuyng alwaies by praies murthered, and bloodie spoiles, yet enemies wee haue, that seeke to kepe vnder, and tame our Woluishe natures, by greate mightie Bandogges, and Shepeherdes Curres. But nature at the firste, did so depely frame and set this his peruerse, cruell, and bloodie moulde in vs, that will thei, nill thei, our nature wil bruste out, and run to his owne course. I muse moche, waiyng the line of our firste progenitour, from whence we came firste: for of a man wee came, yet men as a pestiferous poison doe exile vs, and abandon vs, and by Dogges and other subtill meanes doe dailie destroie vs. Lycaon, as the Poetes doe 79 faine, excedyng in all crueltees and murthers horrible, by the murther of straungers, that had accesse to his land: for he was king and gouernor ouer the Molossians, and in this we maie worthilie glorie of our firste blood and long auncientree, that he was not onelie a man, but a kyng, a chief pere and goueruour:  80 by his chaunge and transubstanciacion of bodie, wee loste by him the honour and dignitee due to him, but his vertues wee kepe, and daily practise to followe them. The fame of Lycaons horrible life, ascended before Iupiter, Iupiter the  81 mightie God, moued with so horrible a facte, left his heauenlie palace, came doune like an other mortall man, and passed doune by the high mountaine Minalus, by twilighte, and so to Licaons house, our firste auncestoure, to proue, if this thing was true. Lycaon receiued this straunger, as it semed  82 doubtyng whether he were a God, or a manne, forthwith he feasted him with mannes fleshe baked, Iupiter as he can doe what he will, brought a ruine on his house, and transubstanciated  83 hym, into this our shape  & figure, wherein we are, and so sens that time, Wolues were firste generated, and that of manne, by the chaunge of Lycaon, although our shape is chaunged from the figure of other men, and men knoweth vs not well, yet thesame maners that made Wolues, remaineth  84 vntill this daie, and perpetuallie in men: for thei robbe, thei steale, and liue by iniurious catching, we also robbe, also wee steale, and catche to our praie, what wee maie with murther come to. Thei murther, and wee also murther, and so in all poinctes like vnto wicked menne, doe we imitate the like fashion of life, and rather thei in shape of men, are Wolues, and wee in the shape of Wolues menne: Of all these thynges hauyng consideracion, I haue inuented a pollicie, whereby we maie woorke a slauter, and perpetuall ruine on the Shepe, by the murther of the Bandogges. And so wee shall haue free accesse to our bloodie praie, thus we will doe, wee will sende a Embassage to the Shepeherdes for peace, 85 saiyng, that wee minde to ceasse of all bloodie spoile, so that thei will giue ouer to vs, the custodie of the Bandogges, for otherwise the Embassage sent, is in vaine: for their Dogges being in our handes, and murthered one by one, the daunger and enemie taken awaie, we maie the better obtain and enjoye our bloodie life. This counsaill pleased well the assemble of the Wolues, and the pollicie moche liked theim, and with one voice thei houled thus, thus. Immediatlie comunicacion was had with the Shepeherdes of peace, and of the giuyng ouer of their Bandogges, this offer pleased theim, thei cocluded the peace, and gaue ouer their Bandogges, as pledges ofthe same. The dogges one by one murthered, thei dissolued the peace, and wearied the Shepe, then the Shepeherdes repented them of their rashe graunt, and foly committed:  86 So of like sorte it alwaies chaunceth, tyrauntes and bloodie menne, dooe seke alwaies a meane, and practise pollicies to destroye all soche as are godlie affected, and by wisedome and  87 godlie life, doe seke to subuerte and destroie, the mischeuous enterprise of the wicked. For, by crueltie their Woluishe natures are knowen, their glorie, strength, kyngdome and renowne, cometh of blood, of murthers, and beastlie dealynges and by might so violent, it continueth not: for by violence and blooddie dealyng, their kyngdome at the last falleth by blood and bloodilie perisheth. The noble, wise, graue, and goodlie  88 counsailes, are with all fidelitee, humblenes and sincere hartes to be obeied, in worthines of their state and wisedome, to be embraced in chief honour and veneracion to bee taken, by whose industrie, knowledge and experience, the whole bodie of the common wealth and kyngdome, is supported and saued. The state of euery one vniuersallie would come to pardicion, if the inuasion of foraine Princes, by the wisedom and pollicie of counsailers, were not repelled. The horrible actes of wicked men would burste out, and a confusion ensue in al states, if the wisedom of politike gouernors, if good lawes if the power and sword of the magistrate, could not take place. The peres and nobles, with the chief gouernour, standeth as Shepherds ouer the people: for so Plato alledgeth that name 89 well and properlie giuen, to Princes and Gouernours, the which Homere the Poete attributeth, to Agamemnon king  90 of Grece: to Menelaus, Ulisses, Nestor, Achillas, Diomedes, Aiax, and al other. For, bothe the name and care of that state  91 of office, can be titeled by no better name in all pointes, for diligent kepyng, for aide, succoryng, and with all equitie temperyng the multitude: thei are as Shepeherdes els the selie poore multitude, would by an oppression of pestiferous men. The commonaltee or base multitude, liueth more quietlie then the state of soche as daily seke, to vpholde and maintaine  92 the common wealthe, by counsaill and politike deliberacion, how troublous hath thei state alwaies been: how vnquiete from time to time, whose heddes in verie deede, doeth seke for a publike wealth. Therefore, though their honor bee greater, and state aboue the reste, yet what care, what pensiuenesse of minde are thei driuen vnto, on whose heddes aucthorit ee and regiment, the sauegard of innumerable people doeth depend.  93 If in our domesticall businesse, of matters pertainyng to our housholde, euery man by nature, for hym and his, is pensiue, moche more in so vaste, and infinite a bodie of comon wealth, greater must the care be, and more daungerous deliberacion. We desire peace, we reioyce of a tranquilitee, and quietnesse to ensue, we wishe, to consist in a hauen of securitee: our houses not to be spoiled, our wiues and children, not to bee murthered. This the Prince and counsailours, by wisedome foresee,  94 to keepe of, all these calamitees, daungers, miseries, the whole multitude, and bodie of the Common wealthe, is without them maimed, weake and feable, a readie confusion to the enemie. Therefore, the state of peeres and nobles, is with all humilitee to be obaied, serued and honored, not without greate cause, the Athenians were drawen backe, by the wisedome of Demosthenes, when thei sawe the selues a slauter and praie, to the enemie. What can bee more rashly and foolishly doen, then the Shepeherdes, to giue ouer their Dogges, by whose might and strength, the Shepe were saued: on the other side, what can be more subtlie doen and craftely, then the 95 Wolues, vnder a colour of frendship and amit ee, to seeke the blood of the shepe, as all pestiferous men, vnder a fained profer of amitee, profered to seeke their owne profite, commoditee and wealthe, though it be with ruine, calamitie, miserie, destruccion of one, or many, toune, or citee, region and countree, whiche sort of men, are moste detestable and execrable. As to moche simplicitie & lacke of discrecion, is a furtheraunce  96 to perill and daunger: so oftetimes, he tasteth of smarte and woe, who lightly beleueth: so contrariwise, disimulacio in mischeuous practises begon wt fredly wordes, in the conclusion doeth frame & ende pernisiouslie. Therefore fained offers of frendship, are to bee taken heede of, and the acte of euery man to bee examined, proued, and tried, for true frendship is a rare thyng, when as Tullie doth saie: in many ages there are fewe couples of friendes to be found, Aristotle also cocludeth thesame. 97 Esope who wrote these Fables, hath chief fame of all learned aucthours, for his Philosophie, and giuyng wisedome in preceptes: his Fables dooe shewe vnto all states moste wholsome doctrine of vertuous life. He wholy extolleth vertue, and depresseth vice: he correcteth all states and setteth out preceptes to amende them. Although he was deformed and ill shaped, yet Nature wrought in hym soche vertue, that he was in minde moste beautifull: and seing that the giftes of the body, are not equall in dignitie, with the vertue of the mynde, then in that Esope chiefly excelled, hauyng the moste excellente vertue of the minde. The wisedom and witte of Esope semed singuler: for at what tyme as Cresus, 98 the kyng of the Lidians, made warre against the Samians, he with his wisedome and pollicie, so pacified the minde of Cresus, that all warre ceased, and the daunger of the countree was taken awaie, the Samias deliuered of this destruccion  99 and warre, receiued Esope at his retourne with many honours. After that Esope departyng from the Isle Samus, wandered to straunge regions, at the laste his wisedome beyng knowen: Licerus the kyng of that countree, had hym in  100 soche reuerence and honor, that he caused an Image of gold to be set vp in the honour of Esope. After that, he wanderyng ouer Grece, to the citee of Delphos, of whom he beyng murthered,  101 a greate plague and Pestilence fell vpon the citee, that reuenged his death: As in all his Fables, he is moche to bee commended, so in this Fable he is moche to be praised, which he wrote of the Ante and the Greshopper. In a hotte Sommer, the Grashoppers gaue them selues to pleasaunt melodie, whose Musicke and melodie, was harde from the pleasaunt Busswhes: but the Ante in all this pleasaunt tyme, laboured with pain and trauaile, she scraped her liuyng, and with fore witte and wisedome, preuented the barande and scarce tyme of Winter: for 102 when Winter time aprocheth, the ground ceasseth fro fruict, then the Ante by his labour, doeth take the fruicte  & enioyeth  103 it: but hunger and miserie fell vpon the Greshoppers, who in the pleasaunt tyme of Sommer, when fruictes were aboundaunte, ceassed by labour to put of neecessitee, with the whiche the long colde and stormie tyme, killed them vp, wantyng al sustinaunce. Here in example, all menne maie take to frame their owne life, and also to bryng vp in godlie educacion their children: that while age is tender and young, thei maie learne by example of the Ante, to prouide in their grene and lustie youth, some meane of art and science, wherby thei maie staie their age and necessitee of life, al soche as do flie labour, and paine in youth, and seeke no waie of Arte and science, in age thei shall fall in extreme miserie and pouertee. Not without a cause, the Philosophers searchyng the 104 nature and qualitee of euery beaste, dooe moche comlmende the Ante, for prouidence and diligence, in that not oneie by nature thei excell in forewisedome to the selues,  105 but also thei be a example, and mirrour to all menne, in that thei iustlie followe the instincte of Nature: and moche more, where as men indued with reason, and all singulare vertues and excellent qualitees of the minde and body. Yet thei doe so moche leaue reason, vertue,  & integritee of minde, as that thei had been framed without reason, indued with no vertue, nor adorned with any excellent qualitee. All creatures as nature hath wrought in them, doe applie them selues to followe nature their guide: the Ante is alwaies diligent in his busines, and prouident, and also fore seeth in Sommer, the sharpe season of Winter: thei keepe order, and haue a kyng and a common wealthe as it were, as nature hath taught them. And so haue all other creatures, as nature hath wrought in the their giftes, man onelie leaueth reason, and neclecteth the chief ornamentes of the minde: and beyng as a God aboue all creatures, dooeth leese the excellent giftes. A beaste will not take excesse in feedyng, but man often tymes is without reason, and hauyng a pure mynde and soule giuen of God, and a face to beholde the heauens, yet he doeth abase hymself to yearthlie  106 thynges, as concernyng the Greshopper: as the Philosophers doe saie, is made altogether of dewe, and sone perisheth The Greshopper maie well resemble, slothfull and sluggishe persones, who seke onely after a present pleasure, hauyng no fore witte and wisedom, to foresee tymes and ceasons: for it is 107 the poinct of wisedo, to iudge thinges present, by thinges past and to take a coiecture of thinges to come, by thinges present. Thus might the Ante reason with her self, althoughe the seasons of the yere doe seme now very hotte, pleasaunt 108 and fruictfull: yet so I do not trust time, as that like pleasure should alwaies remaine, or that fruictes should alwaies of like sorte abounde. Nature moueth me to worke, and wisedome herein sheweth me to prouide: for what hurteth plentie, or aboundaunce of store, though greate plentie commeth thereon, for better it is to bee oppressed with plentie, and aboundaunce, then to bee vexed with lacke. For, to whom wealthe and plentie riseth, at their handes many bee releued, and helped, all soche as bee oppressed with necessitie and miserie, beyng caste from all helpe, reason and prouidence maimed in theim: All arte and Science, and meane of life cutte of, to enlarge and maintain better state of life, their miserie, necessitie, and pouertie, shall continuallie encrease,  109 who hopeth at other mennes handes, to craue relief, is deceiued. Pouertie is so odious a thing, in al places  & states reiected for where lacke is, there fauour, frendship, and acquaintance decreaseth, as in all states it is wisedome: so with my self I  110 waie discritlie, to take tyme while tyme is, for this tyme as a floure will sone fade awaie. The housebande manne, hath he  111 not times diuers, to encrease his wealth, and to fill his barne, at one tyme and ceason: the housebande man doeth not bothe plante, plowe, and gather the fruicte of his labour, but in one tyme and season he ploweth, an other tyme serueth to sowe, and the laste to gather the fruictes of his labour. So then, I must forsee time and seasons, wherin I maie be able to beare of necessitie: for foolishly he hopeth, who of no wealth and no abundaunt store, trusteth to maintain his own state. For nothyng 112 soner faileth, then frendship, and the soner it faileth, as fortune is impouerished. Seyng that, as Homere doeth saie, 113 a slothfull man, giuen to no arte or science, to helpe hymself, or an other, is an vnprofitable burdein to the yearth, and God dooeth sore plague, punishe, and ouerthrowe Citees, kyngdomes, and common wealthes, grounded in soche vices: that the wisedome of man maie well iudge, hym to be Vnworthie of all helpe, and sustinaunce. He is worse then a beast, that is not able to liue to hymself  & other: no man is of witte so vndescrite,  114 or of nature so dulle, but that in hym, nature alwayes coueteth some enterprise, or worke to frame relife, or help  115 to hymself, for all wee are not borne, onelie to our selues, but many waies to be profitable, as to our owne countrie, and all partes thereof. Especiallie to soche as by sickenes, or infirmitie of bodie are oppressed, that arte and Science can not take place to help the. Soche as do folowe the life of the Greshopper[illeg.] are worthie of their miserie, who haue no witte to foresee seasons and tymes, but doe suffer tyme vndescretly to passe,  116 which fadeth as a floure, thold Romaines do picture Ianus with two faces, a face behind, & an other before, which resemble a wiseman, who alwaies ought to knowe thinges paste, thynges presente, and also to be experte, by the experience of many ages and tymes, and knowledge of thynges to come. What can be more descritlie doen, then the Ante to be so prouident and politike: as that all daunger of life, & necessitie is excluded, the stormie times of Winter ceaseth of might, & honger battereth not his walles, hauyng 117 soche plentie of foode, for vnlooked bitter stormes and seasons, happeneth in life, whiche when thei happen, neither wisedo nor pollicie, is not able to kepe backe. Wisedome therefore, it is so to stande, that these thynges hurte not, the miserable ende of the Greshopper sheweth vnto vs, whiche maie be an example to all menne, of what degree, so euer thei bee, to flie slothe and idelnesse, to be wise and discrite. As diligence, prouidence, and discrete life is a singulare 118 gift, whiche increaseth all vertues, a pillar, staie and a foundacion of all artes and science, of common wealthes, and kyngdomes. So contrarily sloth and sluggishnesse, in all states and causes, defaseth, destroyeth, and pulleth doune all vertue, all science and godlines. For, by it, the mightie kyngdome of the Lidias, was destroied, as it semeth no small vice, when the Lawes of Draco, dooe punishe with  119 death idelnesse. Therefore, the diligence of the Ante in this Fable, 120 not onelie is moche to be commended, but also her example is to bee followed in life. Therefore, the wiseman doeth admonishe vs, to go vnto the Ant and learne prouidence: and also by the Greshopper, lette vs learne to auoide idelnes, leste the like miserie and calamitie fall vpon vs. This place followyng, is placed of Tullie, after the exordium or beginnyng of Oracion, as the seconde parte: whiche parte of Rhetorike, is as it were the light of all the Oracion folowing: conteining the cause, matter, persone, tyme, with all breuitie, bothe of wordes, and inuencion of matter. A Narracion is an exposicion, or declaracion of any thyng dooen in deede, or els a settyng forthe, forged of any thyng, but so declaimed and declared, as though it were doen. A narracion is of three sortes, either it is a narracion historicall, of any thyng contained, in any aunciente storie, or true Chronicle. Or Poeticall, whiche is a exposicion fained, set forthe by inuencion of Poetes, or other. Or ciuill, otherwise called Iudiciall, whiche is a matter of controuersie in iudgement, to be dooen, or not dooen well or euill. In euery Narracion, ye must obserue sixe notes. 1\. Firste, the persone, or doer of the thing, whereof you intreate. 2\. The facte doen. 3\. The place wherein it was doen. 4\. The tyme in the whiche it was doen. 5\. The maner must be shewed, how it was doen. 6\. The cause wherevpon it was doen. There be in this Narracion, iiij. other properties beloging 1\. First; it must be plain and euident to the hearer, not obscure, 2\. Short, and in as fewe wordes as it maie be, for soche amatter. 3\. Probable, as not vnlike to be true. 4\. In wordes fine and elegante. after what sort she obtained the gouernment thereof. 121 After the death of Ninus, somtime kyng of Babilon, 122 his soonne Ninus also by name, was left to succede hym, in all the Assirian Monarchie, Semiramis wife to Ninus the firste, feared the tender age of her sonne, wherupon the thought  123 that those mightie nacions and kyngdomes, would not obaie  124 so young and weake a Prince. Wherfore, she kept her sonne from the gouernmente: and moste of all she feared, that thei  125 would not obaie a woman, forthwith she fained her self, to be the soonne of Ninus, and bicause she would not be knowen to bee a woman, this Quene inuented a newe kinde of tire, the whiche all the Babilonians that were men, vsed by her commaundement. By this straunge disguised tire and apparell, she not knowen to bee a woman, ruled as a man, for the  126 space of twoo and fourtie yeres: she did marueilous actes, for  127 she enlarged the mightie kyngdome of Babilon, and builded thesame citee. Many other regions subdued, and valiauntlie ouerthrowen, she entered India, to the whiche neuer Prince came, sauing Alexander the greate: she passed not onely men in vertue, counsaill, and valiaunt stomacke, but also the famous counsailours of Assiria, might not contende with her in Maiestie, pollicie, and roialnes, For, at what tyme as thei knewe her a woman, thei enuied not her state, but marueiled at her wisedome, pollicie, and moderacion of life, at the laste she desiryng the vnnaturall lust, and loue of her soonne Ninus, was murthered of hym. tiraunt Richard duke of Glocester, after the death of Edward 128 the fowerth his brother king of England, vsurped the croune, moste traiterouslie and wickedlie: this kyng Richard was small of stature, deformed, and ill shaped, his shoulders beared not equalitee, a pulyng face, yet of countenaunce and looke cruell, malicious, deceiptfull, bityng and chawing his nether lippe: of minde vnquiet, pregnaunt of witte, quicke and liuely, a worde and a blowe, wilie, deceiptfull, proude, arrogant in life and cogitacion bloodie. The fowerth daie of Iulie, he  129 entered the tower of London, with Anne his wife, doughter  130 to Richard Erle of Warwick: and there in created Edward his onely soonne, a child of ten yeres of age, Prince of Wales. At thesame tyme, in thesame place, he created many noble peres, to high prefermente of honour and estate, and immediatly with feare and faint harte, bothe in himself, and his nobles and commons, was created king, alwaies a vnfortunate  131 and vnluckie creacion, the harts of the nobles and commons thereto lackyng or faintyng, and no maruaile, he was a cruell murtherer, a wretched caitiffe, a moste tragicall tyraunt, and blood succour, bothe of his nephewes, and brother George Duke of Clarence, whom he caused to bee drouned in a Butte of Malmsie, the staires sodainlie remoued, wheron 132 he stepped, the death of the lorde Riuers, with many other nobles, compassed and wrought at the young Princes commyng out of Wales, the. xix, daie of Iuly, in the yere of our lorde. 1483. openly he toke vpon him to be king, who sekyng hastely to clime, fell according to his desart, sodainly and ingloriously, whose Embassage for peace, Lewes the Frenche king, for his mischeuous & bloodie slaughter, so moche abhorred, that he would neither see the Embassador, nor heare the Embassage: for he murthered his.ij.nephues, by the handes  133 of one Iames Tirrell, & .ij.vilaines more associate with him  134 the Lieutenaunt refusyng so horrible a fact. This was doen he takyng his waie & progresse to Glocester, whereof he was before tymes Duke: the murther perpetrated, he doubed the good squire knight. Yet to kepe close this horrible murther, he caused a fame and rumour to be spread abrode, in all partes of the realme, that these twoo childre died sodainly, thereby  135 thinkyng the hartes of all people, to bee quietlie setteled, no heire male lefte aliue of kyng Edwardes children. His mischief was soche, that God shortened his vsurped raigne: he was al together in feare and dread, for he being feared and dreaded of other, did also feare & dread, neuer quiete of minde faint harted, his bloodie conscience by outward signes, condepned  136 hym: his iyes in euery place whirlyng and caste about, his hand moche on his Dagger, the infernall furies tormented him by night, visions and horrible dreames, drawed him from his bedde, his vnquiet life shewed the state of his conscience, his close murther was vttered, fro the hartes of the subiectes: thei called hym openlie, with horrible titles and names, a horrible murtherer, and excecrable tiraunt. The people  137 sorowed the death of these twoo babes, the Queene, kyng Edwardes wife, beeyng in Sanctuarie, was bestraught of witte and sences, sounyng and falling doune to the grounde as dedde, the Queene after reuiued, kneeled doune, and called on God, to take vengaunce on this murtherer. The conscience of the people was so wounded, of the tolleracion of the facte, that when any blustryng winde, or perilous thonder, or 138 dreadfull tempest happened: with one voice thei cried out and quaked, least God would take v engauce of them, for it is alwaies seen the horrible life of wicked gouernors, bringeth to ruin their kyngdom and people,  & also wicked people, the like daungers to the kyngdome and Prince: well he and his supporters with the Duke of Buckyngham, died shamefullie.  139 The knotte of mariage promised, betwene Henrie Erle of Richemonde, and Elizabeth doughter to kyng Edward the fowerth: caused diuerse nobles to aide and associate this erle, fledde out of this lande with all power, to the attainmente of the kyngdome by his wife. At Nottyngham newes came to kyng Richard, that the Erle of Richmonde, with a small copaignie of nobles and other, was arriued in Wales, forthewith exploratours and spies were sent, who shewed the Erle to be encamped, at the toune of Litchfield, forthwith all preparacion  140 of warre, was set forthe to Leicester on euery side,  141 the Nobles and commons shranke from kyng Richarde, his power more and more weakened. By a village called Bosworthe,  142 in a greate plaine, meete for twoo battailes: by Leicester this field was pitched, wherin king Richard manfully fightyng hande to hande, with the Erle of Richmonde, was slaine, his bodie caried shamefullie, to the toune of Leicester  143 naked, without honor, as he deserued, trussed on a horse, behinde a Purseuaunte of Armes, like a hogge or a Calfe, his hedde and his armes hangyng on the one side, and his legges on the other side: caried through mire and durte, to the graie Friers churche, to all men a spectacle, and oprobrie of tirannie this was the cruell tirauntes ende. Britaine. When Iulius Cesar had ended his mightie and huge 144 battailes, about the flood Rhene, he marched into the  145 regio of Fraunce: at thesame time repairing with a freshe multitude, his Legios, but the chief cause of his warre in Fraunce was, that of long time, he was moued in minde, 146 to s ee this noble Islande of Britain, whose fame for nobilitee  147 was knowen and bruted, not onelie in Rome, but also in the vttermoste lades. Iulius Cesar was wroth with the, because in his warre sturred in Fraunce, the fearce Britaines aided the Frenche men, and did mightilie encounter battaill with the Romaines: whose prowes and valiaunt fight, slaked the proude and loftie stomackes of the Romaines, and droue the  148 to diuerse hasardes of battaill. But Cesar as a noble warrier preferryng nobilitee, and worthinesse of fame, before money or cowardly quietnes: ceased not to enter on ye fearce Britaines, and thereto prepared his Shippes, the Winter tyme folowyng, that assone as oportunitee of the yere serued, to passe 149 with all power against them. In the meane tyme, Cesar inquired of the Marchauntes, who with marchaundise had accesse  150 to the Islande: as concernyng the quatitee and bignes of it, the fashion and maner of the people, their lawes, their order, and kinde of gouernmente. As these thynges were in all poinctes, vnknowen to Cesar, so also the Marchautes knewe no more tha the places bordring on the sea side. For, the Britaines  151 fearing the traiterous and dissembled hartes of aliautes, politikelie repelled them: For, no straunger was suffered to enter from his Shippe, on the lande, but their marchaundice  152 were sold at the sea side. All nacions sought to this land, the felicitee of it was so greate, wherevpon the Grekes knowyng  153 and tastyng the commoditee of this Islande, called it by a Greke name Olbion, whiche signifieth a happie and fortunate countrie, though of some called Albion, tyme chaunged the firste letter, as at this daie, London is called for the toune 154 of kyng Lud. Cesar thereupon before he would marche with his armie, to the people of Britain, he sent Caius Uolusenus a noble man of Rome, a valiaunte and hardie Capitaine, as Embassadour to the Britaines, who as he thoughte by his Embassage, should knowe the fashion of the Island, the maner of the people, their gouernemente. But as it seemeth, the Embassadour was not welcome. For, he durste not enter fro his Ship, to dooe his maisters Embassage, Cesar knewe nothing 155 by him. Yet Cesar was not so contented, but sent an other Embassadour, a man of more power, stomack, and more hardie, Comas Atrebas by name, who would enter as an Embassadour, to accomplish the will  & expectacion of Cesar, Comas Atrebas was so welcome, that the Britains cast him in prison: Embassages was not common emong theim, nor the curteous vsage of Embassadours knowen. Al these thinges, made Cesar more wrothe, to assaie the vncourtous Britaines. In those daies Cassibelan was kyng of London, this  156 Cassibelan was a prince of high wisedom, of manly stomacke and valiaunt in fight: and for power and valiauntnesse, was chosen of the Britaines, chief gouernour and kyng. Dissencion and cruell warre was emong the, through the diuersitie of diuers kinges in the lande. The Troinouautes enuied the state of Cassibelan, bicause Immanuencius, who was kyng of London, before Cassibelan, was put to death, by the counsail of Cassibelan. The sonne of Immanuencius, hearing of  157 the commyng of Cesar, did flie traiterouslie to Cesar: The Troinouauntes fauoured Immanuecius part, & thereupon promised, as moste vile traitours to their countrie, an enteryng to Cesar, seruice and homage, who through a self will,  158 and priuate fauour of one, sought the ruine of their countrie, and in the ende, their own destruccion. But Cassibelan gaue many ouerthrowes to Cesar, and so mightelie encountred with hym, so inuincible was the parte of Cassibelane: but by treason of the Troinouauntes, not by manhod of Cesars power, enteryng was giuen. What house can stande, wherein  159 discord broile: What small power, is not able to enter the mightiest dominions or regions: to ouercome the strongeste fortresse, treaso opening the gate, treaso giuyng passage. Although Cesar by treason entered, so Cesar writeth. Yet the fame of Cesar was more commended, for his enterprise into Britain, and victorie: then of all his Conquest, either against 160 Pompey, or with any other nacion. For in a Piller at Rome this sentence was engrauen: Of all the domintons, Citees, and Regions, subdued by Cesar, his warre attepted against the fearce Britaines, passeth all other. After this sort Cesar entred our Islande of Britaine by treason. Themistocles. The Athenians brought vnder the thraldome of the Lacedemonians, soughte meanes to growe mightie, and to pull them from the yoke, vnder the Lacedemonians. Lacedemonia was a citee enuironed with walles. Athenes at thesame tyme without walles: whereby their state was more feeble, and power weakened. Themistocles a noble Sage, and a worthie pere of Athens: gaue the Athenias counsaile to wall their citee strogly, and so forthwith to be lordes and rulers by them selues, after their owne facion gouerning. In finishing this enterprise, in all poinctes, policie, and wittie conueiaunce wanted not. The Lacedemonians harde of the purpose of the Athenians, & sent Embassadours, to knowe their doynges, and so to hinder them. Themistocles gaue counsaill to the Athenians, to kepe in safe custodie, the Embassadours of Lacedemonia, vntil soche tyme, as he from the Embassage was retourned fro Lacedemonia. The Lacedemonians hearyng of the commyng of Themistocles, thought little of the walle buildyng at Athens. Themistocles was long looked for of the, because Themistocles lingered in his Embassage, that or the matter were throughly knowen: the walle of Athens should be builded. The slowe commyng of The mistocles, was blamed of the Lacedemonians: but Themistocles excused hymself, partly infirmitie of bodie, lettyng his commyng, and the expectacion of other, accompaignied with hym in this Embassage. The walle ended, necessitie not artificial workemanship finishing it, with al hast it was ended; then Themistocless entered the Senate of Lacedemonia, and saied: the walle whom ye sought to let, is builded at Athens, ye Lacedemonians, that wee maie be more strong. Then the Lacedemonians could saie nothyng to it, though thei enuied the Athenians state, the walle was builded, and leste thei should shewe violence or crueltie on Themistocles, their Embassadours were at Athens in custodie, whereby Themistocles came safe from his Embassage, and the Athenians made strong by their walle: this was politikely dooen of Themistocles. Who so doeth maruaile at the beaut ee and goodly colour of the redde Rose, he must consider the blood, that came out of Uenus the Goddes foot. The Goddes Uenus, as foolishe Poetes dooe feigne, beyng the aucthour of Loue:loued Adonis the soonne of Cynara kyng of Cypres. But Mars called the God of battaile, loued Uenus, beyng nothyng loued of Uenus: but Mars loued Venus as feruently, as Uenus loued Adonis, Mars beyng a God, loued Uenus a goddes, but Uenus onely was inflamed with the loue of Adonis, a mortall man. Their loue was feruent, and extremely set on fire in bothe, but their kinde and nature were contrary, wherevpon Mars beyng in gelousie, sought meanes to destroie, faire amiable, and beautifull Adonis, thinkyng by his death, the loue of Uenus to be slaked: Adonis and Mars fell to fighting Uenus as a louer, ranne to helpe Adonis her louer, and by chaunce she fell into a Rose bushe, and pricked with it her foote, the blood then ran out of her tender foote, did colour the Rose redde: wherevpon the Rose beyng white before, is vpon that cause chaunged into redde. so called: it is a rehersall in fewe wordes, of any ones fact, or of the saiyng of any man, vpo the whiche an oracion maie be made. As for example, Isocrates did say, that the roote of learnng was bitter, but the fruictes pleasaunt: and vpon this one sentence, you maie dilate a ample and great oracion, obseruyng these notes folowyng. The saiyng dooeth containe so greate matter, and minister soche plentie of argumente. Aucthors intreatyng of this exercise, doe note three sortes to bee of theim, one of theim a Chria verball, that is to saie, a profitable exercise, vpon the saiyng of any man, onely conteinyng the wordes of the aucthour, as the sentence before. The seconde is, conteinyng the facte or deede of the persone: As Diogines beyng asked of Alexander the Greate, if he lacked any thyng, that he was able to giue hym, thinkyng his demaude vnder his power, for Diogenes was at the same tyme warmyng hymself in the beames of the Sunne: Diogenes aunsewered, ye take awaie that, that ye are not able to giue, meanyng that Alexander by his bobie, shadowed hym, and tooke awaie that, whiche was not in his power to giue, Alexander tourned hymself to his men, and saied, if I were not Alexander, I would be Diogenes. Diogenes seyng a boie wanton & dissolute, did strike his teacher with a staffe, vtteryng these woordes; why dooest thou teache thy scholer so dissolutlie. You shall learne to make this exercise, obseruyng these notes. 1\. Firste, you shall praise the aucthour, who wrote the sentence, waighing his life, if his life be vnknowen, and not easie to finde his sentence or sentences: for godlie preceptes will minister matter of praise, as if these saiynges bee recited, thei are sufficient of them selues, to praise the aucthour. 2\. Then in the seconde place, expounde the meanyng of the aucthour in that saiyng. 3\. Then shewe the cause, why he spake this sentence. 4\. Then compare the matter, by a contrary. Then frame similitude of thesame. Shewe the like example of some, that spake the like, or did the like. Then gather the testimonies of more writers of thesame Then knit the conclusion. Socrates did saie, that the roote of learnyng is was bitter, but the fruictes were pleasaunt. This Oratour Isocrates, was an Athenian borne, who florished in the time of Lusimachus the chief 161 gouernor of Athens: this Isocrates was brought vp in all excellecie of learning, with the moste famous and excellent Oratour Prodicus, Gorgias Leontinus  162 indued him with all singularitie of learnyng and eloquence, the eloquece of Isocrates was so famous, that Aristotle the chief Pholosopher, enuied his vertue  & praise therin: Demosthenes also, who emong the Grecians chieflie excelled, learned his eloquence, of the Oracions whiche Isocrates wrote,  163 to many mightie and puisant princes and kinges, do shewe his wisedome, & copious eloquece, as to Demonicus the king to Nicocles, Euagoras, against Philip the king of the Macedonias, by his wisedome and counsaill, the Senate and vniuersal state of Athens was ruled & the commons and multitude thereby in euery part florished: chieflie what counsaill, what wisedome, what learnyng might bee required, in any man of high fame and excellencie: that same was aboundantly in Isocrates, as in all his Oratios he is to be praised, so in this sentence, his fame importeth like commendacion. In that he saieth, the roote of learnyng is bitter, and the fruictes pleasaunt: he signifieth no excellent qualitie or gift, vertue, arte or science can bee attained, 164 except paine, labour, diligence, due plant and sette the same: but when that noble gift, either learnyng, or any excellente qualitee, is lodged and reposed in vs, then we gather by painfull labours, greate profite, comforte, delectable pleasures, wealth, glorie, riches, whiche be the fruictes of it. tender yeres and infancie, to the extirpacion of vertue, folowyng with all earnest studie and greedie, the free passage to vice, and specially children, whose iudgementes and reason, are not of that strengthe, to rule their weake mindes and bodies, therefore, in them chieflie the roote of learning is bitter, because not onely many yeres thei runne their race, in studie of arte and science. With care and paine also, with greuous chastisment and correccio, thei are compelled by their teachers and Maisters, to apprehende thesame: the parentes no lesse dreaded, in the educacio, of their children, in chastisement and correccion, so that by all means, the foundacion and roote of all learnyng, in what  165 sort so euer it is, is at the firste vnpleasaunte, sower, and vnsauerie. To folowe the times and seasons, appointed for the same, is moste painfull, and in these painfull yeres: other greate pleasures, as the frailtie of youth, and the imbecilitie of nature iudgeth, dooeth passe by, but in miserable state is 166 that childe, and vnfortunate, that passeth the flower of his youth and tender yeres, instructed with no arte or Science, whiche in tyme to come shalbe the onelie staie, helpe the piller to beare of the sore bront, necessitie, and calamities of life. Herein the noble Romaines, laied the sure foundacion of 167 their mightie dominion, in the descrite prouidente, and politike educacion of children: to whom the Grecians gaue, that necessarie bulwarke and faundacion, to set vp all vertue, all arte and science. In Grece no man was knowen, to liue in that common wealth, but that his arte and science gaue manifest probacion and testimonie, how and after what sorte he liued. The Romaines in like sorte, the sworde and aucthoritie of the Magistrate, executyng thesame, did put forthe, and draw to the attainment of learnyng, art or science, all youth hauyng maturitie and ripenesse to it, and why, because that in a common wealth, where the parentes are vndescrete and foolishe, as in all common wealthes, there are not a fewe, but many, thei not ponderyng the state of the tyme to come, bringing vp their children without all ciuilitie, vnframed to vertue, ignoraunt of all arte and science: the children of their owne nature, vnbrideled, vntaught, wilfull, and heddie, doe run with free passage to all wickednes, thei fall into al kinde of follie, oppressed with all kinde of calamitie, miserie, and vnfortunate chaunces, whiche happen in this life. Nothyng doeth soner pulle doune a kyngdome, or common wealthe, 168 then the euill and leude educacion of youth, to whom neither substaunce, wealth, riches, nor possessions doe descende, from their auncestours and parentes, who also of them selues wat all art, science and meanes, to maintain them to liue, who of them selues are not able to get relief, for onely by this meanes, life is maintained, wealth and riches ar possessed to many greate siegniories, landes, and ample possessions, left by their parentes, and line of auncetours, haue by lacke of vertuous educacion, been brought to naught, thei fell into extreme miserie, pouertie, and wantyng learnyng, or wealth, to maintaine their state and delicate life, thei haue robbed, spoiled, murthered, to liue at their owne will. But then as rotten, dedde, and putride members fro the common wealth thei are cutte of by the sworde, and aucthoritie of the Magistrate. What kyngdome was more mightie and strong, then the kyngdome of Lidia, whiche by no other meanes was  169 brought to ruine and destruccion, but by idlenes: in that thei were kepte from all vertuous exercise, from the studie of artes and sciences, so longe as thei meditated and liued in the schoole of vertuous life: no nacion was hable to ouerthrowe them, of them selues thei were prone and readie, to practice all excellencie. But Cyrus the kyng of Persians, by no other  170  meanes was able to bring them weaker: He toke from the al furtherance to artes, destroied all occupacios of vertue wherupon 171 by commaundemet aud terrour, wer driuen to practise the vaine and pestiferous practise, of Cardes and Dice. Harlottes then schooled them, and all vnhoneste pastyme nurtered them, Tauernes an quaffyng houses, was their accustomed and moste frequented vse of occupacion: by this meanes their nobilitie and strengthe was decaied, and kyngdome made thrall. Ill educacion or idlenes, is no small vice or euill when so mightie a prince, hauyng so large dominions, who all the Easte serued and obaied. Whose regimente and gouernemente was so infinite, that as Zenophon saieth, tyme would rather want, then matter to speake of his mightie and  172 large gouernement, how many nacions, how diuerse people and valiaunte nacions were in subieccion to hym. If this mightie Prince, with all his power and populous nacions, was not hable to giue the ouerthrowe, to the kyngdome of 173 Lidia, but by ill educacion, not by marciall atteptes sworde or battaill: but by giuyng them scope and libertie, to dooe as he would. No doubt but that Cyrus sawe, by the like example of other kyngdomes, this onelie pollicie to bee a ruine  174 of that kyngdome. Pythagoras the famous and godlie Philosopher, saued the kyngdome and people of Crotona, thei leauyng all studie of arte, vertue and science. This people of  175 Crotona, was ouercome of the people of Locrus, thei left all exercise of vertue, neclectyng the feates of chiualrie, whervpo Pythagoras hauyng the profitable and godlie lawes of Lycurgus, which he brought from Lacedemonia: and the lawes of Minos kyng of Creta, came to the people of Crotona, and by his godlie teachyng and Philosophie, reuoked  & brought backe the people, giuen ouer to the neglectyng of all vertue, declaryng to them the nobilitie and excellencie thereof, he liuely set foorthe the beastlinesse of vice. Pithagoras recited to them, the fall and ruine of many regions, and mightie kingdomes, whiche tooke after those vices. Idlenes beyng forsaken, vertue embrased, and good occupacions practised, the kyngdome and people grewe mightie. Emong the godlie lawes of Lycurgus, Lycurgus omitted 176 not to ordaine Lawes, for the educacion of youthe: in the whiche he cutte of all pamperyng of them, because in tender yeres, in whose bodies pleasure harboreth, their vertue, science, cunnyng rooteth not: labour, diligence, and industrie  177 onelie rooteth vertue, and excellencie. Uices as vnprofitable weedes, without labour, diligence and industrie growe vp,  178 and thereby infecteth the minde and bodie, poisoneth all the mocions, incensed to vertue and singularitie. Who euer attained cunnyng, in any excellent arte or science, where idlenes or pleasure helde the swaie, Philosophie sheweth, pleasure  179 to bee vnmete for any man of singularitie, for pleasure, idlenes, and ignoraunce, are so linked together, that the possession of the one, induceth the other. So many godlie monumetes of learning, had not remained to this posteritie of ours and of all ages: if famous men in those ages and tymes, had huted after immoderate pleasure. Thindustrie of soche, who left to the posteritie of all ages, the knowlege of Astronomie is knowen: the monumentes of all learnyng of lawes, and of all other woorkes of antiquitie, by vertue, noble, by industrie, labour, and moderacion of life in studie, not by pleasure and wantones, was celebrated to all ages. The mightie volumes of Philosophers, bothe in morall preceptes, and in naturall causes, knewe not the delicate and dissolute life of these our daies. Palingenius enueighyng against the papered, and lasciuious life of man, vttereth a singulare sentece Qui facere et qui nosce, cupit quam plurima et altum, In terris virtute aliqua sibi querere nomen: Hunc vigilare opus est, nam non preclara geruntur, Stertendo, et molles detrectat gloria plumas. Who so coueteth to purchase fame by actes, or whose minde hunteth for aboundaunte knowlege, or by vertue in this life, to purchause good fame. He had not nede to slugge and slepe in his doynges: for good fame is not vpholded by gaie Pecockes feathers. Of this, Demosthenes the famous Oratour of Athens, vttereth a worthie saiyng to the Athenians in his Epistle: if any will iudge Alexander the greate, to be famous and happie, in that he had successe in all his doynges, 180 let this be his cogitacion, that Alexander the greate, alwaies did inure hymself to doe thynges, and manfullie to assaie that he enterprised. The felicitie of his successe came to hym not slepyng, or not cogitatyng thereof: Alexander the greate now dedde, Fortune seketh with whom she maie accompanie, and associate her self. Thusidides comparyng the Lacedemonians, and the Athenians together, shewed a rare moderacion, and temperature of life, to be in the Athenians: wherupon thei are moste commended, and celebrated to the posteritie. Euen as idlenes and a sluggishe life, is moste pleasant to all soche, as neglecte vertuous exercises, and godlie life. So paine, labour, and studie, bestowed and emploied, in the sekyng out of vertue, arte, or science is moste pleasaunt to well affected mindes: for no godlie thyng can be attained to, without diligence and labour. Euen as housbandmen, with labour and trauaile, dooe labour in plantyng and tillyng the grounde, before thei receiue any fruicte of thesame. Euen so no vertue, arte, or science, or any other thyng of excellencie is attained, without diligence and labour bestowed thereto. Let Demosthenes, the famous Oratour of Athenes, bee an example of diligence to vs, who to auoide all let from studie, vsed a meanes to kepe hymself therto: preuentyng also the industrie of artificers. The same Demosthenes, wrote seuen tymes out the storie of Thusidides, to learne thereby his eloquence and wisedome. Plinie, Plato, and Aristotle, with many other mo, are like examples for diligence to vs: who wrote vpon vertue and learnyng like sentences. Therefore, Isocrates dooeth pronounce worthelie, the roote of learning and vertue to be bitter, and the frutes pleasaunte. The Oracion, whiche must be made by a sentece is in al partes like to Chria, the profitable exercise, onelie that the Oracion made vpon a sentence, as aucthours do saie: hath not alwaie the name of the aucthour prefixed in the praise, a small matter of difference, who so can make the one, is expert and exquisite in the other, aucthours doe define a sentece in this maner. A sentence is an Oracion, in fewe woordes, shewyng a godlie precept of life, exhorting or diswadyng: the Grekes dooe call godly preceptes, by the name of Gnome, or 181 Gnomon, whiche is asmoche to saie, a rule or square, to direct any thyng by, for by them, the life of manne is framed to all singularitie. Thei are diuers sortes of sentences, one exhorteth, an other diswadeth, some onely sheweth: there is a sentence simple, compounde, profitable, true, & soche like. Frame your Oracion vpon a sentence, as in the Oracion before. 1.   The praise of the aucthour. ------ 2.   The exposicion of the sentence. 3.   A confirmacion in the strength of the cause. 4.   A conference, of the contrarie. 5.   A similitude. 6.   The example. 7.   The testimonie of aucthors, shewing ye like. 8.   Then adde the conclusion. In a common wealthe or kyngdome, many kynges to beare rule, is verie euill, let there be but one kyng. Homere, who of all the Poetes chiefly excelled, spake this sentence in the persone of Vlisses, vpon the king Agamemnon, kyng of Grece. This Homere intreating of all the princely affaires, and greate enterprices of the Grecians: and of the mightie warre againste the Troians, emong whom soche discorde rose, that not onely the warre, for lacke of vnitie and concorde, continued the space of tenne yeres. But also moche blood shed, hauocke, and destruccion, came vpon the Grecians, vttered this senteece. This Homere for his learnyng and wisedome remaineth, intteled in many monumentes of learnyng: with greate fame and commendacion to all ages. What Region, Isle, or nacion is not, by his inuencion set foorthe: who although he were blinde, his 182 minde sawe all wisedome, the states of all good kyngdomes and common wealthes. The verie liuely Image of a Prince or gouernour, the faithfull and humble obediece of a subiect, toward the prince, the state of a capitaine, the vertue and noble  183 qualities, that are requisite, in soche a personage, be there set forthe. The perfite state of a wiseman, and politike, is intreated of by hym. The Iustice, and equitie of a Prince, the strength of the bodie, all heroicall vertues: also are set forthe his eloquence and verse, floweth in soche sorte, with soche pleasauntnes: so copious, so aboundaunt, so graue and sentencious, that his singularitie therein excelleth, and passeth. 184 The mightie prince Alexander, in all his marciall enterprices, and great conquestes, did continually night by night, 185 reade somewhat of the Ilias of the Poete Homere, before he slepte, and askyng for the booke, saied: giue me my pillowe. Alexander as it semeth, learned many heroical vertues, policie, wisedome,  & counsaill thereof, els he occupied in so mightie and greate warres, would not emploied studie therein. Iulius Cesar the Emperour, commendeth this Poete, for his singularitie, his commendacion giueth, ample argument, in this singulare sentence, whiche preferreth a Monarchie aboue all states of common wealthes or kyngdome. Homere the Poete, signified by this one sentence, no kyngdome or common wealthe can prospere, or florishe to continue, where many holde gouernement as kynges. For, the mindes of many rulers and princes, doe moste affecte a priuate wealthe, commoditie and glorie: and where, many doe beare soche swaie and dominion, the common wealth can not be good. For, thei priuatly to theim selues, doe beare that regiment, and alwaie with the slaughter of many, do seke to attain and clime, to the whole gouermet Many occasions dooe rise, whereby many princes, and 186 gouernours in a common wealth, be diuerslie affected, so that the gouernmet of many, can not prosper. For, bothe in quiete state, their counsailes must bee diuerse, and vncertaine: and where thei so differ, the kyngdome standeth in great ieopardy and daunger. Isocrates intreatyng of  187 a Monarchie, sheweth that the common wealth of Athenes, whiche detested and refused, that forme and state, after the ruine and fall of their citee beyng vunder the thraldome of the Lacedomonias, bothe in their externall chiualrie and feates, bothe by sea and by lande, and also in regimente otherwise, their citee grewe mightie, and state stedfast. The Carthagineans also, gouerned by one, had their gouernment 188 stedfaste, and kyngdome roiall: who in puisaunte actes, might compare with the noble Romaines; As the obedience to one ruler and chief gouernour, sekyng a common wealth, is in the hartes of the subiectes: feruent and marueilous with loue embraced, so the Maiestie of hym is dreade, with loue serued, and with sincere harte, and fidlitie obeied, 189 his maners folowed, his lawes imitated. Many gouernours bearyng regiment, as their maners be diuers, and fashion of life: euen so the people bee like affected, to the diuersitie of diuers princes. And if we weigh the reuolucion of the heauens and the maruciles of God therein, the maker or thesame, who 190 beyng one God, ruleth heauen and yearth, and all thynges cotained in thesame. The heauen also adorned with many a starre, and cleare light, haue but one Sunne to gouerne the: who being of a singulare vertue aboue the rest, by his vertue and power, giueth vertue to the reste. Also in small thynges  191 the Ante and the Bee, who for prouidence and wisedome, ar moche commended: haue as it were a common wealth, and a king to gouerne the, so in all thinges as a confusion, the state of many kings is abhorred in gouernmet. After the death of Constantinus the greate, Constancius his sonne was made  192 Emperour, and Licinius with him, partaker in felowship of the Empire. But forthwith, what blood was shed in Italie, with all crueltie, vntill Constancius had slaine Licinius, partaker of the Empire, and Marabodius was slaine also, whom Licinius did associate with hym in the gouernment. So moche princes and chief gouernours, doe hate equalitie,  193 or felowship in kingdomes. After the same sort, in this mightie Monarchie of Rome, diuerse haue attempted at one and sondrie tymes, to beare the scepter and regiment therein, but that mightie Monarchie, could not suffer but one gouernor. The kyngdome of Thebes, was in miserable state, the twoo sonnes of Oedipus, Eteocles, and Polunices: striuing bothe  194 to be Monarche, and onely kyng. The kyngdome of Assiria, whiche was the golden kyngdome, and the first Monarchie: hauyng. 36. kynges by succession, continued. 1239. yeres, this kyngdome for all nobilitie and roialnes excelled, and all in a Monarchie. The kyngdome of the Medes, in a Monarchie florished in wealthe and glorie and all felicitie: who in dominion had gouernmente, 300. lackyng, 8. yeres. After that, the monarchie of the Medes ceased, the Persia people rose mightie, 195 bothe in people and Princes, and continued in that state 236 and 7 monethes. Macedonia rose from a base and meane people, to beare the whole regiment, and power ouer all kingdomes. So God disposeth the state and seate of princes, ouerthrowyng often tymes mightier kyngdomes at his will: the continuance of this Monarchie was. 157. and eight monethes,  196 ten kynges linealie descendyng. Asia and Siria, was gouerned by one succedyng in a sole gouernement. Nicanor gouerned Siria 32. yeres. In the other Antigonus raigned, Demetrius Poliorchetes one yere, Antiochus Soter also, the scepter of gouernment, left to the successcion of an other, then Antiochus Soter, ruled all Asia and Siria, hauyng. 16. kinges whiche in a monarchie, cotinued 189 yeres. The Egipcians,  197 had famous, wise, and noble princes, whose kyngdome and large dominion, in all felicitee prospered: whiche was in the tyme of Ninus, the first king of the Assarias, who hauing 10. princes, one by one succedyng, Cleopatra their Queene, gouerning, stoode in a monarchie. 288. This one thyng sheweth, that kinde of gouernmente to bee roiall, and moste famous, not onely for the flicitee and glory therof: but also for the permanent and stedfast state thereof. Aristotle and Plato setteth forthe, thother formes of gouernmet. But in all those, no long cotinuaunce of felicitee, nor of happy state can appere in them, as for the contrarie to a Monarchie, is tirannis, pestiferous,  198 and to be detested, where one man gouerneth to his priuate gaine pillyng and polyng his subiectes; murderyng with all crueltie, neither Lawe nor reason, leadyng thereto; but will bearyng regiment ouer lawe, Iustice and equitee, whiche princes often tymes see not. How the wilfull rashenes, or tirannicall minde doeth abase them, and make them, though in vtter porte thesame princes, yet in verie deede, thei bee thrall and flaue to beastlie affeccion. Nothyng dooeth so  199 moche adorne and beautifie, the seate and throne of a prince, as not onely to beare dominion, ouer mightie people and regions, 200 then to be lorde ouer hymself. The state of a fewe peeres or nobles, to holde the chief and whole gouernment, who bothe in vertue, learnyng, and experience dooe excelle, is a goodlie state of common wealth. But the profe of that common wealthe and ende sheweth, and the maner of Princes: who, although thei be, of life godlie, wise, graue, expert and politike. For, these vertues or ornamentes, ought to be reposed in soche noble personages, thei doe marueilously chaunge and alter: So honour and preeminente state, puffeth theim vp, and blindeth theim, that euery one in the ende, seeketh to climbe ouer all, as hed and gouernour. Shewe me one kinde of this state, and forme of gouernmente, whiche either longe prospered, or without bloodshed, and destruccion of the rest of the nobles and peres, haue not caught the whole regimente. Seyng that in all common wealthes and kingdomes, equalitee or felowshippe, will not be suffred in gouernmente: for, it can not bee, that this forme of common wealthe maie bee 201 good, as Aristotle and Plato sheweth: The ende of this gouernemente, fell euer to one, with a ruine of the kingdome  202 and people. The multitude to beare dominion, and though a publike wealth bee sought for a tyme, moche lesse thei continue in any good state: for in the ende, their rule and gouernement, will be without rule, order, reason, modestie, and their lawe must bee will. The other three states, are the refuse of good common wealthes, not to bee tollerated in any region.  203 The one of them is a tyraunte, to bee gouernour onely to his owne glorie, with crueltie tormented his subiectes, onelie to haue his will and lust, ouer all lawe, order, and reason. The  204 nobelitee rulyng to them selues, eueryone for his owne time  205 The third, the base and rude multitude, euery one for hymself, and at his will. This troublous state, all Regions and common wealthes, haue felte in open sedicions and tumultes, raised by theim, it is a plagued and pestiferous kinde of gouernemente. The example of a good Monarchie, is of greate force, to confounde the state of al other common wealthes, and formes of Regimente. The nobilitee of Persia hauyng no kyng, linially descendyng, 206 to rule that mightie dominion of persia, Cambises beyng dedde, the vsurper murthered, thei tooke counsaill in their assemble, what state of gouernment was beste, thei hauyng the profe of a Monarchie: in their longe counsaill, thei knewe the felicitie of that state, thei knewe as it seemed, the perilous state of the other gouernmentes. If these noble and peres had been ambicious, and that eche of them would haue had felowshippe, or participacion in kyngdomes: thei would not haue preferred a Monarchie aboue the reste. The antiquitie of that tyme sheweth, their personages, wisedome, grauitie, and maiestie was soche, that eche one of theim was mete for his vertues, to haue a whole kyngdome. If Aristocratia would haue contented them, then was tyme and occasion offered, no kyng remainyng to haue preferred that state. But thei as vpright nobles, sincere and faithfull, hauyng altogether  207 respecte to a publique wealthe: to a permanent state and felicitie of kingdome, sought no participacion by priueate wealthe, to dissolue this Monarchie. But thei beyng moste godlie, eche were content to proue, whose chaunce might be, to set vp againe that Monarchie. The kyngdome at the laste came to the handes of Darius, who was after kyng of the  208 Persians. This is a goodly example, to shewe the worthines of a Monarchie, the Persian kingdome after many yeres declinyng, from his power and state, not for any faulte of gouernment, but God as he seeth tyme, raiseth vp kyngdomes  209 and plucketh them doune. Afterward Darius the kyng, not able to make his parte good with Alexander the Greate: offered to hym the greatest parte of his kyngdome, euen to the flood of Euphrates, and offred his daughter to wife: Alexander was content to take the offer of Darius, so that he would  210 bee seconde to hym, and not equall with hym in kyngdome. For, Alexander saied, that as the worlde can not bee gouerned with twoo Sunnes, neither the worlde can suffer twoo mightie kingdomes: wherupon it is manifest, that no kingdome will suffer equalitie or felowship, but that if the will & minde of Princes might brust out, the state of all the worlde, would bee in one mightie gouernours handes. For, alwaies  211 Princes dooe seke to a sole regimente. Alexander the greate coquerour also, preferring for worthines a Monarchie, at the tyme of his death, demaunded who he would haue to succede him in his mightie dominios, he by one signifiyng a Monarchie,  212 saiyng:  Dignissimus, that is to saie, the worthiest. After the death of Alexander, Antipater caught the gouernmente of Macedonia and Grece, and Crates was Treasurer, Meleagrus and Perdiccas caught other of his dominions, then Ptolemeus possessed Egipte, Africa and a parte of Arabia, Learcus, Cassander, Menader, Leonatus, Lusimachus, Eumenes, Seleucus and manie other, who were for their worthines in horror and estimacion with Alexander, caught into their handes other partes of his dominions, euerie one sekyng for his time, his owne priuate glorie, dignitie, and aduauncemente, but not a publike wealthe, and so in fine, ambicion broiled in their loftie stomackes, eche to attaine to others honor. Wherevpon bloodshed, destruction of the people and countries, the fall of these Princes ensued. So moche kingdomes hate equalitie or felowship: let vs laie before our 213 iyes, the kyngdomes nere at hand. Fraunce, from the tymes of Faramundus vntill this daie haue stoode, and did florishe in a Monarchie. The state of Spaine, from the tyme of the firste Kyng, vntill this daie, hath florished continually in a Monarchie. The great seigniories of Germanie, by one succedyng in gouernment, haue been permanent in that goodlie state. Our noble Isle of Britain from Brutus, hath stoode by a Monarchie: onely in those daies, the state of gouernmet chaunged, at the commyng of Iulius Cesar, Emperour of Rome. The lande beyng at division, and discorde, through the diuersitie of diuerse kynges: so moche the state of diuerse kynges in one lande, is to be expelled, or the gouernment of the base multitude, to haue vniuersally power of dominion, or the state of peres, to bee chief in regiment, no kyng lefte to commaunde ouer the people, and nobles, or els there can not be but discorde in thende, whiche pulleth doune moste mightie Regions and dominions, so that the beste state, the moste stedfaste and fortunate, is in all tymes, in all ages, in all lawes, and common wealthes, where one king sekyng the aduauncement, wealthe, glorie, of hym and his people. That housholde or familie, can not be well gouerned, where many and diuerse beareth gouernment, neclectyng the state prosperous vniuersallie: for where obedience is drawen to diuers and many, there can not bee good gouernment, nor faithfull obedience. And so in a kingdome where one chiefly gouerneth, and to a common wealth there the hartes of the subiectes, be moste knitte to obaie. Even as thei, whiche serue one maister, shall soneste with labour please, and with fidelitie, accomplishe his will and pleasure. For, the maners of many me be diuerse, and variable, so in a Monarchie, the state of one is sone obaied, the minde and lawe of one Prince sone folowed, his Maiestie dreaded and loued. and the Romaine, whiche haue continued from the beginnyng mightie, moste happie, bee an example herein. If that state of gouernement, had not been chiefe of all other, those mightie kyngdomes would not haue preferred, that kinde of gouernment. Therefore, Aristotle, Plato, and all the chief Philosophers, intreatyng of the administracion of a common wealthe: doe preferre before all states of gouernment a Monarchie, bothe for the felicitie of it, and stedfaste state. Homere therefore deserueth greate commendacion, for this one sentence, whiche preferreth a Monarchie before all states. because it is in a oracion, a certain reprehension of any thyng declaimed, or dilated, in the whiche by order of art, the declaimer shall procede to caste doune by force, and strengthe of reason, the contrarie induced. whiche are not manifeste true, neither it so repugnaunt from reason, as that there can appere no holde, to induce a probable reason to confounde the same. But soche proposicions are meete for this parte, as are probable in both sides, to induce probabilitie of argument, to reason therupon. 1\. It shall behoue you firste, for the entryng of this matter, to adde a reprehension there against those, whiche haue confirmed as a truthe, that, whiche you will confute. 2\. In the same place, adde the exposion, and meanyng of his sentence. 3\. Thirdly, shew the matter to be obscure, that is vncertain 4\. Incrediblie. 5\. Impossible. 6\. Not agreyng to any likelihode of truthe. 7\. Uncomlie to be talked of. 8\. Unprofitable. who should saie, all partes of Rhetorike, maie copiouslie be handled in this parte, called confutacion, so ample a matter Tullie doeth note this parte to be. It is not like to be true, that is said of the battaill of Troie. Not without a cause, the vanities of Poetes are to bee reproued, and their so forged inuencions to bee reiected: in whose writynges, so manifestlie are set forthe as a truthe, and Chronicled to the posteritie of ages and times, soche forged matters of their Poeticall and vain wittes. Who hath not heard 214 of their monsterous lies against God, thei inuentyng a genealogie of many Goddes procreated, where as there is but one God. This vanitie also thei haue set forthe, in their monumentes and woorkes. How a conspiracie was sometyme emong the Goddes and Goddes, to binde the great God Iupiter. How impudentlie doe thei set forthe the Goddes, to bee louers of women, and their adulterous luste: and how thei haue transformed theim selues, into diuers shapes of beastes and foules, to followe after beastly luste. The malice and enuie of the Goddes, one to an other. The feigne also the heaue to haue one God, the sea an other, helle an other, whiche are mere vanities, and false imaginacios of their Poeticall wittes. The like forged inuencion haue thei wrote, of the mightie  215 and terrible battaill bruted of Troie, for a beautifull harlot susteined ten yeres. In the whiche, not onely men and noble peeres, gaue the combate of battaile, but the Goddes toke partes against Goddes, and men wounded Goddes: as their  216 lies exceade all nomber, because thei bee infinite, so also thei passe all truthe, reason, and iudgemente. These fewe examples of their vanities and lies, doe shewe the feigned ground and aucthoritie of the reste. Accordyng to the folie and supersticiousness of those tymes, thei inuented and forged folie vppon folie, lye vpon lye, as in the battaill of Troie, thei aggrauate, the dolour of the battaill, by pitifull and lamentable inuencion  217 As for the Poetes themselues, Plato in his booke, made vpon the administracion of a common wealth, maketh theim in the nomber of those, whiche are to bee banished out of all common wealthes. Homere dooeth saie, and many other Poetes, that the warres of the Grecians against the Troians, was for beautifull Helena, and continued tenne yeres. The Goddes and Goddis toke partes, and all the people of Grece, aided Menelaus, and the kyng Agamemnon, to bryng home again Helena, neclecting their own countrie, their wife and childre, for one woma. The Grekes inuentyng a huge and mightie horse made of Firre tree, and couered with brasse, as huge as a moutain, out of the whiche the Grecians by treason issuyng, brought Troie to ruine. It semeth a matter of folie, that so many people, so mightie nacions should bee bewitched, to raise so mightie a armie, hassardyng their liues, leauyng their countrie, their wiues, their children, for one 218 woman: Be it so, that Helena passed all creatures, and that Nature with beautie had indued her with all vertue, and singularitie: yet the Grecians would not be so foolishe, that vniuersallie thei would seke to caste doune their owne wealthe, and moche more the common wealthe of Grece, and kyngdome to stande in perill. Neither is it to be thought, the Grecians, sekyng to aduauce the beautie of Helena: would leaue  219 their owne state. But it is like, the wittes of Poetes did immagine so forged a Chronicle, that the posteritie of ages followyng, should rather wounder at their forged inuencion, then to beleue any soche warre truly mencioned. There was no soche cause, seyng that the kyngdome of Grece, fell by no title of succession to Helena, for them to moue warre, for, the bringyng backe of that beutifull harlotte Helena. Neither in Helena was there vertue, or honestie of life, to moue and exasperate the Grecians, to spende so greate treasures, to raise so mightie an armie on euery side. What commedacion had 220 the Troians to aduaunce Helena, and with all roialnesse to entreate her, she beyng a harlotte: the folie of the Grecians and the Troians, is so on euery side so greate, that it can not be thought, soche a warre truely chronicled. If violence and power, had taken Helena from her housebande, and not her owne will and luste, caught with the adulterous loue of Paris  221 beyng a straunger. If her moderacion of life had been so rare, as that the like facte for her chastitie, had not been in any age or common wealthe, her vertues would haue giuen occasion: The Princes and nobles of Grece to stomacke the matter. The example of the facte, would with all praise and  222 commendacion be mencioned, and celebrated to al ages. Lucretia for her chastite, is perpetuallie to be aduaunced, whervpon the Romaines banished Tarquintis their kyng, his stocke and name from Rome. The rare chastite of Penelope, is remainyng as a example herein: So many snares laied to caste doune her vertuous loue towarde her housebande Ulisses. But Ulisses made hauocke by murder, on these gaie and gallante Ruffins, who in his absence sought to alienate and withdrawe, the chaste harte of Penelope, consumyng his substance. A greater example remaineth in no age, of the like chastite. As for the battaile of Troie, raised for Helena, could wise men, and the moste famous nobles of Grece: So occupie their heddes, and in thesame, bothe to hasarde their liues for a beautifull strumpet or harlot. The sage and wise Nestor, whom Agamemnon for wisedome preferred, before  223 the moste of the peeres of Grece, neither it Ulisses wanted at  224 thesame tyme, hauyng a politike and subtill hedde, to withdrawe theim from so leude and foolishe a enterprise. Grece wanted not beautifull creatures, Nature in other had bestowed  225 amiable faces, personage, and comelie behauiour. For, at those daies, Grece thei called  Achaida calligunaica, that is, Grece the lande of faire women. The dolorous lamentacion of the Ladies and Matrons in Grece, would haue hindered soche a foolishe enterprise, seyng their owne beautie neglected, their honestie of life caste vp to perilles, one harlot of 226 innumerable people followed and hunted after, in whom neither honestie, vertue, nor chastite was harbored. gouernours beastlie and rashe, yet by no meanes it can be so many yeres, so greate folie  227 to take roote in their hartes, and that the wisedom of the Grecias, should not rather caste of as naught, the beautie of Helena: rather then the whole multitude, the state of the Prince, the welfare of the subiecte, to stande in perill for the beautie of one. What is beautie, when a beastlie and adulterous 228 minde is possessed: Beautie without chastitie, harboreth a monsterous rabelmente of vices, a snare and baite, to poison other. Beautie in fewe yeres, is not onely blemished,  229 but decaied, and wholie extinguished: it is vncredible, that the Grecians would seeke to bryng home Helena, who had loste the chaste loue toward her housband, beyng caught  230 with the adulterous loue of Paris, sonne to Priamus kyng of Troie. The lande of Phrigia was a mightie Region, the people noble, puissaunte in warre: the kyng for nobilitie of actes famous. The Citee of Troie, wherein the kyng helde his Scepter of gouernement, was riche, mightie, and populous: ruled and gouerned, by the wisedome and policie of famous counsailours, so that by all meanes it is this vncredible,  231 without any possibilitie. Thei neclectyng their owne state and kyngdo, so to preferre the beautie of one, that the whole multitude of Grece thereby to perishe. It is a matter vncredible  232 in all Grece, whiche for the fame of wisedome, is moste celebrated among all nacions, not one wiseman at thesame tyme to be therein: whose cousaile and politike heddes, might ponder a better purpose. Grece, whiche was the mother and fountaine of all artes and sciences, all Eloquence, Philosophie, wisedome flowyng from theim, and yet wisedome to want in their breastes. Reason can not make any perswasion that any probabilitie can rise, of any soche matter enterprised, what could the intent be of the Grecians, as concerning Menelaus. In Menelaus there was no wisedom, to seke and 233 hunte after Helena, or by any meanes to possesse her, she beyng a harlotte, her loue alienated, her hart possessed with the loue of an other manne: foolishlie he hopeth to possesse loue,  234 that seeketh to enioye the cloked, poisoned, and dissembled harte of a harlotte, Grece was well ridde of a harlotte, Troie harbouryng Helena. In the Troians it is not to be thought,  235 that either the kyng, or nobles, for a harlotte, would s ee the the people murthered, their owne state, the king to be in danger of ruine. In the Grecians there was neither wisedome,  236 neither commendacion, to pursue with a maine hoste, with a greate Nauie of Shippes, to bryng backe againe a harlotte, whose enterprise rather might better bee borne, to banishe & exile soche a beastlie disposed persone. The Troians mighte  237 well scorne the Grecians, if that the possession of a beautifull moste amiable, and minsyng harlotte, was of soche valour, estimacion, and price with theim, not onely the beautie of all other to bee reiected. But moste of all the vertuous life, and chastitie of all their matrons and honourable Ladies, to bee caste of as naught. Grece that had the name of all wisedome,  238 of all learnyng and singularitie, might rather worthelie bee called, a harbouryng place of harlottes:a Stewe and vpholder of whoredome, and all vncleanes. Wherefore, these absurdities ought to bee remoued, from the minde and cogitacion of all menne, that should worthelie ponder the state of Grece. Troie of like sorte to bee a kyngdome and common  239 wealthe of all vice: whoredome in soche price with the kyng, and people, that moste fortunate should the harlotte bee, and the adulterour in soche a common wealthe, that for adulterous loue, putteth rather all their state to hasarde and perill, for the maintenaunce of beastlie loue, brutishe socitetie moste in price with soche a nacion, chastitie, and moderacion of life, abandoned and caste of. 240 If wee weigh naturall affeccion, it can not bee, that the Grecians so moche abhorring fro nature, should cast of the naturall loue of their wifes, their children and countrie, to bryng home againe, by slaughter of infinite people: soche an one as had lefte honestie, and chaste loue of her housbande. For, what praise can redounde to the Grecians 241 by warre, to bryng home Helena, though she of all creatures was moste beautifull, beyng a harlotte: followyng the bridell and will of an other man. Maie shame or commendacion rise to the Troians, can wisedome, counsaile, or grauitie,  242 defende the adulterous luste of Priamus soonne, yea, could Priamus so loue Helena, for Paris his sonnes sake, as that he had rather venter the ruine and destruccion of his citee, and the falle of his people, the murder and ruine of his children, and wife for the beautie of one. For what is beautie, where honestie and vertue lacketh, it is an vncomly matter, though the Poetes so faigne it, not onely that in heauen, a contencio should fall emong the Goddises of their beautie, or that Iupiter of whom thei make an ignoraunt God, to chuse Paris the kynges sonne of Troie, chief arbitratour  & Iudge of that matter, to who he should giue the golde Apell to her beautie, as chief of al other, was ascribed these thynges, are vndecent to thinke of the Goddeses, and moste of all, to thinke there is more Goddes then one. And euen as these are vanities, and forged imaginacions of the Goddes, so of the battaile. The daunger of many people doeth shewe, that no soche thyng should happen, either of the Grecians or of the Troians: for it is a matter dissonaunt fro all truthe, that thei should so moche neclecte the quiete state, and prosperous renoume of their kyngdome, in all tymes and ages, since the firste constitucion of all Monarchies and kyngdomes. Who euer harde soche a forged matter to be Chronicled, and set forthe. Or who can giue credite to soche warre, to be enterprised of so small a matter: to leaue the state of waightier thynges for one woman. All the women of that countrie to stande in perill, the slaughter of their deare housbandes, the violent murder of their children to insue. Therefore, the wilfulnesse of people and princes, are the cause of the falle and destruccion, of many mightie kyngdomes, and Empires. The fall of Grece ensued, when the chief citees, Athenes and Lacedemonie tooke partes, and did confederate 243 diuers citees to them, to assiste theim, and aide theim in battaile onely: ambicion and desire of glorie, moued bothe the Athenians and Lacedemonians, fro concorde and vnitie  244 by whiche meanes, the power, glory, and stregth of all kingdomes falleth. Ambicion was the cause that mightie Pompey fell, and died violently. Cesar likewise caught with ambicion, not bearyng the equalitee, or superioritie of Pompei,  245 was tourned of violentlie fro Fortunes wheele. Many princes of like sorte and kingdomes. By ambicion onely, had the cause of their ruine. The glorie of the Assirian Monarchie grewe moste mightie, by the ambicion of Ninus kyng of Babilon: the offspryng of Ninus, whiche were kynges lineallie descendyng to the firste kyngdome of the Medes, bothe inlarged their kyngdomes, and also had the decaie of theim by ambicion. Let the Medes also associate them selues to the, from Arbactus the first kyng, vnto Astiages the laste: the beginnyng and falle of the Persian Monarchie. The mightie state of Grece, the seate Imperiall of Rome, by ambicio first  246 extolled theim selues: and also by it, their glorie, scepter, and kyngdome was translated, but the falle of Troie came not, by ambicion, that the Grecians sought. But as the Poetes doe faigne, the beautie of one woman so wounded their hartes, that the Grecians did hasarde, the perilles of their countrie. The Troians so moche estemed, the beautie of Helena, as that the state of all their kyngdome perished. It was no glorie nor honour to the Grecians, to resiste by armour, and to defende the violente takyng awaie of Helena, from her housbande: nor it was no honour, the Grecians to pursue by armour, the takyng awaie of Helena, beyng a harlotte. So that by no meanes it can followe, these thynges to bee true, of the battaile of Troie. The other part, contrary to destruccion or subuersion, is called confirmacion. Confirmacion, hath in it so greate force of argumente, to stablishe and vpholde the cause or proposicion: as destruccion hath in castyng doune the sentence or proposicion. Confirmacion is a certain oracion, whiche with a certain reprehension of the persone or facte, by order and waie of art, casteth doune, the contrary propounded. As in the other parte called destruccion, those proposicions are to bee suberted, whiche are not manyfestlie true, with all other notes before specified: so in contrariwise, this oracion by contrary notes is declaimed by, as for example. 1\. It shall behoue you first, for the entring of the oracion, to induce a reprehension againste those, whiche haue confuted as a truthe, that whiche you will confirme. 2\. In the seconde parte, place the exposicion and meanyng of the aucthours sentence. 3\. Shewe the matter to be manifest. 4\. Credible. 5\. Prossible. 6\. Agreyng to the truthe. 7\. Shewe the facte comelie. 8\. Profitable. who should saie, all partes of Rhetorike maie copiouslie bee handled in this parte, called confirmacion, You maie as matter riseth, ioigne twoo notes together, as the reason of the argumente cometh in place, whiche Apthonius a Greke aucthour herein vseth. As manifest and credible, possible and agreyng to truthe, comelie and profitable, but in al these, as in all the reste: the theme or proposicion by it self, is to bee placed, the reprehension of the aucthour by it self, the exposicion of the theme by it self. life:  & did cause the deformitie of his bodie, for the sauegarde of his countrie. Iustinus the Historiographer, for worthinesse 247 of fame and wisedome, deserueth to the posteritie of all tymes, immortall fame, by whom the famous actes of Princes, and other noble men, doe remaine Chronicled. Giuyng examples  248 of all valiauntnesse and vertue: for, bothe the actes and worthie feactes of Princes, would passe as vnknowen in all ages, excepte the worthinesse of them, were in monumentes of writyng Chronicled. For, by the fame of their worthines, and vertues, comon wealthes and kyngdomes, doe stablishe and make Lawes, the hartes of people are incensed, and inflamed, to the like nobilitie of actes, and famous enterprices,  249 Histories of auncient tymes, bee vnto vs witnesses of all tymes and ages, of kyngdomes and common wealthes, a liuely example. A light to all truthe and knowlege, a scholemaister:  250 of maners a memorie of life, for, by it we se the wisedom of all ages, the forme of the beste and florishing common wealthes. We learne by the vertues of Princes and gouernours, to followe like steppe of vertue; to flie and auoide vices, and all soche thynges, as are to the destruccion and decaie, of realme and countrie. How brutishe wer our life, if we  251 knewe no more then we se presently, in the state of our common wealthe and kyngdome. The kyngdomes of all Princes and common wealthes that now florisheth, doe stande by the longe experience, wisedome, pollicy, counsaile, and godlie 252 lawes of Princes of auncient times, no smal praise and commendacion can be attributed, to all suche as doe trauell in the serching out the veritie of auncient Histories, for bi the knoledge of them, we are as it were liuyng in all ages, the fall of all kyngdomes is manifeste to vs, the death of Princes, 253 the subuersions of kingdomes and common wealthes, who knoweth not the first risyng  & ende of the Assiriane monarchie, the glorie of the Persians, and the ruynge of the same, the mightie Empire of the Grekes, risyng & fallyng, the Romane state after what sorte florishyng and decaiyng, so that no state of common wealthe or kyngdome is vnknowen to vs, therefore Iustine, and all suche as doe leue to the posteritie, the state of al things chronicled, deserue immortal commendacions. 254 In the time of Darius kyng of the Persians, the Assyrias who ware subiects to him, sence the time of Cirus the firste kynge of the Persians, rebelled, inuaded and toke the myghtie Citie of Babilon, whiche beyng possessed, with much difficultie, and not 255 withoute greate daungers coulde bee attained. Darius the  256 kynge hearyng of the treason of the Assyrians and that the mightie Citie of Babilon was taken, was very wroth waiynge with him selfe, that there by, the ruyne of the Persian Kyngdome mighte happen. Zopyrus one of the. vii. noble peres of Persia, seing the daunger of the countrie, the state of the Prince, and the welfare of the subiectes to decaie, in the safegarde of his countrie, leuyng all priuate commoditie, for the behoufe and felicitie of the Persian kyngdome, did venter  257 his owne life, commaunded his seruauntes at home to teare and rete his bodie with whippes, to cut of his nose, his lippes and his eares, these thinges being vnknowen to Darius the kynge. As sone as Darius sawe Zopyrus so torne and deformed, bewailed his state being astonished, at so horrible 258 a faict: but Zopyrus shewed to the kynge his hole intente and purpose that he mynded to go to Babylon, whiche the Assyrians dyd traitorouslie possesse,  & complained as that these things had ben don by the tyrannie and crueltie of Darius, he wet to Babilon, and there complained of the crueltie of his Kyng, whereby purchasyng the fauor and loue of the Assyrians, he shewed them how Darius came to be kyng not by worthines, not by vertue, not by the common consent of men, but by the neynge of a horse. Zopyrus therefore admonished them, that they should trust more to their armour,  259 then to their walles, he willed them to proclame ope warre, forthwith they encountred with the Persians, and for a time victorie fel on the Babilonians side, suche was the pollice of Zopyrus. The Assyrians reioised of the successe and felicitie of their warres, the King of the Babilonians gaue to Zopyrus, the chiefe power & office, to leede a mightie armie, of the whiche beynge Lieutenaunt, he betraied the Babilonians and their Citie. and Iustine which tooke the Story of him, but also the Greke writers doe sette forthe, as matter of truthe, the valiaunte enterprises of Zopyrus: so that the straunge and mightie facte of him can not seme vncredible, hauyng testimonie of it in all ages. Zopyrus hauing not respect  261 to his owne life, to his owne priuate wealthe or glorie, did thereby put of the daunger that insued to the Persiane Kyngdome: It maie seme a greate matter, to a mynde not  262 well affected towarde his countrie, to destroie or deforme his owne bodie, for the sauegarde of countrie or common welth. But if we waie the State of oure bearth, oure countrie chalengeth more at oure handes then frindes or parents, so  263 muche price Plato the Philosopher, and Aristotle doe attribute vnto our countrie, the volumes of all lawes and bokes doe prefare oure naturall countrie before the priuate state of 264 owne manne, wealthe, glorie, honor, dignitie, and riches of one or fewe, the Statutes of all Princes, sekyng the glorie of their countrie, doe prefare a vniuersal welthe, before a priuate and particular commoditie. Pericles the noble Athenian in his oration made to the Athenians, sheweth that the glorie and welthe of one man or manie, cannot plante suche glorie, and renowne to their countrie, as that in all partes thereby to be beautified and decorated, but whe gloriea happie and florishyng state redoundeth to the kyngdome, the subiectes, the nobelles and hye peres, the gouuernour standeth happie and fortunate. Who so hopeth in sparing costes and charges, monie or ornaments, to the behouf and imploiment of his countrie and not by all meanes to his power and strength aydeth and defendeth his naturall countrie, from  265 the daunger and inuasion of his enemie, what state inioyeth he, or what wealth remaineth priuatlie, when the trone and scepter of his kyng faileth, the enemie wasteth, spoileth and destroieth all partes of his state, with the reste his life perisheth, so that no daunger, coste, is to bee refused, to serue the kingdom and prince, by whose scepter, iustice, lawes, and equitie we are gouuerned, there is no subiect well affected, but that he onlie liueth to proffite his countrie, to liue  & dye therein. If only Zopyrus had enterprised this valiaunt act, and that no memorie were remainyng in anie age of the noble acts of other men, it may seme not truelie chronacled, but from time to time, in all ages & comon wealthes, famous men for their acts & nobilitie haue ben, whiche with like courrage and magnanimitie haue saued  266 their countrie, by the losse of their owne liues. Horatius Cocles is bothe a witnesse and a light to the same, by whose aduenture the mightie and stronge Citie Rome was saued; For at what time as the Hetruscians entred on the citie, and were on the bridge, Horatius cocles defendid the ende of the same, baryng of the brunte, and stroke of the enemie, vntill the Romans, for the sauegarde of the cytie, had broken doun the bridge, as sone as Horatius Cocles sawe the Cytie thus deliuered, and the repulse of the enemie, he lepte with his armours into the flud Tibar, it semed he had not regard to his life, that beyng burdened with the waighte and grauitie of his armour, durst venter his life to so main and depe a water. Marcus Attilius in the defence of his Prince, his right hand 267 being cut of, the which he laide on the ship of the Massilians, forthwith he apprehended with the lefte hand, and ceased not vntill he hadde soouncke thesame ship. Cynegerus the Athenian  268 liueth by fame and like nobilitie of actes, veteryng his life for his countrie. The mightie cytie of Athenes, brought vnder the dominions of the Lacedemonians. Thrasibulus, Hismenias and Lisias bi their aduenture, and noble atchiue  269 reduced Athenes to his felicitie so moche loue, soo faithefull hartes they hadde towardes theire countreie. Leonides the King of the Lacedemonians, defendyng the narow straights of the cytie Thermopolie with fower thousand men against the mightie and huge armie of Xerres, for Xerres contemned theire smalle number and armie: Leonides the kyng hearde  270 that the place and hill of the battell was preuetid of . xx. thousande enemies, he exorted his souldiours parte of them to departe vntill a better time might be locked for, and onlie with the Lacedemonians he proued the conflicte and the combate, although the campe of Xerres was mightier  & more in number: yet Leonides the kyng thought it good for the sauegarde of his contrie, for saieth he, I must rather saue it, then to haue respecte to my life, although the oracle of Delphos had foreshewed, that euen Leonides muste die in the fielde or battell of the enemie, and therefore Leonides entred battail, & comfortid his men for their countrie sake, as to die therein, therefore he preuented the narrowe straightes of the countrie, and the dangerous places, where the force of the enemie mought bruste in, he lingered not, leste the enemie mighte compasse him in, but in the quiet season of the nighte, he set vppon his 271 enemie vnloked for, and they beynge but sixe hundred men with the kyng Leonides, brust into the cape of their enemies beyng sire hundred thousand menne, their valiauntnes was suche, and the ouerthowe of their enemies so great, and Xerres the Kyng hauyng two woundes, retired with shame and  272 loste the honor. Agesilaus and Conon valiaunte in actes, and excellynge in all nobilittie, what great and mightie dangers haue thei atchiued and venterid for their countrie sake, howe moche haue thei neglectid their owne wealth, riches, life and glorie, for the aduauncement and honor of their coutrie.  273 Lisander also the Lacedemonian, was indued with like nobilitie with faithfull and synceer harte towarde his country.  274 Archidamus also lieth not in obliouio, whose fame death buried not the famous aduenture of Codrus kyng of the Athenians is maruelous and almoste incredible, but that the Histores, truelie set forth, and declare a manifest truthe therof,  275 who is more famous then Epaminundas, bothe for virtue, nobilitie and marciall feates among the Thebans, the  276 mightie armie of the Grecians, at the longe sege of Troie, what valiaunte Capitains hadde thei, whiche in the defence  277 of their countrie hasarde their life: the Troians also wanted not for proues valiauntnes and al nobilitie, their peeres and  278 nobles: amonge the Romans, what a greate number was of noble peres, whose studie alwaies was to liue and dye in the glorie, aide and defence of their countrie, for he liueth not by whose cowardlines fainted harte and courage, the contrie or kyngdome standeth in perrill, he liueth in shame, that refuseth daunger, coste or charge, in the defence or procuryng,  279 better state to his countrie. The worthie saiyng of Epaminundas declareth, who liueth to his countrie, who diyng valiauntlie in the felde, beyng thrust thorow with the speare of his enemie, asked those quesctions of these that stoede by him at the poincte of deathe, is my speare manfullie broken, and my enemies chassed awaie, the whiche things his copanions in warre affirmed, then saide he: nowe your Capitaine Epaminundas beginneth to liue in that he dieth valiauntlie for 280 his countrie, and in the proffite  & aduauncement of the fame, a worthie man, noble and valiaunte, his sentence also was worthie to be knowen, and followed of all suche as bee well affected and Godlie mynded to their countrie. Marcus Marcellus of like sorte, and Titus Manlius Torquatus, & Scipio Aemilianus, Marcus Attilius shewed in what hye price our naturall countree ought to bee had, by their valiaunt atchifes, and enterprises: I might passe by in silece Scipio Cato, and Publius Scipio Nasica, but that thei by like fame honour and glorie liue immortall to their countrie, the fame also of Vibeus, Valerius Flaccus, and Pedanius Centurio giueth ampell and large matter to all menne, endued with nobilitie and valiaunt proues, for the defence of their countrie with Quintus Coccius, Marcus Sceua and Sceuola. There nedeth no doute to rise of possibilitie, seinge that examples doe remain of famous men, of godlie and well affected persones, whiche haue with like magnanimitie putte in daunger their life, to saue their Prince, kyngdome, and countrie. Greate honour was giuen of the Athenians, to soche noble and valiaunte 281 men, whiche ventered their liues for their common wealthe, to maintaine the florishyng state thereof. The eloquente and copious oracion of Thusidides, the true, faithfull, and eloquente  282 Historiographer doeth shewe: what honour and immortall fame was attributed, to all soche as did venter their liues, in the florishyng state of their countrie, in supportyng, mainteinyng, and defendyng the fame. Who, although thei loste their liues, whiche by death should bee dissolued, their fame neuer buried, liueth with the soule to immortalitie, the losse of their Priuate wealthe, glorie, riches, substaunce, or dignitie, hath purchased and obtained fame, that withereth not, and glorie that faileth not. Zopyrus, and the noble and worthie enterprises of other: whiche haue giuen the like assaie, and their fame is celebrated and titeled with immortall commendacion and glorie, to the posteritie  283 of all ages followyng. What harte can bee so stonie, or brutishly affected, that wil not venter his life, goodes, landes, or possessions: if with the daunger of one, that is of hymself, the whole bodie and state of his countrie, is thereby supported, and saued. What securitie and quietnesse remained, what wealth, honour, or fame to Zopyrus: if not onely Zopyrus had perished, but the kyng  & people vniuersally had been destroied. Thereupon Zopyrus weighing and cosideryng, the  284 state of his birthe, that his countrie chalenged his life, rather then the dissolucion of the whole kyngdome, the decaie of the Prince, the takyng awaie of the scepter, the slaughter of infinite people to ensue. He was borne to be a profitable member to his countrie, a glorie and staie to thesame: and not sparyng his life, or shunnyng the greate deformitie of his bodie, to bee a ruine of thesame. Was it not better that one perished, then by the securitie of one, a whole lande ouer runned, as partes thereby spoiled: it was the duetie of Zopirus, to take vpon hym that greate and famous enterprise. It was also comelie, the kyngdome standyng in perill, a sage and descrite persone to preuente and putte of, soche a daunger at  285 hande: The faicte altogether sheweth all vertue and greate singularitie, and a rare moderacion of minde, to cast of all respectes and ecuuses, forsakyng presentlie honour, quietnesse and obiecting himself to perill, he sawe if he onelie died, or by ieopardie saued his countrie, many thereby liued, the kyngdome & people florished, where otherwise, he with his Prince and kyngdome might haue perished. throwen doune, the Citee taken, the enemie brought to confusion: on the other side, the Persians rose mightie, soche a mightie enemie put vnder foote. The fame of Zopryus and glorie of the facte, will neuer be obliterated, or put out of memorie, if this were not profitable to the kyngdome of Persia: if this were not a renoume to the prince and people, and immortall glory to Zopryus 287 iudge ye. Zopyrus therfore, beautified his countree, by the deformitie of his bodie. Better it wer to haue many soche deformed bodies, then the whole state of the realme destroied or brought to naught: if we weigh the magnanimitie of that man, and his enterprise, there is so moche honour in the fact, that his same shall neuer cease. A Common place is a Oracion, dilatyng and amplifiyng 288 good or euill, whiche is incidente or lodged in any man. This Oracion is called a common place, because the matter conteined in it, doeth agree vniuersally to all menne, whiche are partakers of it, and giltie of thesame.  A Oracion framed againste a certaine Thefe Extorcioner, Murderer, or Traitor, is for the matter conteined in it, metelie and aptlie compiled, against all soche as are giltie of theft, murder, treason, or spotted with any other wickednes. moche to saie, as a rehearsall of that whiche is spoken of before. neuerthelesse, for the profite and exercise of the learner, you maie place soche a proemium, or beginnyng of the oracion, as maie be easie to induce the learner. of matter. aboundaunce of matter. The common place, whiche Aphthonius intreateth of, is to be aplied against any man, for the declaimor to inuade, either against vices, or to extoll and amplifie his vertues. This oracion of a common place, serueth bothe for the acuser and the defender. For the accuser, to exasperate and moue the Iudges or hearers, against the offender, or accused. For the defendour to replie, and with all force & strength of matter, to mollifie and appease the perturbacions of the Iudges and hearers, to pulle doune and deface the contrarie alledged. There is greate force in this oracion, on bothe the sides. semeth to be made againste this man, or that man: because the matter of thesame shall properly pertain to all, giltie of thesame matter. 289 certaine exaggeracion of reason, to induce a manifest probacion of any thyng committed. As for example, a Theife taken in a robberie, in whom neither shamefastnesse, nor sparcle of grace appereth against soche a one: this oracion maie be made, to exasperate the Iudges from all fauour or affeccion of pitie, to be shewed. with these notes to be made by. his oracio made against Aristogito doeth saie, that Lawes wherewith a common wealthe, citie or Region is gouerned, are the gifte of God, a profitable Discipline among men, a restraint  291 to with holde and kepe backe, the wilfull, rashe, and beastilie life of man, and therupo Aristotle and Plato doe shewe, that through the wicked behauour of men, good lawes were first ordained, for, of ill maners, saie thei, rose good lawes, where 292 lawes doe cease, and good order faileth, there the life of man will growe, rude, wild and beestlie: Man beyng a chiefe creature  293 or God, indued with manie singuler vertues, is framed of nature to a mutuall and Godlie societie of life, without the whiche moste horrible wolde the life bee, for not onlie by concorde and agremente, the life of man dothe consiste but al things on the earth haue therin their being: the heauens and lightes conteined in the same, haue a perpetuall harmonie  & concente in finishyng their appointed race. The elementes of the worlde, where with the nature and substaunce of all  294 thinges, doe consiste onlie by a harmonie and temperature of eche parte, haue their abidyng increase & prosperous beyng, otherwise their substaunce, perisheth and nature in all partes decaieth: kyngdomes and common wealthes doe consiste in a harmonie, so long as vertue and all singularitie tempereth their state and gouernemente, and eche member thereof obeieth his funccion, office and callynge, and as partes of thesame bodie, euerie one as nature hath ordained theim occupiyng, their roume and place, the vse of euerie parte, all to the vse and preseruacion of the hole bodie, and as in the bodie so in the common wealthe, the like concorde of life oughte to be in euery part, the moste principall parte accordyng to his dignitie of office, as moste principall to gouerne thother inferior partes: and it thei as partes moste principal of thesame bodie with all moderacion and equabilitie teperyng their state,  295 office and calling. The meanest parte accordyng to his lowe state, appliyng hym selfe to obeie and serue the moste principall: wherein the perfecte and absolute, frame of common wealthe or kyngdome is erected. And seyng that as the Philosophers doe saie, of ill maners came good lawes, that is to saie, the wicked and beastlie life of man, their iniurius behauiour, sekyng to frame themselues from men to beastes moued  296 the wise and Godlie, elders to ordaine certaine meanes, to rote discipline, whereby the wickedlie disposed personne should bee compelled to liue in order, to obeie Godlie lawes, to the vpholdyng of societie. Therefore, all suche as dissolue lawes, caste doune good order, and state of common wealth, out as putride and vnprofitable weedes, to be extirpated and plucked vp from Citie and Common wealthe, from societie, who by mischeuous attemptes seke, to extinguishe societie, amitie, and concord in life. Princes & gouernors with al other magistrates ought in their gouernment to imitate the practise of the Phisician, the nature of man, wekedned and made feble with to moche abundaunce of yll humors, or ouermoch with ill bloode replenished, to purge and euacuate that, and all to the preseruacion and healthe of the whole bodie: for so was the meanyng of the Philosopher, intreatyng of the politike, gouernment of kingdome and common wealth, when thei compared a kingdome to the bodie of man: the thefe and robber as a euill and vnprofitable member, and all other as  297 without all right, order, lawe, equitie and iustice, doe breake societie of life, bothe against lawe and nature: possessing the goodes of a other man, are to bee cutte of, as no partes, meete to remaine in any societie. 298 The chifest cause that moued gouernours and magistrates, to cutte of the race of theues, and violete robbers, and of all other mischeuous persons, was that by them a confusion would ensue in al states. What Citee could stande in prosperous state, yea, or what house priuatlie inhabited, where lawes and aucthoritee were exiled: where violence, will, luste, and appetite of pestiferous men, might without terrour bee practised. If the labour and industrie of the godlie, should be alwaie a praie to ye wicked, and eche mannes violence and iniurious dealyng, his owne lawe, the beaste in his state, would bee lesse brutishe and iniurious. Who so seketh to caste doune this societ ee, he is not meete to be of any societee, whiche he dissolueth. Who so robbeth or stealeth, to liue by the gooddes of an other manne, as his possession, is by violence and againste Nature: so by violence and against nature, their pestiferous doinges do frame 299 their confusion: their execrable  & destetable purpose, do make theim a outcaste from all good people, and as no members thereof, cut of from all socictee, their euill life rooteth perpetual ignomie and shame. And thus is the tragicall ende of their enterprise. Democratia, haue contented  300 the wilfull heddes of pestiferous men: wherein euery man must bee a ruler. Their owne will is their Lawe: there luste setteth order, no Magistrate, but euery one to hymself a Magistrate. All thynges in common, as long as that state doeth remain emong the wicked, a most happie state coumpted, a wished state to idell persones, but it continueth not. Herein the murtherer, the thiefe were meete  301 to be placed. The greater thiefe, the better manne: the moste execrable murtherer, a moste mete persone, for soche state of gouernemente. There is no nacion vnder the Sunne, but that one tyme or other, this troublous state hath molested theim: and many haue sought to sette vp soche a monsterous state of regiment, a plagued common wealthe, and to be detested. Soche was the order of men, when thei liued without lawes. When the whole multitude were scattered, no citee, Toune, or house builded or inhabited, but through beastlie maners, beastlie dispersed, liued wilde and beastlie. But the wise, sage, and politike heddes reduced by wisedome, into  302 a societie of life, nature leadyng thereto: Houses and habitacions, were then for necessitie made, families multiplied, villages and Tounes populouslie increased, and Citees raised emong so infinite people. Nature by God inuented and stablished Lawe, and the sage and wise persones, pronounced and gaue sentence vpon Lawes. Whereupon, by the obedience of lawes, and preeminente aucthoritie of Magistrates. The state of mightie Kyngdomes and Common wealthes, haue growen to soche a roialnesse and loftie state, many famous kingdomes haue been on the face of the yearth: many 303 noble Princes from tyme to tyme succedyng, whiche without a order of godlie lawes, could not haue continued. What was the cause that the mightie Monarchies, continued many hundred yeres: did the losse and dissolute life of subiectes and Princes, cause thesame but good lawes, and obedience to orders. 304 Therefore, where Magistrates, bothe in life and office, liue in the obedience of Lawes: the multitude inferiour, by example of the Magistrates singularitie, incensed dooe place before them, their example of life, as a strong lawe. 305 Theodosius Emperor of Rome, writyng to Volusianus his chief Pretor, as concernyng his office, in these woordes, saieth: Digna vox est maiestate regnantis legibus alligatum se principem profiteri. Adeo de autoritate Iuris nostra pendet autoritas et reuera maius imperio est submittere legibus principatum  & oraculo presentis edicti quod nobis licere non patimur alijs indicamus. It is a worthie saiyng, and meete for the Maiestie of a Prince, to acknowledge hymself vnder his lawe. For, our aucthoritie, power, and sworde, doeth depende vpon the force, might, and aucthoritie of Lawes, and it passeth all power and aucthoritie, his gouernemente and kyngdome to be tempered by lawe, as a moste inuiolable Oracle and decree, so to doe as we prouulgate to other. Wherevpon it is manifeste, what force godlie lawes gaue to the Prince, what aucthoritie. Take lawes awaie, all order of states faileth, 306 the Prince by Lawe, is a terrour to the malefactour: his Maiestie is with all humblenesse serued, feared, and obeied. By lawes, his state maketh hym as a God, emong menne, at whose handes the preseruacion of eche one, of house, citee and countrie is sought. Seing bothe lawes and the Prince, haue that honour and strength, that without them, a  Chaos a confusion would followe, in the bodie of all common wealthes aud kyngdomes. Let them by aucthoritie and lawe bee confounded, that practise to subuerte auocthoritie, to neclecte the Prince, and his godlie lawes. to bee aboue all lawes, exempted from all order, vnder no obedience, their pestiferous dealyng, dooe vtter thesame: For, as Demosthenes the famous Orator of Athenes  308 doeth saie. If that wicked men cease not their violece if that good men in all quietnes and securitie, can not enioye their owne goddes, while lawe and aucthoritie of the magistrate, seuerelie and sharply vseth his auocthoritie and sword. If dailie the heddes of wicked men, cease not to subuerte lawes, orders, and decrees godlie appoincted. Whiles that in all Citees and common wealthes, the Princes and gouernours,  309 are by lawes a terror to them. Lawes then ceasyng, the dreadfull sentece of the Iudge and Magistrate wanting. The sworde vndrawen, all order confounded, what a confusion would followe: yea, what an open passage would bee lefte open to all wickednesse. The terrour of Lawes, the sworde and auocthoritie of the Magestrate, depresseth and putteth doune, the bloodie cogitacions of the wicked, and so hindereth and cutteth of, many horrible and bloodie enterprises. Els there would bee neither Prince, Lawe, nor subiecte, no hedde or Magistrate: but euery manne his owne hedde, his owne lawe and Magistrate, oppression and violence should bee lawe, and reason, and wilfull luste would bee in place of reason, might, force, and power, should ende the case. Wherefore, soche as no lawe, no order, nor reason, will driue lo liue as members in a common wealthe, to serue in their functio. Thei are as Homere calleth theim, burdeins to the yearth,  310 for thei are of no societie linked with Nature, who through wickednesse are disseuered, abhorryng concorde of life, societie and felowship. Whom sinister and bitter stormes of fortune, doe daiely vexe and moleste, who in the defence of their 311 countrie are maimed, and thereby their arte and science, for, imbecilitie not practised, all art otherwise wantyng, extreme pouertee fallyng on them, reason muste moue, and induce all hartes, to pitee chieflie their state: who in defence and mainteinaunce of our Countrie, Prince, and to the vpholdyng of our priuate wealthe at home, are become debilitated, deformed and maimed, els their miseries will driue them to soche hedlesse aduentures, that it maie bee saied, as it was saied to  312 Alexander the Greate. Thy warres, O Prince, maketh many theues, and peace will one daie hang them vp. Wherein the Grecians, as Thusidides noteth, had a carefull prouidence, for all soche as in the defence of their Countrie were maimed, yea, euen for their wiues, and children of all soche, as died in warre, to be mainteined of the commo charge and threasure of Grece. Reade his Oracion in the seconde booke, made vpon the funerall of the dedde soldiours.  313 The dronkarde in his state is beastlie, the proude and arrogante persone odious, the riotous and prodigall persone to be contempned, the coueitous and nigardlie manne to bee reiected. But who so by violence, taketh awaie the goodes of an other man, or by any subtill meanes, iniustlie possesseth thesame, is detestable, with all seueritee to be punished. The  314 adulterer and the harlotte, who by brutishe behauiour, leude affeccion, not godlines leadyng thereto: who by their vnchast behauior, and wanton life doe pollute, and cotaminate their bodie, in whom a pure minde ought to be reposed. Who thorowe beastly affeccion, are by euill maners transformed to beastes: and as moche as in theim lieth, multipliyng a brutishe  315 societie. The homicide in his state more horrible, accordyng to his outragious and bloodie life, is to bee tormented, in like sort all other vices, accordyng to their mischiues, reason, Lawe and Iustice, must temper and aggrauate due reward, and sentence to them. No vice was more greuous, and horrible emong 316 the Scithians then thefte, for this was their saiyng:  Quid saluum esse poterit si licet furari, what can be safe, if thefte bee lefull or tolerated. Herein the vniuersalle societee of life is caste doune, hereby a confusion 317 groweth, and a subuersion in all states immediatlie followeth, equitee, iustice, and all sincere dealyng is abaundoned, violence extirpateth vertue, and aucthoritie is cutte of. theim selues, the facte and conuersacion of life is moste pernicious, and hurtfull, but by soche kinde of menne, whole kyngdomes and common wealthes would bee ouerthrowen. And for a prosperous state and common wealthe, a common woe and calamitee would fall on them, tumultes and vprores maintained,  318 right and lawe exiled: neither in field quietnes, welth or riches, houses spoiled, families extinguished, in all places sedicion, warre for peace, violence for right, will and lust for lawe, a hedlesse order in all states. And as concernyng Vsurers,  319 though their gaines be neuer so ample, and plentifull, to enriche them, whereby thei growe to be lordes, ouer many thousandes of poundes: yet the wealthe gotten by it, is so iniurious, that thei are a greate plague, to all partes of the comon wealthe: so many daungers and mischiues, riseth of the Cato the noble and wise Senator of Rome, being demaunded diuers questions, what was firste to bee sought, in a familie  320 or housholde, the aunsweres not likyng the demaunder: this quescion was asked, O Cato, what sentece giue you of Vsurie, that is a goodlie matter to bee enriched by. Then Cato aunswered in fewe woordes.  Quid hominem occidere, Vsurie. A brief sentence againste Vsurers, but wittely pronounced from the mouth of a godlie, sage, noble, and descrite persone, whiche sentence let the Vsurer, ioigne to his Vsury retourned, and repeate at the retourne thereof, this sentence 321 of Cato, I haue murthered. This one sentence will discourage any Vsurer, knowyng hymself a murtherer. Though moche more maie be spoken against it, this shalbe sufficient. The Hebrues calleth Vsurie, by the name of  Shecke, that is a bityng gaine, of the whiche many haue been so bitten, that whole families haue been deuoured, & beggerie haue been their gaine. And as Palingenius noteth. The debtour often tymes saieth he, runneth awaie, and carieth with hym, the debte and gaines of the Vsurie. The Grekes calleth Vsurie Tokos, that is properlie the trauaile of women of their childe: soche is their Vsurie, a daungerous gettyng. Demosthenes likeneth their state as thus, as if terrestriall thynges should be aboue the starres: and the heaues 322 and celestialle bodies, gouerned by the base and lowe terrestriall matters, whiche by no meanes, can conserue the excellencie of them, for, of them onely, is their matter, substauce and nature conserued. Wherefore, to whom regimente and gouernemente is committed, on whose administracion, the frame of the comon wealth doe staie it self: thei ought with al wisedome and moderacion, to procede in soche causes, whose office in worthinesse of state, and dignitee, maketh the as Goddes on the 323 yearth, at whose mouthes for wisedome, counsaill, and fortunate state, infinite people doe depende. It is no smal thing in that their sword  & auchoritee, doeth sette or determine all thinges, that tendereth a prosperous state, whereupon with all integritee and equitee, thei ought to temper the affeccions of their mynde: and accordyng to the horrible facte, and mischiues  of the wicked, to exasperate & agrauate their terrible iudgemente, and to extirpate from the yearth, soche as be of no societie in life. The bloodie homicide, the thief, the adulterer  324 for by these all vertue is rooted out, all godlie societtie extinguished, citees, realmes, and countrees, prostrate & plagued for the toleracion of their factes, against soch frendship in iudgemente muste cease, and accordyng to the state of the cause, equite to retaine frendship, money muste not blinde, nor rewardes to force and temper Iudgements: but accordyng to the veritee of the cause, to adde a conclusion. Worthelie  325 the pictures of Princes, Gouernours and Magistrates in auncient tymes doe shewe this, where the antiquitee maketh theim without handes, therein it sheweth their office, and iudgemente to proceade with equitee, rewardes not to blind, or suppresse the sinceritee of the cause. Magistrates not to bee bounde to giftes, nor rewardes to rule their sentence.  Alciatus in his boke called Emblemata, in senatu sancti principis. Effigies manibus trunce ante altaria diuum Hic resident, quarum lumine capta prior Signa potestatis summe, sanctiq senatus,  326 Thebanis fuerant ista reperta viris. Cur resident? Quia mente graues decet esse quieta Iuridicos, animo nec variare leui. Cur sine sunt manibus? Capiant ne xenia, nec se Pollicitis slecti muneribus ve sinant. Cecus est princeps quod solis auribus, absq Affectu constans iussa senatus agit. Where vertue and integritee sheweth it self, in the persone and cause, to vpholde and maintein thesame. Roote out horrible vices from common wealthe, that the more surer and stronge foundacion of vertue maie be laied; for, that onelie cause, the scepter of kinges, the office of magistrates was left to the posteritee of all ages. 327 Seyng that lawes bee godlie, and vniuersally thei temper equitee to all states, and giue according to iustice, euery man his owne: he violateth vertue, that dispossesseth an other manne of his own, and  328 wholie extinguisheth Iustice. And thereupon his beastly life by merite forceth and driueth, lawe and Magistrate, to terrible iudgement. For, who so against right, without order, or lawe, violateth an other man, soche a one, lawes of iustice, muste punishe violentlie, and extirpate from societ ee, beyng a dissoluer of societee. If soche wicked persones be restrained, and seuerelie punished, horrible vices will be rooted out: all artes sciences, and godlie occupacions mainteined, vpholded 329 and kept. Then there must bee a securitee in all states, to practise godlines, a mutuall concorde. The Magistrate with equitee, the subiecte with faithful and humble obedience, accomplishyng his state, office, and callyng. Whereupon by good Magistrates, and good subiectes, the common wealthe  330 and kyngdom is in happie state stablished. For, in these twoo poinctes, as Plato doeth saie, there is vertuous rule, and like obedience. groweth, when the magistrate driueth continually, by sworde and aucthoritee, all menne to  331 obedience, bothe of lawes and gouernuurs. Then in al good common wealthes, vices are neuer tolerated to take roote: because the beginnyng and increase of vices, is sone pulled vp, his monsterous kyngdome thereby ouerthrowen. So doyng, happie shall the kyng be, happie kyngdome, and moste fortunate people. His Oracion, which is titeled praise, is a declamacio of the vertuous or good qualitees, propertees belongyng to any thyng, whiche doeth procede by certaine notes of arte. All thynges that maie be seen, with the iye of man, touched, or with any other sence apprehended: that maie be praised, or dispraised. 332 Manne.   Citees. --------- Fisshe.   Floodes. Foule.   Castles. Beaste.   Toures. As   Orchardes.   Gardeins. Stones.   Stones. Trees.   Artes. Plantes.   Sciences. Mettals. Any vertue maie be praised, as wisedome, rightuousnes fortitude, magnanimitee, temperaunce, liberalitee, with all other. These are to be celebrated with praise. The persone, as Iulius Cesar, Octauius Augustus, Hieremie, Tullie, Cato, Demosthenes. Thynges, as rightuousnes, temperaunce. Tymes, as the Spryng tyme of the yere, Sommer, Haruest, Winter. Places, as Hauens, Orchardes, Gardeins, Toures, Castles, Temples, Islandes. Beastes wantyng reason, as Horse, Shepe, Oxen Plates, as Vines, Oliues. In the praise of vertue, this maie be saied. The excellencies of it, the antiquitee and originalle beginnyng thereof, the profite that riseth to any region by it, as no kyngdome can consiste without vertue, and to extoll the same, in makyng a comparison, with other giftes of nature, or with other giftes of fortune, more inferiour or base. Vpon a cit ee, praise maie be recited, consideryng the goodlie situacion of it, as of Paris, Venice, London, Yorke: consideryng the fertilitie of the lande, the wealthe and aboundaunce, the noble and famous gouernours, whiche haue gouerned thesame. The first aucthors and builders of thesame, the politike lawes, and godlie statutes therein mainteined: The felicitee of the people, their maners, their valeaunt prowes and hardines. The buildyng and ornatures of thesame, with Castles, Toures, Hauens, Floodes, Temples: as if a manne would celebrate with praise. The olde, famous, and  333 aunciente Citee of London, shewyng the auncient buildyng  334 of thesame: the commyng of Brutus, who was the firste aucthor and erector of thesame. As Romulus was of the mightie citee Rome, what kyngs haue fro tyme to tyme, lineally descended and succeeded, bearing croune and scepter therein: the valiauntnes of the people, what terror thei haue been to all forraine nacions. What victories thei haue in battaile obteined, how diuers nacions haue sought their amitee and  335 league. The false Scottes, and Frenche menne truce breakers: many and sonderie tymes, losyng their honour in the field, and yet thei, through the puissaunt harte of the kynges of this lande, vpholdyd, and saued, from the mighte and force of other enemies inuadyng theim. The twoo famous Vniuersitees  336 of this lande, from the whiche, no small nomber of greate learned men and famous, haue in the comon wealthe sprong, with all other thynges to it. The praise of a Kyng, Prince, Duke, Erle, Lorde, Baron, Squire, or of any other man be maie declaimed of obseruing the order of this parte of Rhetorike. one, as of kyng Henry the fifte, Plato, Tullie, Demosthenes, Cyrus, Darius, Alexander the greate. Or a generalle and vniuersalle praise, as the praise of all the Britaines; or of all the citezeins of London. beginnyng. saie: Of what kinde he came of, whiche dooeth consiste in fower poinctes. --- After that you shall declare, his educacion: the educacion is conteined in thr ee poinctes. Institucion. ------ Arte. Lawes. Then put there to that, whiche is the chief grounde of al praise: his actes doen, whiche doe procede out of the giftes, and excellencies of the minde, as the fortitude of the mynde, wisedome, and magnanimt ee. Of the bodie, as a beautifull face, amiable countenaunce swiftnesse, the might and strength of thesame. The excellencies of fortune, as his dignit ee, power, aucthoritee, riches, substaunce, frendes. In the fifte place vse a comparison, wherein that whiche you praise, maie be aduaunced to the vttermoste. In whom nature hath powred singuler giftes, in whom vertue, & singularitee, in famous enterprises aboundeth: whose glorie & renoume, rooteth to the posteritee, immortall commendacion. In the graue, their vertues and godlie 338 life, tasteth not of Obliuion, whiche at the length ouerthroweth all creatures, Cit ees, and regions, Thei liue onelie in all ages, whose vertues spreadeth fame and noble enterprises, by vertue rooteth immortalitee. Who so liueth, as that  339 his good fame after death ceaseth not, nor death with the bodie cutteth of their memorie of life: Soche not onely in life, but also in death are moste fortunate. In death all honor, dignitee, glorie, wealthe, riches, are taken from vs: The fame  340 and glorie of singulare life is then, chieflie takyng his holde and roote, wise men and godlie, in life, knowen famous, after death, remain moste worthie & glorious. Who knoweth  341 not of Tullie, the famous Oratour of Rome. Doeth Demosthenes  342 lieth hidden, that noble Oratour of Athenes. Is  343 not ye fame of Iulius Cesar, Octauius Augustus remainyng  344 of Vespasianus: of Theodosuns, of Traianus, of Adrianus, who by praise minded, be left to the ende of al ages. Soche a  345 one was this Epaminundas, the famous Duke of Thebe,  346 whose vertues gaue hym honour in life, and famous enterprises,  347 immortalitee of fame after death, What can bee saied more, in the praise and commendacion, of any peere of estate, then was saied in the praise of Epaminundas, for his vertue, were so singulare, that it was doubted, he beyng so good a manne, and so good a Magistrate, whether he were better manne, or better Magistrate: whose vertues were so vnited, that vertue alwaies tempered his enterprises, his loftie state as fortune oftentymes blindeth, did not make hym vnmindfull of his state. No doubt, but that in all common wealthes, famous gouernours haue been, but in all those, the moste parte haue not been soche, that all so good men, and so good magistrates; that it is doubted, whether thei were better me,  348 or better magistrates. It is a rare thyng to be a good manne, but a more difficult matter, to bee a good Magistrate: and moste of all, to be bothe a good man, and a good Magistrate. Honour and preeminent state, doeth sometyme induce obliuion, whereupon thei ought the more vigilantlie to wade: in all causes, and with all moderacion, to temper their preeminent state. The Philosophers ponderyng the brickle and 349 slippere state of fortune, did pronunce this sentence:  Difficilius est res aduersas pati, quam fortunam eslantem ferre, it is more easie to beare sharpe and extreme pouertie, then to rule and moderate fortune, because that the wisest menne of all haue as Chronicles doe shewe, felte this obliuion, that their 350 maners haue been so chaunged, as that natures molde in the had ben altered or nuelie framed, in the life of Epaminudas moderacion and vertue, so gouerned his state, that he was a honor and renowne to his state, nothing can be more ample in his praise, then that which is lefte Chronicled of him. Epaminundas was borne in Thebe a famous citie in Beotia, the which Cadmus the sone of Agenor builded, 351 whiche Amphion did close  & enuiron with walles, in the whiche the mightie and valiaunt Hercules was borne, & manie noble Princes helde therin scepter, the which Citie is tituled famous to the posterity by the noble gouernment of Epaminundas. Epaminundas came not of anie highe nobilitie or blood, but his parentes were honeste and verteous who as it semed were verie well affected to vertue, instructyng their soonne in all singulare and good qualities, for by good and vertuous life and famous enterprises from a meane state, manie haue bene extolled to beare scepter, or to attaine greate honour, for as there is a begynnyng of nobilitie, so there is an ende, by vertue and famous 352 actes towarde the common wealthe, nobilite first rose. The stock of Cesar and Cesars was exalted from a meaner state,  353 by vertue onelie to nobilitie. Scipios stocke was not alwais noble, but his vertues graffed nobilitie to the posteritie of his line and ofspryng followynge. And euen so as their famous enterprices excelled, nobilite in theim also increased. 354 Catilina wicked, was of a noble house, but he degenerated from the nobilitie of his auncestours, the vertues that graffed  355 nobilitie in his auncestors, were first extinguished in Catiline. Marcus Antonius was a noble Emperour, a Prince indued with all wisedome and Godlie gouernmet, who was of a noble paretage, it what a wicked sonne succeded him, the  356 father was not so godlie, wise, and vertuous, as Commodus was wickedlie disposed and pestiferous. There was no vertue or excellence, meete for suche a personage, but that Marcus attained to. Who for wisedome was called Marcus Philosophus, in his sonne what vice was the that he practised not, belie chier, druncknes and harlottes, was his delite, his crueltie and bluddie life was suche that he murthered all the godlie and wise Senatours, had in price with Marcus  357 his father. Seuerus in like maner, was a noble and famous Emperor, in the Senate moste graue, politike, and in his  358 warres moste fortunate, but in his sonne Marcus Antoninus Caracalla, what wickednes wanted, whose beastlie life is rather to be put in silence, then spoken of. In the assemble of the Grecians, gathered to consulte vpon the contencion of  359 Achilles armour, Aiax gloriouslie aduaunceth hymself of his auncestrie, from many kinges descended, whom Vlisses his aduersarie aunswered: makyng a long and eloquente Oracion, before the noble peeres of Grece, concernyng Aiax his auncetours. These are his woordes. Nam genus et proauos et que non fecimus ipsi, Vixea nostra voco, sed enim quia retulit Aiax, esse Iouis pronepos. As for our parentage, and line of auncetours, long before vs, and noble actes of theirs: as we our selues haue not doen the like, how can we call, and title their actes to be ours. Let them therefore, whiche haue descended from noble blood, and famous auncetours: bee like affected to all nobilitiee of their auncetours, what can thei glory in the nobilitee of their auncestours, Well, their auncetours haue laied the foundacion, and renoume of nobilitee to their ofspryng. What nobilitiee 360 is founde in them, when thei builde nothyng, to their auncetours woorke of nobilitee. Euen as their auncetours, noblie endeuoured them selues, to purchase and obtain, by famous actes their nobilit ee) for, nobilitee and vertue, descendeth alwaies to the like ) so thei contrary retire and giue backe, fro all the nobiltee of their auncestours, where as thei ought, with like nobilitee to imitate them. Many haue been, whiche through their wisedome, and famous enterprises, in the affaires  361 of their Prince, worthelie to honour haue been extolled and aduaunced: who also were the firste auchours and founders of nobiltee, to their name and ofspring. Whose ofspring indued with like nobilitee of vertues, and noble actes haue increased their auncestors glorie: the childre or ofspring lineally descendyng, hauyng no part of the auncestours glorie, how can thei vaunte them selues of nobilee, whiche thei lacke, and dooe nothyng possesse thereof, Euen from lowe birthe and degree. Galerius Armentarius was aduaunced, euen from a Shepherdes sonne, to sit in the Imperiall seat of Roome. Galerius Mariminus whom all the Easte obaied,  362 his vertues and noble acts huffed hym to beare scepter in the Empire of Roome. Probus Gardiners soonne, to the like throne and glorie asceded, so God disposeth the state of euery man, placyng and bestowing dignitee, where it pleaseth him as he setteth vp, so he pulleth doune, his prouidence & might is bounde to no state, stocke, or kindred. Epaminudas beyng borne of soche parentes, was brought vp in all excellente learnyng, for, vnder hym Philippe the kyng of the Macedonians, the soonne of Amintas, was brought vp. This Epaminundas, the Histories note hym to be a chief Philosopher, and a capitaine moste valiaunte. In Musike, in plaiyng, and singyng finelie to his Instrumente, notable and famous, no kinde of learnyng, arte, or science, wanted in his breaste: So greate and aboundante were his vertues, that aboue all gouernuours, whiche haue been in Thebe, his name and fame is chieflie aduaunced. 363 Epaminundas beyng moste valiaunte and noble, leauing all priuate commodit ee, glory, and riches a side: sought the renoume of his countree, as all rulers and gouernours ought to do. For, a kyngdome or common wealth, can not rise to any high nobilitee or Roialnesse, where gouernuours,  364 rulers and magistrates, nelecting the vniuersall, and whole body of the common wealthe, doe cogitate and vigilantly endeuour them selues, to stablish to them and theirs, a priuate, peculiar, and domesticall profite, glorie, or renoume. Coueiteousnes, whiche is in all ambicious Magistrates the poison, plague, destruccion, and ruine of the beste and florishing comon  365 wealthes, of al wickednes and mischief the roote: a vice, whereupon all vice is grounded, from whom all mischiefe floweth, all execrable purposes issueth. That wanted in Epaminundas, for in the ende of his life, his coffers were so thin and poore, that euen to his Funerall, money wanted to solempnise thesame. Priuate glorie nor excesse, was hunted after of hym, yet his vertues were of soche excellencie, that honour, vignitee, and preeminent state, was offered and giuen to hym vnwillinglie. This Epaminandas was in gouernement so famous, and so vertuouslie and politikelie ruled thesame, that he was a glorie, renoume, honour, and felicitee to his kingdome, by his state. Before the time of Epaminundas,  366 the countree of Beotia was nothyng so famous  367 in their enterprises: neither the citee of Thebe so roiall, puissaunt or noble, the antiquitee of that tyme sheweth, that Epaminundas wantyng the power of Thebes, their glorie, strength, and felicitee fell and decaied. The learning of Epaminundas and knowlege, was so aboundant and profounde bothe in Philosophie, and in all other artes and sciences, that it was wounderfull. In chiualrie and in feates of warre, no p eere was more couragious and bolde, or hardie, neither in that, whiche he enterprised, any could be of greater counsaile in hedde more pollitike, of minde more sage and wittie: his gouernement so good, that beyng so good a Magistrate, it is doubted, whether he be better man, or better Magistrate, Epaminundas died in the defence of his countree. The Athenians were enemies to the Thebanes, and many greate battalies were assaied of theim and foughten: and often tymes the Athenians felt many bitter stormes, and fortune loured of them, he beyng so valiaunt a capitain. Epaminundas beyng dedde, the Athenians ceased to practise, any one parte of chiualrie, their prowesse and derteritee decaied: thei hauyng no aliaunte, and forraine enemie to moleste theim, or whom thei feared. So that a famous, wise, pollitike, and valiaunte  368 capitaine, is not onely a state, a pillar and strong bulwarke to his countree. But also forraine nacions, hauyng one, who for his valiauntnes thei dreade, doe practise and inure them selues, to all dexteritee, counsaile, wisedome, and pollicie: soche a one was Epaminundas, to his enemies and coutree. Neither Hector of Troie, nor Achilles ofGrece, might 369 bee compared with Epaminundas, Numa Pompilius was not more godlie, Adriane the Emperour of Roome, no better learned, nor Galba the Emperour more valiaunte, Nerua no more temperate, nor Traianus more noble, neither Cocles nor Decius, Scipio nor Marcus Regulus, did more valianntly in the defence of their countrie, soche a one was this Epaminundas. Of many thynges, these fewe are recited, but if his whole life and vertues, wer worthely handeled: fewe would beleue, soche a rare gouernour, so vertuous a Prince, so hardie and valiaunte a capitaine, to haue remained in no age. This parte of Rhetorike, which is called dispraise, is a inuectue Oracion, made againste the life of any man. called laus, that is to saie, praise: and by contrary notes procedeth, for the Oratour or declaimer to entreate vpo. This parte of Rhetorike, is called of the Grekes Psogos. In praise, we extoll the persone: First by his countr ee. Then by his auncestours and parentes. In the third place, by his educacion and institucion. Then in the fowerth place, of his actes in life. In the fifte place vse a comparison, comparyng the persone with other, whiche are more inferiour. Then the conclusion. Now in dispraise, contrarily we doe procede. Firste, in the dispraise of his countr ee. Of his auncetours and parentes. His educacion is dispraised. Then his actes and deedes of life. Also in your comparison with other, dispraise hym. Then in the laste place, adde the conclusion. All thynges that maie be praised, maie be dispraised. 370 As vertue meriteth commendacion and immortall renoume, for the nobilitee and excellencie reposed in it:so eugle vices for the deformitee of them, are in mynd to be abhored and detested, and with all diligence, counsaile, and wisedome auoided. As pestiferous poison extinguisheth with his corrupcion 371 and nautinesse, the good and absolute nature of all thinges:so vice for his pestiferous nature putteth out vertue and rooteth out with his force all singularitee. For, vice and vertue are so of nature contrary, as fire and water, the violence of the one expelleth the other: for, in the mansion of vertue, vice at one tyme harboreth not, neither vertue with vice can be consociate or vnited, for, vertue is a singuler meane, 372 or Mediocrite in any good enterprise or facte, with order and reason finished. Whose acte in life, doeth repugne order and reason, disseuered from all Mediocrite, soche do leaue iustice, equitee, wisedome, temperaunce, fortitude, magnanimit ee, and al other vertues, bothe of minde and body: onely by vertues life men shewe theim selues, as chief creatures of God, with reason, as a moste principall gifte, beautified and decorated; In other giftes, man is farre inferiour to beastes, both in strength of bodie, in celeritee and swiftnesse of foote, in labour, in industrie, in sense, nothyng to bee compared to beastes, with beastes as a peculier and proper thyng, wee haue our bodie of the yearth: but our minde, whiche for his diuinitee, passeth all thynges immortall-maketh vs as gods emog other creatures. The bodie therefore, as a aliaunt and forain enemie, beyng made of a moste base. moste vile and corruptible nature, repugneth the mynde. This is the cause, that wickednesies taketh soche a hedde, and that the horrible facte and enterprise of the wicked burste out, in that, reason exiled and remoued from the minde, the eugle pertubacions of the minde, haue their regiment, power, and dominio: and where soche state of gouernemente is in any one bodie, in priuate and domesticalle causes, in forraine and publike affaires, in kyngdome and comon wealthe. Vertue fadeth and decaieth, and vice onely beareth the swaie. Lawe is ordered by luste, and their order is will, soche was the tyme and gouernment of this wicked Nero. Nero was a Romaine borne, though in gouernement he was wicked, yet his coutree was famous, and noble: for, the Romaines wer lordes and heddes ouer all the worlde. The vttermoste Indians, the Ethiopes, the Persians, feared the maiestie and aucthorit ee of the Romaines. From Romulus, who was the firste founder,  373 and builder of that Citee: the Romaines bothe had their name of hym, and grew afterward to marueilous puisaunt roialnes. There was no nacion vnder the Sunne, but it dreaded their Maiestie, or felte their inuincible handes. there hath been many mightie kyngdomes, on the face of the yearth, but no kyngdome was able, with like successce and felicitee in their enterprise, or for like famous gouernors, and continuance of their state, to compare with them. This was, and is, the laste mightee Monarchie in the worlde. Roome a olde aunciente citee, inhabitcd firste of the Aborigines, which  374 came from Troie. The prouidence of God, so disposeth the tymes and ages of the world, the state of kyngdomes, by the fall of mightier kyngdomes, meaner grewe to power and glorie. The Carthagineans, contended by prowes, and magnanimitee, to be lordes ouer the Romaines. Carthage was a greate, mightie, olde, auncient & famous citee, in the whiche valiaunte, wise, and pollitike gouernours, helde therein regiment, long warres was susteined betwene the Romaines and Carthagineans, emong whom infinite people, and many noble peeres fell in the duste. Fortune and happie successe fell to the Romaines: the people of Carthage vaquished, and prostrate to the grounde. Scipio the noble Consull, beyng at the destruccion of it, seeyng with his iye, Carthage by fire burnte to ashes, saied:  Talis exitus aliquando erit Rome: eue 375 as of Carthage, like shall the destruccion of Rome bee, as for continuaunce of the Romaine state, of their glorie, power, and worthie successe, no nacion vnder the Sunne, can compare with theim: soche was the state of Rome, wherein wicked Nero raigned. Domitianus Nero, the sonne of Domitius Enobarbus, Agrippina was his mothers name: this Agrippina, was Empresse of Rome, wife to Claudius Tiberius, the daughter of his brother Germanicus. This Agrippina, the Chronicle noteth her, to be indued with al mischief and crucelt ee: For Tiberius her housbande, hauyng by his firste wife children, thei were murthered by her, because she might, thei beyng murthered, with more facilitee, further the Empire, to her soonnes handes, many treasons conspired against them oftentimes, Agrippina poisoned her husbande, then Nero succeded. Seneca the famous Poete & Philosopher, was scholemaister  376 to Nero, who brought hym vp in all nobilitie of learnyng, mete for his state: though that Nero was wickedlie of nature disposed, as his beastlie gouernement sheweth, yet wickednes in him, was by the seueritie of Seneca, and his castigacion depressed: for Traianus Emperour of Rome, would saie, as concernyng Nero, for the sparce of fiue pyeres, no Prince was like to hym, for good gouernment, after fiue yeres, losely and dissolutly he gouerned. This Nero, at what tyme as his mother was conceiued 377 of him, she dreamed that she was conceiued of a Viper: for, the young Viper alwaies killeth his dame. He was not onely a Viper to his mother whom he killed, but also to his kyngdome and common wealthe a destroier, whiche afterward shalbe shewed, what a tyraunte and bloodie gouernour he was. This Nero made  378 in the Citee of Rome, the rounde seates and scaffoldes, to beholde spectacles and sightes, and also the bathes. He subdued Pontus a greate coutree, whiche ioineth to the sea Pontus: whiche countree containeth these realmes, Colchis, Cappadocia, Armenia, and many other countrees, and made it as a  379 Prouince, by the suffraunce of Polemon Regulus, by whose name it was called Pontus Polemoniacus. He ouer came the Alpes, of the king Cottius, Cottius the king being dedde The life followyng of Nero was so abhominable, that the 380 shame of his life, will make any man a fraied, to leaue any  381 memorie of hym. This Domitius Nero, caused his Scholemaister Seneca to be put to death, Seneca chosing his owne death, his veines beyng cutte in a hotte bathe died, bicause he corrected wicked Nero, to traine hym to vertue. He was outragious wicked, that he had cosideracion, neither to his own honestie, nor to other, but in continuaunce, he tired hymself as virgines doe when thei marie, callyng a Senate, the dourie assigned, and as the maner of that solemnitee is, many resortyng  382 and frequentyng, in maidens tire and apparell. He went beyng a man, to be maried as a woman: beside this, at other tymes he cladde hymself with the skin of a wilde beast, and beastlie did handle that, whiche Nature remoueth from the sight. He defiled hymself with his owne mother, whom he killed immediatlie. He maried twoo wiues, Octauia, and  383 Sabina, otherwise called Poppea, firste murtheryng their housbandes. In that tyme Galba usurped the Empire, and Caius Iulius: as sone as Nero heard that Galba came here towardes Rome, euen then the Senate of Rome had determined, that Nero should bee whipped to death with roddes, accordyng to the old vsage of their auncestours, his necke yoked with a forke. This wicked Nero, seyng himself forsaken of all his friendes, at midnight he departed out of the Citee, Ephaon, and Epaphroditus waityng on hym, Neophitus and Sporus his Eunuche: whiche Sporus before tyme, had Nero assaied to frame and fashion out of kinde. In the ende,  384 Nero thruste himself through, with the poinct of his sworde, his wicked man, Sporus, thrustyng foreward his trembling hande: this wicked Nero before that, hauyng none to murther hym, he made a exclamacion, in these woordes. Is there neither friende nor enemie to kill me, shamefullie haue I liued, and with more shame shall I die, in the .xxxij. yere of his age he died. The Persians so entirely loued hym, that after his death thei sente Ambassadours, desiryng licence to erecte to hym a monumente, all countr ees and Prouinces, and the whole Citee of Rome, did so moche reioyce of his death, that thei all wearyng the Toppintant hattes, whiche bonde men doe vse to ware, when thei bee sette at libertie, and so thei triumphed of his death, deliuered from so cruell a tyraunte. like to Comodus, Domitianus, Antoninus Caracalla, thei were all so wicked, that the Senate of Rome thought it m eete, to obliterate their name, from all memorie and Chronicle, because of their wickednesse. Moche more the life and gouernement of witked Nero, might be intreated of, but this shall be sufficient: to shewe how tyrannically and beastly, he gouerned vnmete of that throne. A Comparison, is a certain Oracion, shewyng by a collacion the worthines, or excellecie of any thing: or the naughtines of thesame, compared with any other thyng or thynges, either equalle, or more inferiour. In a comparison good thynges, are compared with good as one vertue with an other: as wisedome & strength, whiche of them moste auaileth in peace and warre. Euill thynges maie bee compared with good, as Iustice, with iniustice, wisedome with foolishnes. Euill thynges maie be compared, with euill thynges, as wicked Nero, compared to Domitianus, or Caligula to Comodus, theft to homicide, drunkenes with adulterie. Small thynges maie be compared with greate: the king with his subiect, the Elephant or Camell to the Flie, a Crocodile to the Scarabe. bothe the sides, worthelie to praise, or dispraise. Where a comparison is made, betwene a thyng excellente, and a thing more inferiour; the comparison shall procede with like facilitee. All thynges that maie bee celebrated with praise, or that meriteth dispraiseal soche thynges maie be in a comparison. The persone, as Cato being a wise man, maie be compared with Nestor, the sage peere of Grece: Pompei with Cesar, as Lucane compareth them, and so of all other men. Thynges maie bee compared, as golde with siluer: one mettall with an other. Tymes maie bee compared, as the Spryng with Sommer: Harueste with Winter. Places maie be compared, as London with Yorke, Oxforde with Cambridge. Beastes without reason, as the Bee with the Ante, the Oxe with the Shepe. Plantes, as the Vine, and the Oliue. of their countree. and Tullie. To speake moche in the praise of famous men, no argument can wante, nor plentie of matter to make of them, a copious and excellent Oracion. Their actes in life through nobilitee, will craue worthelie more, then the witte and penne of the learned, can by Eloquence expresse. Who can worthelie expresse and sette foorthe, the noble Philosopher Plato, or Aristotle, as matter worthelie forceth to commend, 386 when as of them, all learnyng, and singularit ee of artes hath flowen. All ages hath by their monuments of learning, participated of their wisedome. Grece hath fostered many noble wittes, from whom all light of knowlege, hath been deriued by whose excellencie Rome in tyme florishyng, did seeke by nobilitee of learnyng, to mate the noble Grecians, So moche Italie was adorned, and beautified with the cunnyng of the Grecians. Emong the Romaines many famous Oratours and other noble men hath spronge vp, who for their worthinesse, might haue contended with any nacion: either for their glorie of learnyng, or noble regiment. Emong whom Tullie  387 by learning, aboue the rest, rose to high fame, that he was a renoume to his countree: to learnyng a light, of all singuler Eloquence a fountaine. Whom Demosthenes the famous Oratour of Athenes, as a worthie mate is compared with, whom not onley the nobilitee, and renoume of their Countree shall decorate, but the selues their owne worthines & nobilitee of fame. No age hath had twoo more famous for learnyng, no common wealthe hath tasted, twoo more profitable to their countree, and common wealthe; for granitee and cousaile, nor the posteritee of ages, twoo more worthie celebracion. Thusidides speakyng, in the commendacion of famous  388 men sheweth: as concernyng the fame of noble men, whose vertue farre surmounteth the, and passeth al other. Thenuious  389 man seketh to depraue, the worthinesse of fame in other, his bragging nature with fame of praise, not decorated. The  390 ignoraunte and simple nature, accordyng to his knowlege, iudgeth all singularitee, and tempereth by his owne actes the praise of other. But the fame of these twoo Oratours, neither the enuious nature can diminishe their praise, nor the ignoraunt be of them a arbitrator or iudge, so worthely hath all ages raised fame, and commendacion of their vertues. In Grece Demosthenes, the famous Oratour of Athenes was borne, whose Countr ee or Citee, lacketh no comendacion: either for the nobilitee of the lande, or glorie of the people. What nacion vnder the Sunne, hath not heard of that mightie Monarchie of Grece: of their mightie citees, and pollitike gouernaunce. What famous Poetes how many noble Philosophers and Oratours, hath Grece brede. What science and arte, hath not flowne from Grece, so that for the worthinesse of it, it maie bee called the mother of all learnyng. Roome alfo, in whom Tullie was brought vp, maie contende in all nobilitee, whose power and puisant glorie, by nobilitee of actes, rose to that mightie hed. In bothe soche excellencie is founde, as that no nacion might better contende, of their singularitee and honour of countree, then Grece and Rome: yet first from the Grekes, the light of Philosophie, and the aboundant knowlege of all artes, sprange to the Romaines, from the Grecians. The Godlie Lawes, wherewith the Romaine Empire was decorated and gouerned, was brought from the Grecians. If the citee maie bee a honour and glorie, to these twoo Oratours, or their Citees a singular commendacion, there wanteth in bothe, neither honour, or nobilitee. Bothe Demosthenes and Tullie were borne, of verie meane parentes and auncestours: yet thei thorowe their learnyng and vertues, became famous, ascendyng to all nobilitee. Of their vertues and learnyng, not of their auncestours, nobilit ee rose to them. The singuler vertues of theim bothe, appered euen in their tender youth; wherupon thei being brought vp, in all godlie learnyng and noble Sciences, thei became moste noble Oratours, and by their copious Eloquence, counsaile, and wisedom, aspired to nobilitee & honor. Bothe were taught of the mouthe of the best learned, Demosthenes of Iseus, a man moste Eloquent: Cicero of Philo and Milo, famous in wisedome and Eloquence. Cicero did exercise hymself verie moche, to declaime, bothe in Greke and Latine, with Marcus Piso, and with Quintus Pompeius. Demosthenes wanted not industrie and labour, to attain to that singularitee, whiche he had, bothe in Eloquence, and pronounciacion. In bothe, integritee, humanitee, magnanimitee, and all vertue flowed: at what time as Demosthenes was commaunded of the Athenians, to frame a accusacion, againste a certaine man, Demosthenes refused the acte. But when the people, and the whole multitude, were wrothe with hym, and made a exclamacion against hym, as their maner was. Then Demosthenes rose, and saied: O ye men of Athenes, againste my will, you haue me a counsailer, or pleater of causes before you: but as for a accuser, & calumniator, no, not although ye would. Of this sorte Tullie was affected, excepte it were onely in the sauegard of his countree: as against Catiline, bothe were of godlie, and of vpright conuersacion, altogether in Mediocrite, and a newe leadyng their life. Demosthenes and Tullie bothe, gaue them selues to trauail, in the causes and affaires of their common wealthe, to the preseruacion of it. How vehemently did Demosthenes pleate, and ingeniouslie handle the cause of all his countree, against Philip, for the defence of their libertee: whereupon he gatte fame, and greate glory. Whereby not onely, he was coumpted a great wise counsailour: but one of a valiaunte stomacke, at whose 391 wisedome, all Grece stode in admiracion. The king of Persia, laboured to enter fauour with him. Philip the king of the Macedonians, would safe often tymes, he had to doe against a famous man, notyng Demosthenes. Tullie also by his Eloquence and wisedome, saued Roome and all partes of that dominion, from greate daungers. Their aucthoritee and dignitee was equalle, in the common wealthe: For, at their twoo mouthes, Roome and Athenes was vpholed. Demosthenes was chief in fauour with Caretes, Diophetes, Leostines, Cicero with Pompei: Iulius Cesar, aseending to the chief seate and dignitee of the Consulship. them, before their death. You can not finde soche twoo Orators, who borne of meane & poore parentes, that attained so greate honour, who also did obiecte themselues to tyrantes a like, thei had losse of their children a like, bothe were out of their countree banished men, their returne was with honour, bothe also fliyng, happened into the handes of their enemies. 392 Bothe alike, Demosthenes and Tully wer put to death, Demosthenes died, Antipater gouernyng by the handes of Archias. Cicero died by the commaundement of Marcus Antonius: by Herenius his hedde was cutte of, and sette in Marcus Antonius halle. His handes also were cutte of, with the whiche he wrote the vehement Oracions against Marcus Antonius. To speake as moche as maie bee saied, in the praise of theim: their praise would rise to a mightie volume, but this is sufficiente. Ethopoeia is a certaine Oracion made by voice, and lamentable imitacion, vpon the state of any one. ------ Prosopopoeia. Ethopoeia. knowne: but onely it doeth faigne the maners of thesame, and imitate in a Oracion thesame. Ethopoeia is called of Prisctanus, a certaine talkyng to of any one, or a imitacio of talke referred to the maners, aptly of any certaine knowen persone. maners: whom the Grekes dooe calle, not onelie Ethopoeia, but mimesis, & this is in the maners, and the fact. This parte is as it were, a liuely expression of the maner and affeccion of any thyng, whereupon it hath his name. The firste, a imitacion passiue, whiche expresseth the affection, to whom it parteineth: whiche altogether expresseth the mocion of the mynde, as what pathetical and dolefull oracion, Hecuba the quene made, the cit ee of Troie destroied, her housbande, her children slaine. The second is called a morall imitacio, the whiche doeth set forthe onely, the maners of any one. The thirde is a mixt, the whiche setteth forthe, bothe the maners and the affection, as how, and after what sorte, Achilles spake vpon Patroclus, he beyng dedde, when for his sake, he determined to fight: the determinacion of hym shewith the maner. The frende slaine, the affection. circumstaunce. In the makyng of it, ye shall diuide it thus, to make the Oracion more plaine, into three tymes. A presente tyme. ------ A tyme paste. A tyme to come. Eidolopoeia is that part of this Oracion, whiche maketh a persone knowne though dedde, and not able to speake. Eidolopoeia is called of Priscianus, a imitacion of talke 393 of any one, vpon a dedde manne, it is then called  Eidolopoeia, when a dedde man talketh, or communicacion made vpon a dedde manne. Eidolopoeia, when a dedde manne talketh, is set forthe of Euripides, vpon the persone of Polidorus dedde, whose spirite entereth at the Prologue of the tragedie. sonne, flie and saue thy self, from this ruine and fire: the enemies hath taken the walles, and loftie Troie is prostrate to the grounde. I would haue thought, I had died valiantlie inough to my countree, and my father Priamus, if with this my right hande, Troie had bee defended. weth in his thirde booke of Eneados. Iulia the wife of Pomper beyng dedde, spake to Pompe, preparyng his arme against Cesar, Eidolopoeia, Reade Lucane, in the beginnyng of his thirde booke. If that kyng Hiero were reduced fro his death, who was a aduauncer of the Romaine Empire, with what countenaunce, either Siracusa or Rome, might be shewed to hym, whom he maie beholde with his iyes. His countree brought to ruin, & spoiled, if that kyng Hiero should but enter Rome, Euen in the firste entryng, he should beholde the spoile of his countree. Brutus dedde. If it so wer, that Lucius Brutus, that noble and famous 394 manne were on liue, and before your presence: would he not vse this oracion: I Brutus, somtyme did banishe and cast out for crueltee, the state and office of kinges, by the horrible fact of Tarquinius, againste Lucretia, and all that name banished, but you haue brought in tyrauntes. I Brutus did reduce the Romain Empire, to a fredome and libertee: but you foolishly can not vphold and maintein, the same giuen to you. I Brutus, with the daunger of my life, haue saued my coun tree of Roome, but you without all daunger, lose it. againste nature, speache is feigned to bee giuen. Tullie vseth for a like example this, when he maketh Roome to talke againste cateline. No mischief hath been perpetrated, this many yeres, 395 but by thee Catiline, no pestiferous acte enterprised, whithout thee: thou a lone, for thy horrible murther perpetrated vpon the citee of Rome, for the spoile and robberies of their gooddes art vnpunished. Thou onelie haste been of that force and power, to caste doune all lawes and aucthoritee. Although these thinges were not to be borne, yet I haue borne them: but now thy horrible factes are come to soche an issue, that I feare thy mischiues. Wherefore leaue of Cateline and deminishe this feare from me, that I maie be in securitee Lucane the Poete, intreating of mightie and fearce warres, againste Pompei and Cesar, maketh Roome to vse this Prosopoeia againste Cesar. Quo tenditis vltra quo fertis mea signa viri, Si iure venitis si aues hucusq; licet. Prosopopoeia is properlie, when all thinges are faigned bothe the maners, the persone, as of Roome in this place. Troie might make, Troie being destroied. 396 What kyngdome can alwaies assure his state, or glory? What strength can alwaies last? What  397 power maie alwaies stande? The mightie Okes are somtyme caste from roote, the Ceadars high by tempestes falle, so bitter stormes dooe force their strength. Soft waters pearseth Rockes, and ruste the massie Iron doeth bryng to naught. So nothyng can by stregth so stande, but strength maie ones decaie: yea, mightie kingdoms in time decaie haue felt. Kingdomes weake haue rose to might, and mightie kyngdomes fallen, no counsaile can preuaile, no power, no strength, or might in lande. God disposeth Princes seates, their kyngdome there with standes. I knewe before the brickell state, how kyngdomes ruine caught, my iye the chaunge of fortune sawe, as Priamus did aduaunce his throne, by fauour Fortune gat, on other Fortune then did froune, whose kingdom did decaie, Well, now  398 I knowe the brickle state, that fortune hath no staie, all rashe her giftes, Fortune blind doeth kepe no state, her stone doth roule, as floodes now flowe, floodes also ebbe. So glory doth remaine, sometyme my state on high, was sette in Princelie throne, my porte and traine ful roiall was, a kyng my father also was, my housband scepter held. Troie and Phrigia serued his becke, many kynges his power did dreade, his wille their power did serue. The fame of Troie and Brute, his glorie and renoume, what landes knoweth not? But now his falle, all toungues can speake, so greate as glorie was, though kyngdomes stronge was sette, loftie Troie in duste prostrate doeth lye, in blood their glorie, people, kyng are fallen, no Quene more dolefull cause hath felte. The sorowes depe doe passe my ioyes, as Phebus light with stormes caste doune. Hectors death did wounde my hart, by Hectors might  399 Troie stiffe did stande, my comforte Hector was, Priamus ioye, of Troie all the life, the strength, and power, his death did wound me for to die, but alas my dolefull and cruell fate to greater woe reserueth my life, loftie Troie before me felle, sworde, and fire hath seate and throne doune caste. The dedde on heapes doeth lye, the tender babes as Lions praies are caught in bloode, before my sight, Priamus deare murdered 400 was, my children also slain, who roiall were, and princes mates. No Queene more ioye hath tasted, yet woe my ioyes hath quite defaced. My state alwaie in bondage thrall, to serue my enemies wille, as enemie wille, I liue or dye. No cruell force will ridde my life, onely in graue the yearth shal close my woes, the wormes shall gnawe my dolefull hart in graue. My hedde shall ponder nought, when death hath sence doune caste, in life I sought no ioye, as death I craue, no glorie was so wished as death I seeke, with death no sence. In prison depe who dolefull lieth, whom Fetters sore dooeth greue. Their dolefull state moste wisheth death, in dongion deepe of care my harte moste pensiue is, vnhappie state that wisheth death, with ioye long life, eche wight doeth craue, in life who wanteth smart? Who doeth not feele, or beare somtime, a bitter storme, to doleful tune, mirth full oft chaunged is, the meaner state, more quiet rest, on high, who climes more deper care, more dolefull harte doeth presse, moste tempestes hie trees, hilles,  & mountaines beare, valleis lowe rough stormes doeth passe, the bendyng trees doeth giue place to might by force of might, Okes mightie fall, and Ceders high ar ret from the roote. The state full meane in hauen hath Ancre caste, in surgyng seas, full ofte in vasne to saue the maste, the shippe Ancre casteth. representeth to the iye, that which he sheweth, so Priscianus defineth it: some are of that opinion, that descripcion is not to bee placed emog these exercises, profitable to Rhetorike. Because that bothe in euery Oracion, made vpon a Fable, all thynges therein conteined, are liuely described. And also in euery Narracion, the cause, the place, the persone, the time, the fact, the maner how, ar therin liuely described. But most famous and Eloquente men, doe place descripcion, in the nomber of these exercises. Descripcio serueth to these things, the person, as the Poete Lucane describeth Pompei & Cesar: the person is described, thynges or actes, tymes, places, brute beastes. Nec coiere pares, alter vergentibus annis In senium longo que toge, tranquilior vsu. Dedidicit. &c. Homer describeth the persone of Thersites, in the second booke of his Ilias. Homer setteth out Helena, describing the persone of Menalaus and Vlisses, in the fowerth booke of Ilias. Thynges are described, as the warres attempted by sea and lande, of Xerres. Lucan describeth the war of the Massilias against Cesar Thusidides setteth forthe in a descripcion, the warres on the sea, betwene the Corcurtians, and the Corinthians. Tymes are described, as the Spryng tyme, Sommer, Winter, Harueste, Daie, Night. Places are described, as Citees, Mountaines, Regions, Floodes, Hauens, Gardeines, Temples: whiche thynges are sette out by their commoditees, for Thusidides often tymes setteth forthe Hauens and Citees. Lucane also describeth at large, the places, by the whiche the armie of Cesar and Pompei passed. The descripcion of any man, in all partes is to bee described, in mynde and bodie, what he was. The acttes are to bee described, farre passed, by the presente state thereof, and also by the tyme to come. As if the warre of Troie, should be set forthe in a decripcion, it must b ee described, what happened before the Grecians arriued at Troie, and how, and after what sorte it was ouerthrowne, & what thing chaunced, Troie being destroid. So likewise of Carthage, destroied by the Romaines. Of Hierusalem, destroied by Titus Vespasianus, what admonicion thei had before: of what monsterous thynges happened also in that ceason: Of a Comete or blasyng Starre, and after that what followed. Lucane also setteth forthe the warres of Pompe and Cesar, what straunge and marueilous thynges fell of it. When Darius was dedde, Xerres his soonne did succede hym, who also tooke vpon him to finishe the warres, bego by his father Darius, against Grece. For the whiches warres, preperacion was made, for the space of fiue yeres, after that Xerres entered Grece, with seuen hundred thousande Persians, 401 and three hundred thousande of forrain power aided him that not without cause, Chronicles of aunciente tyme dooe shewe, mightie floodes to be dried vp of his armie. The mightie dominions of Grece, was not hable to receiue his houge, and mightie power, bothe by sea and lande: he was no small  402 Prince, whom so many nacions, so mightie people followed hym, his Nauie of Shippes was in nomber tenne hundred thousande, Xerres had a mightie power, but Xerres was a cowarde, in harte a childe, all in feare the stroke of battaile moued. In so mightie an armie it was marueile, the chiefe Prince and Capitaine to be a cowarde, there wanted neither men, nor treasure, if ye haue respecte to the kyng hymself, for cowardlinesse ye will dispraise the kyng, but his threasures beeyng so infinite, ye will maruaile at the plentie thereof, whose armie and infinite hoste, though mightie floodes and streames, were not able to suffice for drinke, yet his richesse  403 semed not spente nor tasted of. Xerxes hymself would be laste in battaile to fight, and the firste to retire, and runne awaie. In daungers he was fearfull, and when daunger was paste, he was stoute, mightie, glorious, and wonderfull crakyng, 404 before this hassarde of battaile attempted. He thought hym self a God ouer nature, all landes and Seas to giue place to hym, and puffed with pride, he forgatte hymself: his power was terrible, his harte fainte, whereupon his enteryng into Grece was not so dreaded, as his flight fro thence was shamfull, mocked and scorned at, for all his power he was driuen backe from the lande, by Leonides king of the Lacedemonians, he hauing but a small nomber of men, before his second battaile fought on the Sea: he sente fower thousande armed men, to spoile the riche and sumpteous temple of Apollo, at Delphos, from the whiche place, not one man escaped. After that Xertes entered Thespia, Platea, and Athenes, in the whiche not one man remained, those he burned, woorkyng his anger vpon the houses: for these citees were admonished to proue the maisterie in wodden walles, whiche was ment to bee Shippes, the power of Grece, brought into one place Themistocles, fauoryng their part, although Xerxes thought outherwise of Themistocles, then Themistocles perswaded  405 Xerxes to assaie the Grecians. Artemisia the Quene of Halicarnasis aided Xerxes in his battaile: Artemisia fought manfullie, Xerres cowardly shronke, so that vnnaturally there was in the one a manlie stomacke, in the other a cowardlie harte. The men of Ionia, that fought vnder Xerxes banner, by the treason of Themistocles, shrake from Xerxes, he was not so greate a terrour or dreade, by his maine hoste, as now smally regarded  & least feared, What is power, men, or money, when God chaungeth and pulleth doune, bothe the successe, and kyngdome of a Prince. He was in all his glorie, a vnmanlie, and a cowardly prince, yet for a time happie state fell on his side, now his might and power is not feared. He flieth awaie in a Fisher boate, whom all the worlde dreaded and obaied, whom all Grece was not able to recciue, a small boate lodgeth and harboureth. His owne people contemnd hym at home, his glorie fell, and life ingloriously ended, who whom God setteth vp, neither treason nor malice, power nor money can pull doune. Worthelie it is to be pondered of all Princes, the saiyng of Vespasianus Emperour of Rome, at a certain time a treason wrought and conspired against him, 406 the conspiratours taken, Vespasianus satte doune betwene theim, commaunded a sworde to be giuen to either of theim, and saied to them:  Nonne videtis fato potestatem dari. Dooe you not see? Power, aucthoritee, and regimente, by the ordinaunce of God, is lefte and giuen to princes: A singuler sentence, 407 to comforte all good Princes in their gouernemente, not to feare the poisoned hartes of men, or the traiterous hartes of pestiferous men. No man can pull doune, where God exalteth, neither power can set vp and extoll, where God displaseth or putteth doune: Soche is the state of Princes, and their kyngdomes. Thesis, is a certain question in consultacion had, to bee declaimed vpon vncertaine, notyng no certaine persone or thyng. As for example. Whether are riches chieflie to be sought for, in this life, as of all good thynges, the chief good. Whether is vertue the moste excellente good thynge in this life. Whether dooe the giftes of the mynde, passe and excelle the giftes and vertues of Fortune, and the bodie. Whether doeth pollicie more auaile in war, then stregth of menne. Who so will reason of any question of these, he hath nede with reason, and wittie consultacion to discourse, and to declaime vpon thesame. proposicion in question, a question vncertain, included with no certaintee, to any perticuler thyng. The Latine men doeth call it a question infinite, or vniuersall: Tullie in his booke of places called Topickes, doeth call Thesis, Propositum, that is to saie, a question, in determinacion. Priscianus calleth it posicionem, a proposicion in question on ether parte to be disputed vpon. questio finita, that is to saie, a question certaine notyng a certaine persone, or thyng, a certaine place, tyme, and so forthe. In this kinde of exercises, famous men of auncient time did exercise youth, to attain bothe wisedome and Eloquence therby, to make a discourse vpo any matter, by art of lerning Aristotle the famous Philosopher, did traine vp youthe, to be perfite in the arte of eloquence, that thei might with all copiousnes and ingenious inuencion handle any cause. Nothing doeth so moche sharpe and acuate the witte and capacit ee of any one, as this kinde of exercise. It is a goodly vertue in any one man, at a sodain, to vtter wittely and ingeniouslie, the iecrete and hid wisedome of his mynde: it is a greate maime to a profounde learned man, to wante abilitee, to vtter his exquisite and profounde knowledge of his mynds. thyng: is moche like to that Oracion, intreated of before, called a Common place. against any persone, conuicted of any crime, or worthie defence. Thesis is a reasonyng by question, vpon a matter vncertaine. Thesis, that is to saie, a questio generall is in two sortes, Ciuill. ------ Contemplatiue Questions Ciuill are those, that dooe pertaine to the state of a common wealth: and are daily practised in the common wealthe. As for example. Is it good to marie a wife. Is Vsurie lefull in a citee, or common wealthe. Is a Monarchie the beste state of gouernement. Is good educacion the grounde and roote, of a florishyng common wealthe. call Theoricas, because the matter of them is comprehended in the minde, and in the intelligence of man. The example. Is the soule immortall? Had the worlde a beginnyng? Is the heauen greater then the yearth? Simple. ------ Compounde. Is it profitable to declaime. Is vertue of more value then gold, to the coueitous man Doeth wisedome more auaile, then strength in battaile? Doe olde men or young men, better gouerne a common wealthe? Vnto the whiche you maie adde a Narracion, whiche is a exposicion of the thyng doen. To this in some parte of the Oracion, you maie putte in sertaine obieccions, as thus. Vpon this question: Is it good to marie a wife? In Mariage is greate care, and pensiuenesse of minde, by losse of children, or wife, whom thou loueste. There is also trouble of dissolute seruauntes. There is also greate sorowe if thy children proue wicked and dissolute. The aunswere to this obiection, will minister matter to declaime vpon. Since the tyme of all ages, and the creacio of the worlde, GOD hath so blessed his creacion, and meruailous workemanship in manne: as in all his other creatures, that not onelie his omnipotencie, is therby set forthe. But also from tyme to tyme, the posterit ee of men, in their ofspring and procreacion,  408 doe aboundantlie commonstrate thesame. The state of all kyngdomes and common wealthes: by procreacion derued, haue onelie continued on the face of the yearth, thereby many hundred yeres. How sone would the whole worlde be dissolued, and in perpetuall ruine, if that God from tymes and ages, had not by godlie procreacion, blessed this infinite 409 issue of mankinde. The dignitee of man in his creacion, sheweth the worthie succession, maintained by procreation. In vaine were the creacion of the worlde, if there were not as manne so excellente a creature, to beholde the creatour, and his meruailous creacion. To what vse were the Elementes and Heauens, the Starres and Planettes, all Beastes and Foules, Fisshe, Plantes, Herbes and trees, if men wer not, for mannes vse and necessitee, all thinges in the yearth were made and procreated. Wherein the Stoike Philosophers do note the excellencie of man to be greate: for saie thei,  Que in terris gignuntur omnia ad vsum hominum creari. To what vse then were all thynges, if man were not, for whose cause, vse, & necessitee these thynges were made. If a continuaunce of Gods procreacion were not, immediatlie a ruine and ende would ensue of thinges. What age remaineth aboue a hundred yeres? If after a hudred yeres, no issue wer to be, on the  410 face of the yearth, how sone wer kyngdoms dissolued, where as procreacion rooteth, a newe generacion, issue and ofspring, and as it were a newe soule and bodie. A continuaunce of lawes, a permanente state of common wealthe dooeth ensue. Though the life of manne be fraile, and sone cutte of, yet by Mariage, man by his ofspryng, is as it were newe framed, his bodie by death dissolued, yet by issue reuiued. Euen as Plantes, by the bitter season of Winter, from their flowers fadyng and witheryng: yet the seede of them and roote, vegitable and liuyng, dooe roote yerelie a newe ofspryng or flower in them. So Mariage by godlie procreacion blessed, doth  411 perpetually increase a newe bodie, and therby a vaste world, and infinite nacions or people. Xerxes the mightie kyng of Persia, vewing and beholding his maine and infinite hoste, weeped: who beyng demaunded, why he so did.  Doleo inquit post centum annos, neminem ex hijs superesse. It is a piteefulle and dolefull case, that after a hundred yeres, not one of these noble capitaines, and valiant soldiers to be left. But you will saie parauenture, mariage is a greate bondage, alwaies to liue with one. To followe pleasure, and the beastlie mocions of the mynde: what libert ee call you that, to liue in a godly, meane,  412 and Mediocritee of life, with thy spoused wife. There is no greater ioye, libertee, or felicitee, who so practiseth a dissolute life: whose loue and luste is kindeled, and sette on fire with a  413 harlotte, he followeth a brutishe societee. What difference is there, betwene them and beastes? The beaste as nature leadeth, he obaieth nature. Reason wanteth in beastes, manne then indued with reason, whiche is a guide to all excellencie how is it that he is not ruled by reason. Whom GOD hath clothed and beautified, with all vertue and all singularitee: If a godly conuersacion of life, moueth thee to passe thy daies without mariage, then must the mocions of thy minde, be tamed  414 and kepte vnder. Otherwise, execrable is thy purpose, and determinacio of the life. If thou hopest of loue of a harlot though thou enioye her otherwise, thou art deceiued. Bacchis the harlot, whom Terence maketh mencion of, in the persone of her self, sheweth the maners of all harlots to Antiphila, saiyng.  Quippe forma impulsi nostra nos amatores colunt: Hec vbi immutata est, illi suum animum alio conferunt. Nisi prospectu est interea aliquid nobis, deserte viuimus. For saieth she, the louer anamoured with our loue, and sette on fire therewith, it is for our beautie and fauour: but when beautie is ones faded, he conuerteth his loue to an other, whom he better liketh. But that we prouide for our selues in the meane season, w ee should in the ende liue vtterlie forsaked. But your loue incensed with one, whose maners and life contenteth you: so you bothe are linked together, that no calamit ee can separate you: who so hopeth loue of a  415 harlotte, or profite, he maie hope as for the fructe of a withered tree, gaine is all their loue, vice their ioye and delite. In vertue is libertee, in vertue is felicitee, the state of mariage is vertuous, there can be no greater bodage, then to obaie many beastly affections, to the whiche whoredome forceth hym vnto, Loue is fained, cloked amitee, a harte dissembled, many a mightie person and wise, hath been ouerthrowen by the deceiptes of harlottes: many a Citee plagued, many a region ouerthrowen for that mischief, to obaie many affections is a greate bondage. Who so serueth the beastlie affections of his mynde to that purpose, he must also as Hercules to Omphala  416 bee slaue, not onely to his owne will and affection: but to the maners, will, and exspectacton of the harlotte. So serued Thraso, and Phedria Thais, that Gorgious harlot, Antony and Iulius Cesar, Cleopatra, this is a bondage, to liue slaue from reason and all all integritee, to a monsterous rablemet  417 of vices, who so serueth a harlot, thei must learne this lesson.  Da mihi & after, giue and bryng. The women of Scithia, abhorryng the godlie conuersacion of mariage, with their housbandes, lefte theim, who in tyme ware so mightie, that thei repelled theim by force: thei called mariage not Matrimonie, but bondage. For, the chronicles doe testifie, thei became conquerours ouer many kynges, all Asia obaied them: thei did builde many a great citee, and for theire successe, thei might compare with many princes. These women were called Amazones afterwarde, the 418 order of their life was this, ones in the yere thei would enioye the compainie of a man: if it so were that thei had a man childe, the father to haue it, if a daughter, then thei possessed her, and foorthwith burned her right pappe: for thei were all Archers, and wonderfully excelled therein, but in the ende, thei came all to ruine. One of them, Thalestris their Quene  419 in the tyme of Alexander the Greate, came to Alexander, thinkyng that he had been, some monstrous man of stature: 420 whom, when she did beholde (for Alexander was of no mightie stature) did contemne hym, and offered him hand to hande to fight with hym. But Alexander like a wise Prince, saied to his men, if I should ouercome her, that were no victorie, nor manhoode againste a woman: and being ouercome, that  421 were greater shame, then commendacion in all my victories and conquestes, but afterwarde, there was a greate familiaritee betwene them. The adulterer and the adulteris, neuer prospereth, for many mischiues are reserued, to that wicked and beastly loue. Sincere loue is not rooted, frendship coloured: the sober and demure countenaunce, is moche to be commended in a chaste woman, whose breaste pondereth a chaste  422 life. The facte of the matrones of Rome, semeth straunge to be tolde, of Papirius a Senators soonne, beyng taken to the Senate house, of his father: the childe beyng indued with a singuler wit, harde many causes in the assemble, talked and consulted vpo, at his retourne home, his mother was inquisitiue of their consultacion, to heare somewhat. The childe was commaunded by his father, to vtter no secrete that he heard, wherevpon of a long tyme, he refused his mothers demaunde: but at the laste subtelie, he satisfied his mothers request.  423 Truth it is, my father willed me, to vtter no secret, you keping my counsaill, I will shewe you, it is concluded by the Senate house, that euery man shall haue twoo wiues, that is a straunge matter, saieth the mother: foorthwith she had communicacion with all the matrones of Roome, that could doe somewhat in this matter, thei also full willyngly assembled themselues, to let this purpose, to the Senate house, thei went to vtter, their swollen griues. The Senators were amased at their commyng, but in this matter bolde thei were, to enterprise that, whiche thei wer greued at. A Dame mose eloquente then all the reste, and of stomacke more hardie, began  424 in these woordes. Otherwise then right, we are iniuriously handled, and that in this assemble, that now we should be caste of and neclected: that whereas it is concluded in this counsaile, that euery manne should haue twoo wiues, more meter it were, that one woman should haue twoo housbandes. Straunge it was in the Senators eares soche a request, whereupon a proofe made how that rumour rose, Papirius was found the aucthor, who tolde before the Senate, his mother alwaies inquisitiue to knowe that, whiche he should not tell, and thereupon he faigned that, whiche he might better tell. It is to be supposed the Senators mused thereat, and the matrones of Rome went home ashamed: but their secrete cogitacion of minde was manifest, what willingly in hart thei wished. What greater felicitee can there bee, then in a vnit ee of life, the housebande to liue with his wife. The beastes in their kinde, doe condemne mannes brutishe affections herein: there is no facte that sheweth a man or woman, more like to beastes, then whoredome. But you will saie, many calamit ees happeneth in mariage? Fortunne herein is to bee blamed, and not mariage, if any misfortune happeneth to manne therein, the felicit ee and  425 quiet state that any man enioieth thereby. The discrete eleccion is therein approued, in the state it self, nothyng can bee founde worthie reprehension, if a man will impute the bitter stormes of life to mariage: whatseouer happeneth, our owne reason maie iudge contrary. Place before thy iyes all the affaires, and occupacions of this life, bee all tymes pleasaunte to the housebande man, many a colde storme perceth his bodie, and many a mightie tempeste, dooeth moiest hym and greue hym. Sommer is not the tyme, to caste his seede in the grounde, or implowyng to occupie hymself: shall he therfore leaue his housebandrie, or doeth he rather neclecte it, his diligence therein is the more, and labour more industrious. From whence commeth the tempeste, the stormes and bitter seasons: From his house, from his wife, from his art and occupacion, all those thynges by violence are expelled from the aire. No state of life is able to giue riches, healthe, or securit ee to his state. There hath been princes and Emperours, nedie,  426 full of infirmitees and sickenes, in daungerous state, oppressed with many calamitees: was their dignitie and office, the cause of their calamitees? No, God tempreth the state of euery one, how, and after what sorte to possesse thesame. Some are fulle fortunate in Mariage, if Mariage were of necessitee 427 the cause, then all should be onely fortunate, or onely vnfortunate: then in mariage is not the cause, if in marige the maners doe disagree, and loue is extinguished, blame thyn own maners, thy choise, and thy eleccion. The Mariner that passeth  428 the daungerous Seas, and by dreadfull tempestes, and huffyng waues is alwaies in perille, and many often tymes drouned. The Marchaunt lesyng his marchaundise by shipwrack,  429 shall thei impute the daunger and losse, to their wife at home? Or doe the Mariners leaue for all these tempestes, their arte of Nauigacion? Or the owner breake his shippe? Or the Marchaunt proue no aduentures, because of his losse, and many haue been of this sort drouned. No. But more earnestlie  430 thei dooe assaie theim selues thereto. Because warre spoileth many a man of his life, doe Princes therefore, leaue to moue armour againste the enemie, but because, who so in the defence of his countree, dieth manfullie, is worthelie aduaunced, and in perpetuall memorie, no daunger is refused, because euill thynges happeneth in life, is the state of good thynges to be auoided and eschued. Were it not vnsemelie, if housebande men, for no storme or tempeste, doe leaue their state, their laborious and rough codicion of life, nor the shipman his arte of Nauigacion, because he seeth many drouned venteryng thesame, and he hymself often tymes in daunger, nor the soldiour or capitain, their perilous condicion of life, doe leaue for daunger. Should Mariage bee lesse sette by, because alwaies riches and quietnes happeneth not. any man, and a cause to blame mariage. You your self are borne to dye, thei also by death obaye likewise Nature, this is the Lawe of Nature ones to dye, 431 whiche you seeme to blame. Then the death of thy wife and childre, is not the blame in Mariage. What is the cause that you dye? Natures imbecillit ee and weakenes, then in theim Mariage is not the cause: Nature in her firste molde hath so framed all, wherefore doe you ascribe that to mariage, that is founde faultee in Nature. Thei die that marie not, what infirmitie, daunger or peril happeneth to any in mariage, as sharpe and perilous, doe molest and torment the other. If any manne by death, leaseth a right honeste wife, clothed with all chastitee, demurenesse, sobrietee, and also with all singularitee of vertue adorned: he hath loste a rare treasure, a iewell of  432 price, not in all to bee founde. Did you loue your wife, that was so goodlie, so honeste and vertuous: there was greate cause saie you, for her vertuous sake, God hath chosen her fro a mortall creature, to immortalitee, with her it can not bee better. There is no cause why you should blame mariage, for the losse of her, or of thy children, or for the losse of thee, she to blame mariage. If for thy owne sake, this sorowe bee,  Est seipsum amantis non amici, it is then of a self loue, to thy self, not for her cause: for I muste aunswere as Lelius did to Affricanus, Cum ea optime esseactu quis neget, quid est quod no assecuta est immortalitatem. Who can deny saieth he, but that with her it can not bee better? What is it that she hath not attained. Immortalit ee. She was vertuous, chaiste, sober, descerete, of behauiour womanlie: for her vertues beloued. Well, now she hath immortalitee and blesse, are you sorie thereat, that were enuious. Did you loue her liuyng, loue her also departed, her vertuous shewed vnto vs, her immortalitee. dye before theim. If thou leaue them riches, hope not that thy riches shalbe a staie to theim, though thei bee innumerable: a wretched, a miserable executour, wasteth and destroieth oftentymes, the 433 fruictes of thy trauaile, who reioyseth more of thy death, then of thy life. Or thy childrens father in Lawe, shall spoile and spende with a merie harte, that whiche thou haste long terauailed for. Staie thy self and thyne vpon Gods prouidence, for it hath been seen, many a riche widowe, with infinite  434 treasure lefte, to her children also like porcions descendyng: afterwarde bothe wife and children, haue been brought to miserie and beggerlie state. Otherwise, poore children committed to the prouidence of God, and vertuouslie brought vp, and the wife in like state, yet thei haue so passed their daies, that thei haue rose to a goodlie state. S ee that thy richesse bee not iniuriouslie gotten by falshode, by liyng, by vsurie, if it so be, then Male parta male dilabuntnr. That is this, gooddes euill gotte, euill spente, soche riches neuer giue d eepe roote to their ofspryng. That is an euill care, by a iniurious care, to purchase thynges and gooddes wickedlie. Also mariage taketh awaie widowhed, and doeth repare with a newe freshe mariage, the lacke and priuacion of the 435 other. She that was by death left a widowe, mariage again hath coupled her to a newe housbande: and doeth restore that whiche death tooke awaie. That that death dissolueth and destroieth, mariage increaseth, augmeteth, and multiplieth. Bee it so, but mariage is a painfull life, it forceth euery one to trauaile, to vpholde and maintaine his state, I commende not the idell life, neither a life occupied to no vertuous ende. Nature moueth euery manne to loue hymself and his, so thy care and paine be to a godlie purpose. It is commendable. It is the duetie of euery man, as his power, witte, and industrie is able, to emploie thereto his cogitacion. To laboure for thy wife, whom thou loueste, and deare children, thy laboure is pleasure, the ioye easeth thy labour. To behold thy self in thy children, thei beyng vertuouslie broughte vp, it is a goodlie comfort, to liue with a chaste woman, sober and continente, 436 her vertues be a continuall pleasure, a passyng ioye. In mariage ought to be greate deliberacion, whom thou chosest to thy continuall compainie or felowshippe, her life paste well knowen, her parentes and kindrede how honeste and vertuous, her maners, her fame, how commendable, her countinaunce  437 sober, a constaunt iye, and with shamefastnes beautified, a mouthe vttering fewe woordes discretlie. She is not to be liked, who no vertuous qualitees in her educacio, beutifieth and adorneth, the goodlie qualitees sheweth, the well framed and nurtured mynde. These thynges maie be sufficiente, to sheweth what excellencie is in mariage and how necessarie it is, to the procreacion and preseruacio of mankind. A Oracion either in the defence of a Lawe, or againste a Lawe. Oracion maie b ee made in the defence of it: or matter maie be suppeditated, to inuaigh by force of argument againste it. Although the lawe alleged be in maner the whole cause, bicause it doeth cotain al the matter included in the oracion. In this Oracion, the persone is induced to be spoken vppon, vnknowne, vncertaine: wherefore it is to be placed, rather in the state and forme of consultacion, and to b ee examined with iudgement. The induccion of a Lawe, is in twoo sortes. A confirmacion of any olde Lawe, or a confutacion. As for example. The Ciuill Lawe doeth well commende, bondmen to be manumised, that is, to be made free. The lawe is herein to be praised, that willeth the cousail of the parentes & frendes, to be knowne before the contracte. Vpon a Lawe alledged, worthelie matter maie rise, waighyng the godlie ende, whereunto the Lawe was firste inuented, decreed and stablished, what profite thereof ensueth and foloweth. What it is to vertue a mainteiner, otherwise if it be not profitable? What moued any one to frame and ordain soche a Lawe, as was to a common wealthe vnprofitable, to vertue no aider, if it were a profitable Lawe and godlie, it is as Demosthenes saieth, of God inuented, though by famous 438 wise, and godlie menne, stablished and decr eed. Good Lawes tempereth to all states equitee and iustice, without fauour or frendship, no more to the one then the other. The order to make an Oracion by a lawe, is in this sort. First, make a prohemiu or beginning to enter your matter. In the seconde place, adde a contrary to that, whiche you will entreate vpon. Then shewe it lawfull. Iuste. Profitable. Possible. contradiction or obiection: and to that make an answere or solucion. adultrie to bee punished with death, no iudgement giuen thereupon. 439 Lidia, and a lawe giuer to the Athenians: by whose Lawes and godlie meanes, the Athenians were long and prosperouslie gouerned. Emong many of his lawes, this Solon set forthe againste adulterers.  Fas esse deprehendenti m aechum in ipso adulterio interficere : it shalbee lawfull saieth he, who so taketh an adulterer in his beastlie facte, to kill hym. Solon beyng a wise man, was more rigorous and cruell, in this one Lawe, then he ought to be. A meruailous matter, and almoste vncredible, so wise, so noble and worthy a Lawe giuer, to bruste out with soche a cruell and bloodie lawe, that without iudgement or sentence giuen, the matter neither proued nor examined, adulterie to be death. Wherefore, reason forceth euery manne, to Iudge and ponder with hymself, that either adulterie is a moste horrible vice, moste 440 beastlie  & pestiferous, and not mete to tary vpon the censure, and sentence of a Iudge: or Solon was not so wise, discrete, and a politike persone, but a rashe and fonde lawe giuer, that in soche a terrible voice, he should burste out, as adulterie so horrible, as not worthie to be pondered, examined and boulted of in Iudgemente. The Athenians receiued that Lawe, thei did also obaie his other lawes. Their dominions thereby in felicitee was gouerned: there was no populous nomber of adulterers, to let that Lawe, thei liued moste godlie, a straunge worlde, a rare moderacion of that age and people. Plato the godlie Philosopher, who lefte in his woorkes, and  441 monumentes of learnyng, greate wisedome and also godlie Lawes in his bookes: intiteled vpon Lawes, and gouernement of a common wealth, did not passe by in silence, to giue and ordain a Lawe against adulterie. Who also as it semed Iudged adulterie as moste horrible and detestable, in his. ix. booke  de Legibus. This is the Lawe. Adulteram deprehensam impune occidi a viro posse. The adultrous woman saith he, taken in the crime, her housbande maie without daunger of death, or feare of punishement slea her. A straunge matter twoo so noble, so famous for wisedome, to make adulterie present death, no Iudgement or sentence of Magistrate, procedyng to examime and iudge, vpon the state of the cause. A man maie saie, O goodlie age, and tyme in vertue tempered, eche state as seemeth brideled and kepte vnder, and farre fro voluptuousnes remoued. There was no stewes or Baudes houses, where soche Lawes and Lawmakers were. Sobriet ee was in maides, and chastitee harboured in matrones and wedded wiues, a harte inuiolable to honeste conuersacion. Where adulterie is cutte of, there many detestable vices, 442 and execrable purposes are remoued. Cato the sage Peere of Rome, indued with like seuerit ee, did fauour that lawe and highlie extolled it. Although adulterie bee a detestable vice horrible, yea, although it be worthie death, better it were by iudgemente, and the sentence of the Magistrate, the faute to 443 bee determined: then at the will of euery manne, as a Lawe by death to bee ended, the common wealthe shalbee in more quiet state, when the horrible factes of wicked menne, by the  444 Lawe made worthie of deathe: are neuerthelesse by a liuelie Lawe, whiche is the Iudge, pronounced and condemned, accordyng to the Lawe. Els many mischiues might rise in all kyngdomes and common wealthes, vnder a colour of lawe, many a honeste persone murthered: and many a murtherer, by cloke of a Lawe, from daunger saued. In Rome somtime a Lawe there was ordained againste adulterie, whiche was called  Lex Iulia, this Lawe Octauius Augustus set foorthe, The Lawe was thus, Gladio iussit animaduertim in adulteros The lawe commaunded adulterers to be hedded. The chronicles of aunciente tymes herein doe shew, and the decr ees of auncient elders also, how horrible a thing adulterie is, when thei punishe it with death. Who knoweth not emog the Israelites, and in the olde lawe thei wer stoned to death. Well as Magistrates are in common wealthes remoued, or as times chaunge, lawes also are chaunged and dissolued: and as the Prouerbe is, Lex vt Regio, the Lawes are accordyng to the Region. Afterwarde Valerius Publicola, a man ascendyng to high nobilit ee of honour, and fame emong, the Romaines gaue this Lawe. Qua neminem licebat indicta causa  445 necare. By this lawe it was not lefull, any manne to be put to death, their cause not examined in Iudgemente, this was a goodlie Lawe. Then afterwarde, Lawe giuers rose in the common wealth, that with more facilitee tolerated that vice, then wickednesse flowed, adulterie not punished by death. And sence that, the Romaine Empire, wrapped and snared with soche mischiues hath decaied, in fame, nobilit ee and vertue. Many a parte of their dominion plagued, deuoured, and destroied. The good and godlie menne, nede not to feare any  446 Lawe godlie, their life beyng in vertue and godlines nurtured. The terrible sentence of a lawe, forceth the good and godlie, to perseuere and continue in godlines. The terrible sentence  447 of a Lawe, cutteth of the wicked enterprises of pestiferous menne. Vice where lawe is not to correcte, will inure it  448 self by custome as a Lawe, or borne and tolerated againste a Lawe. Therefore as adulterie without Iudgemente, to bee punished worthie of death is vngodlie: so it ought not to bee passed ouer, or tolerated in any Region or common wealth, as no lawe seuerely to punishe thesame.  449  herein, yea, and though thei be vices horrible, yet thei ar not determined, with out the sentece of the Magistrate and Iudge. But this cruell Lawe of Solon, doeth repugne all lawes, stablished  450 in all Citees and common wealthes. And sithe the lawe is of hymself vniuersall, with equit ee, giuing and tempering to all states. Fonde muste that Lawe bee of Solon, whiche rashely, without consideracion of iudgement doeth procede, no man ought in his own cause, to be his own iudge or Magistrate. This is argument sufficient to confounde the lawe of Solon. All Lawes are repugnaunte to that, because with Iudgement thei procede against vices moste pestiferous. In common wealthes Theft is by lawe, pronounced worthie of  451 death, whereupon also the Magistrate and Iudge, determineth the matter, and heareth of bothe the action of the case, before he condempneth, so in all other mischiues. But you maie saie, many mischiues riseth of adulterie. Although it so be, the Iudge determineth vpon Murder, whiche is in like sort horrible, soche also as dooe seeke to caste into perill their countree, and by treason to destroie thesame, Iudgemente proceadeth by determinacion of the Lawe and Iudge. And so in all other wicked factes, and mischiuous enterprises, the Iudgement in euery cause procedeth, as Lawe 452 and right willeth, from the mouthe of the Iudge, he beyng a liuelie Lawe, to the Lawe written. The cruell Lawe of Solon, is like to the phantasie and wille of a tyraunte, who, as phantastie and will leadeth, murdereth at his pleasure, whose will is alwaies a sufficient Lawe to hymself, as who should  453 saie, so I wille, so I commaunde, my wille shall stande for a Lawe: but godlie lawes doe iustlie, accordyng to reason and vertue, tempereth the cause of euery man. No godlie Lawe, maketh the accuser his owne Iudge. 454 the malefactour, nor suspicion seing that, accordyng to lawe, the fact is punished, and as Demosthenes saieth, twoo thynges moued the wise Elders to make Lawes, that the wicked should bee hindered, and cutte of from their purpose, and that good men seyng by a lawe, the actes of pestiferous men kepte vnder, by the terrour of them, are afraied to commit the like facte. This was euen accordyng to lawe. The terrible sentence of a law executed, vpon moste wicked persones, doe kepe vnder many a mischiuous enterprise, whiche through the dolefull and lamentable ende of the wicked, doe driue and force all other to all godlines. is ended accordyng to law. Vertue thereby vpholded, when by order of lawe, vice is condempned. The malifactour hath no excuse, all staie and colour remoued, the accuser by iuste Lawe pleatcth, when the law is thereby supported and saued. And herein a greate parte of Iustice is placed, when the fauour of the Iudge or frendship, is onely on the cause, the persone neclected, that is Iustice, to giue to euery one his owne. the Iustice of godlie lawes, vertue is in high price aduaunced, vice by the open sentence, and manifeste profe conuicted, the malefactour shall be knowen, the sincere and godlie deliuered, and from tyme to tyme maintained. Lawes as thei be vniuersall so thei openlie ought to giue sentence. did in this lawe, it were not possible, any common wealthe to florishe therby. Therefore in Iudgemente ought the cause of euery one to be pleated and examined, that thereby all suspicion  & greuous enormitees, maie be put of. Vice is not therefore tolerated, because for a tyme, Iudgemente ceaseth, but hereupon vices are more depely rooted out, all people knowyng the determinacion of the lawe, and the manifest sentece of the Iudge heard. A terrour ensueth to al malefactours and pestiferous men, good men are incensed to all godlines, whe vice by Lawe is condempned, cutte of, and destroied. Good menne by Lawe and aucthoritee, vpholded and maintained. This is the state of good lawes, by order to procede, the cause in Iudgemente examined, the facte proued, 455 vertue in any persone vpholded, vice in all caste doune and defaced, so there is good Lawe, as Demosthenes saieth, sincere Iudge, and sentence inuiolable.  
