 Broker for the vtteraunce of garishe toyes, but a corrupte Merchaunte for the sale of deceyptfull vvares. For ansvvere heereof it is moste true (and I call Heauen and Earth too vvitnesse) that I neuer receyued of the Printer, or of anye other, one grote or pennie for the firste Copyes of these Posyes. True it is that I vvas not vnvvillinge the same shoulde bee imprinted: And that not of a vaineglorious desyre too bee thought a pleasaunt Poet, neyther yet of a lyghte minde too bee counted a cunning Louer. Forthough in youth I vvas often ouerhardie too put my name in Ballaunce of doubtfull iudgementes, yet novve I am become so bashfull that I coulde rather bee content too leese the prayse of my follyes, than too hazarde the misconceyte of the graue and graye headed Iudges. But too confesse a truthe vntoo you right reuerende (vvith vvhome I maye not dissemble in cases vvhiche so generally doe touche all menne) I vvas the rather contented too see them imprinted for these sundrie considerations. First, for that I haue seene dyuerse Authours, (both learned and vvell learned) vvhich after they haue both reformed their liues, and conuerted their studies, haue not yet disdeyned to reade the Poems vvhich they let passe their pennes in youth. For it seemeth vntoo mee that in all ages Poetrie hath beene not onely permitted, but also it hath beene thought a right good and excellent qualitie. Next vnto this, I haue alvvayes bene of opinion, that it is not vnpossible eyther in Poemes or in Prose too vvrite both compendiously, and perfectly in our Englishe tongue. And therefore although I chalenge not vnto my selfe the name of an English Poet, yet may the Reader finde oute in my vvrytings, that I haue more faulted in keeping the olde English vvordes ( quamuis iam obsoleta ) than in borovving of other languages, such Epithetes and Adiectiues as smell of the Inkhorne. Thirdly, as I seeke aduauncement by vertue, so vvas I desirous that there might remaine in publike recorde, some pledge or token of those giftes vvhervvith it hath pleased the Almightie to endue me: To the ende that thereby the vertuous might bee incouraged to employ my penne in some exercise vvhich might tende both to my preferment, and to the profite of my Countrey. For many a man vvhich may like mine outvvarde presence, might yet haue doubted vvhether the qualityes of my minde had bene correspondent to the proportion of my bodie. Fourthly, bicause I had vvrittu sundry things vvhich coulde not chuse but content the learned and Godlye Reader, therefore I hoped the same should serue as vndoubted proofe, that I had layde aside vanities, and delighted to exercise my penne in morall discourses, at least the one passing (cheeke by cheek) vvith the other, muste of necessitie persuade both the learned, and the light minded, that I coulde as vvell sovve good graine, as graynes or draffe. And I thought not meete (beeing intermingled as they vvere) to cast avvay a vvhole bushell of good seede, for tvvo or three graynes of Darnell or Cockle. Lastly, I persuaded my selfe that as in the better sort of the same I shoulde purchase good lyking vvith the honourable aged: So euen in the vvorst sorte, I might yet serue as a myrrour for vnbrydled youth, to auoyde those perilles which I had passed. For little may he do vvhich hath escaped the rock or the sandes, if he cannot vvaft vvith his hande to them that come after him. These considerations (right reuerend) did first moue me to consent that these Poemes shoulde passe in print. For recapitulation vvhereof, and to ansvvere vnto the obiections that may bee giuen: I say to the first that I neither take example of vvanton Ouid, doting Nigidius, nor foolish Samocratius. But I delight to thinke that the reuerend father Theodore Beza, vvhose life is vvorthily become a lanterne to the vvhole vvorlde, did not yet disdaine too suffer the continued publication of such Poemes as he vvrote in youth. And as he termed them at last Po emata castrata , So shal your reuerend iudgements beholde in this seconde edition, my Poemes gelded from all filthie phrases, corrected in all erronious places, and beautified vvith addition of many moral examples. To the seconde, although I be sometimes constreyned for the cadence of rimes, or per licentiam Pocticam , to vse an ynkehorne terme, or a straunge vvord: Yet hope I that it shall be apparant I haue rather regarde to make our natiue language commendable in it selfe, than gay vvith the feathers of straunge birdes. To the thirde reason may be obiected, that if I vvere so desirous to haue my capacitie knovvne, I shoulde haue done much better to haue trauelled in some notorious peece of vvorke, vvhich might generally haue spred my commendation. The vvhich I confesse. But yet is it true that I must take the Foord as I finde it: Sometimes not as I vvoulde, but as I may And since the ouersight of my youth had brought mee farre behinde hande and indebted vnto the vvorld, I thought good in the meane time to pay as much as I had, vntill it might please God better to inable me. For commonly the greediest creditor is appeased, if he see his debitor vvilling to pay vvhu he hath any thing. And therefore being busied in martiall affayres (vvhereby also I sought some aduauncement) I thought good to notifie vnto the vvorlde before my returne, that I coulde as vvell persuade vvith Penne, as pearce vvith launce or vveapon: So that yet some noble minde might be incouraged both to exercise mein time of peace, and to emploie mee in time of seruice in vvarre. To the fourth and last considerations, I had alledged of late by a right reuerende father, that although in deede out of euerie floure the industrious Bee may gather honie, yet by proofe the Spider thereout also sucks mischeeuous poyson. VVherevnto I can none othervvise ansvvere, but that he vvho vvill throvv a stone at euerie Dogge vvhich barketh, had neede of a great satchell or pocket. And if the learned iudgements and honest mindes doe both construe my doings aright, and take therein either councell or commoditie, then care I the lesse vvhat the vvicked conceyue of my conceytes. For I esteeme more the prayse of one learned Reader, than I regard the curious carping of ten thousande vnlettered tattlers. To conclude (right reuerend) as these considerations did specially moue me at first to consent to the imprinting of these posies, so novve haue I yet a further consideration vvhich moueth mee most earnestly to sue for this second edition or publishing of the same. And that is this. I vnderstande that sundrie vvell disposed mindes haue taken offence at certaine vvanton vvordes and sentences passed in the fable of Ferdinando leronimi , and the Ladie Elinora de Valaseo , the vvhich in the first edition vvas termed The aduentures of master F. I. And that also thervvith some busie coniectures haue presumed to thinke that the same vvas indeed vvritten to the scandalizing of some vvorthie personages, vvhom they vvoulde seeme therby to knovv. Surely (right reuerend) I smile to see the simplicitie of such, vvho being indeed starke staring blind, vvould yet seeme to see farre into a milstone. And the rather I scorne their rash iudgements, for that in talking vvith. xx. of them one after another, there haue not tvvo agreed in one coniecture. Alas, alas, if I had bene so foolishe as to haue passed in recitall a thing so done in deede, yet all the vvorld might thinke me verie simple if I vvoulde call Iohn, Iohn, or Mary, Mary. But for the better satisfying of all men vniuersally, I doe here protest vnto you (reuerend) euen by the hope of my saluation, that there is no liuing creature touched or to be noted thereby. And for the rest you shall find it novv in this second imprinting so turquened and turned, so clensed from all vnclenly vvordes, and so purged from the humor of inhumanitie, as percase you vvoulde not iudge that it vvas the same tale. For although I haue bin heretofore contented to suffer the publication thereof, only to the ende men might see my Methode and maner of vvritng: yet am I novve thus desirous to set it forth eftsoones, to the ende all men might see the reformation of my minde: And that all suspitions may be suppressed and throughly satisfied, by this mine vnfeined protestation vvhich I make vnto you in that behalfe. Finally, vvere it not that the same is alreadie extant in such sort as hath moued offence, I should rather be cotent to cancel it vtterly to obliuion, than thus to returne it in a nevv patched cote. And for full proofe of mine earnest zeale in Gods seruice, I require of you (reuerende) most instantly, that if hereby my skill seeme sufficient to vvade in matters of greater importance, you vvill then vouchsafe to employ mee accordingly. Surely you shall finde me no lesse readie to vndertake a vvhole yeares trauaile in anie vvorke vvhich you shall thinke me able to ouercome, than I haue beene vvilling heretofore to spende three houres in penning of an amorous Sonnet. Euen so being desirous that all men generally (and you especially) should conceiue of me as I meane, I haue thus farre troubled your lerned eies vvith this plaine Epistle, vvritten for my purgation, in matters vvhiche (else) might both haue offended you, and giuen great batterie to the ramparts of my poore credite. The God of peace vouchsafe to gouerne and product you, and me, and all his, in quiet of conscience, and strength of spirit Amen. From my poore house at VValtamstovv in the Forest, this last day of Ianuarie. 1574. Gas coigne Esquire by birth, and Souldiour by profession, wisheth increase of knowledge in all vertuous exercises. here (as you see) published in print suche Posies and rymes as I vsed in my youth, the which for the barbarousnesse of the stile may seeme worthlesse, and yet for the doubtfulnesse of some darke places they haue also seemed (heretofore) daugerous. So that men may iustly both condemne me of rashnesse, and wonder at my simplicitie in suffering or procuring the same to be imprinted. A yong man well borne, tenderly fostered, and delicately accompanied, shall hardly passe ouer his youth without falling into some snares of the Diuell, and temptations of the flesh. But a man of middle yeares, who hath to his cost experimented the vanities of youth, and to his perill passed them: who hath bought repentance deare, and yet gone through vvith the bargaine: who seeth before his face the tyme past lost, and the rest passing away in post: Such a man had more neede to be well aduised in his doings, and resolute in his determinations. For with more ease and greater fauour may we answere for tenne madde follies committed in grene youth, than one sober ouersight escaped in yeares of discretion. Lycurgus the good princely Philosopher, ordeyned that if an olde man perceiuing a yong man to commit any dishonestie, did not rebuke but suffer him: the aged shoulde be chastifed, and the yong man should be absolued. All this rehearsed and considered, you may (as I say) growe in some doubt, whether I were worse occupied in first deuising, or at last in publishing these toies  & pamphlets and much the rather, for that it is a thing commonly seene, that (nowe adayes) fewe or no things are so well handled, but they shall bee carped at by curious Readers, nor almost any thing so well ment, but may bee muche misconstrued. And heerewithall I assure my selfe, that I shall bee generally condemned as a man verie lightly bent, and rather desyrous to continue in the freshe remembraunce of my follyes, than content too cancell them in obliuion by discontinuance: especially since in a house where many yong childre are, it hath bene thought better pollicie quite to quench out the fire, than to leaue any loose cole in the imbers, wherewith Babes may play and put the whole edifice in daunger. But my lustie youthes, and gallant Gentlemen, I had an intent farre contrarie vntoo all these supposes, when I fyrst permitmitted the publication heereof. And bycause the greatest offence that hath beene taken thereat, is least your mindes might heereby become enuenomed with vanities, therefore vnto you I will addresse my tale, for the better satisfying of common iudgements. And vnto you I will explane, that which being before mistically couered, and commonly misconstrued, might be no lesse perillous in seducing you, than greeuous euidence for to proue mee guiltie of condemnation. Then to come vnto the matter, there are three sortes of men which (beeing wonderfully offended at this booke) haue founde therein three maner of matters (say they) verie reprehensible. The men are these: curious Carpers, ignorant Readers, and graue Philosophers. The faults they finde are, Iudicare in the Creede: Chalke for Cheese: and the comon infection of Loue. Of these three sorts of men and matters, I do but very little esteeme the two first. But I deeply regarde the thirde. For of a verie troth, there are one kinde of people nowadayes which will mislyke any thing, being bred (as I thinke) of the spawne of a Crab or Creuish, which in all streames and waters will swimme eyther sidewayes, or flat backwards: and when they can indeede finde none other fault, will yet thinke Iudicare verie vntowardlye placed in the Creede. Or (beeing a simple Sowter) will finde fault at the shape of the legge: or if they be not there stopped, they wil not spare to step vp higher, and say, that Apelles paynted Dame Venus verie deformed or euill fauoured. Of this sort I make small accounte, bycause indeede they seeke a knotte in the Rushe, and woulde seeme to see verie farre in a Mylstone. There are also certaine others, who (hauing no skill at all) will yet be verie busie in reading all that may bee read, and thinke it sufficient if (Parrot like) they can rehearse things without booke: when within booke they vnderstande neyther the meaning of the Authour, nor the sense of the figuratiue speeches, I will forbeare to recyte examples by any of mine owne doings. Since all comparisons are odious I will not say how much the areignment and diuorce of a Louer (being written in ieast) haue bene mistaken in sad earnest. It shall suffice that the contentions passed in verse long sithence, betwene maister ( Churchyard and Camell , were (by a block- headed reader) costrued to be indeed a quarell betwene two neighbors. Of whom that one hauing a Camell in keping, and that other hauing charge of the Churchyard, it was supposed they had grown to debate, bicause the Camell came into the Churchyarde. Laugh not at this (lustie yonkers) since the pleasant dittie of the noble Erle of Surrey (beginning thus: In winters iust returne ) was also construed to be made indeed by a Shepeherd. VVhat shoulde I stande much in rehersall how the L.Vaux his dittie (beginning thus: I loth that I did loue ) was thought by some to be made vpo his death bed and that the Soulknill of M.Edwards was also written in extremitie of sicknesse. Of a truth (my good gallants) there are such as hauing only lerned to read English, do interpret Latin, Greke, French and Italian phrases or metaphors, eue according to their owne motherly conception and childish skill. The which (bicause they take Chalke for Cheese) shall neuer trouble me, whatsoeuer fault they finde in my doings. But the third sort (beeing graue Philosophers, and finding iust fault in my doings at the common infection of loue) I must needes alledge suche iuste excuse as may counteruayle their iuste complaynts. For else I shoulde remayne woorthie of a seuere punishment. They wysely considering that wee are all in youth more apt to delight in harmefull pleasures, than to disgest wholesome and sounde aduice, haue thought meete to forbid the publishing of any ryming tryfles which may serue as whetstones to sharpen youth vnto vanities. And for this cause, finding by experience also, how the first Copie of these my Posies hath beene verie much iuquired for by the yonger sort: and hearing likewise that (in the same) the greater part hath beene written in pursute of amorous enterpryses, they haue iustly conceyued that the continuance thereof hath beene more likely to stirre in all yong Readers a venemous desire of vanitie, than to serue as a common myrrour of greene and youthfull imperfections. VVherevnto I must confesse, that as the industrious Bee may gather honie out of the most stinking weede, so the malicious Spider may also gather poyson out of the fayrest floure that growes. And yet in all this discourse I see not proued, that either that Gardener is too blame which planteth his Garden full of fragrant floures: neyther that planter to be dispraysed, which soweth all his beddes with seedes of wholesome herbes: neyther is that Orchard vnfruitfull, which (vnder shew of sundrie weedes) hath medicinable playsters for all infirmities. But if the Chirurgian which should seeke Sorrell to rypen an Vlcer, will take Rewe which may more inflame the Impostume, then is hee more to blame that mistooke his gathering than the Gardener which planted aright, and presented store and choyse to be taken. Or if the Phisition will gather hote Perceley in stead of cold Endiue, shall he not worthily beare the burthen of his owne blame. To speake English it is your vsing (my lustie Gallants) or misvsing of these Posies that may make me praysed or dispraysed for publishing of the same. For if you (where you may learne to auoyd the subtile sandes of wanton desire) will runne vpon the rockes of vnlawfull lust then great is your folly, and greater will growe my rebuke. If you (where you might gather wholesome hearbes to cure your sundrie infirmities) will spende the whole day in gathering of sweete smelling Posies, much will be the time that you shal mispende, and much more the harme that you shall heape vpon my heade. Or if you will rather beblister your handes with a Nettle, than comfort your senses by smelling to the pleasant Marioram, then wanton is your pastime, and small will be your profite. I haue here presented you with three sundrie sortes of Posies: Floures, Hearbes , and VVeedes . In which diuision I haue not ment that onley the Floures are to be smelled vnto, nor that onely the VVeedes are to be reiected. I terme some Floures, bycause being indeed inuented vpon a verie light occasion, they haue yet in them (in my iudgement) some rare inuention and Methode before not commonly vsed. And therefore (beeing more pleasant than profitable) I haue named them Floures. The seconde (being indeede morall discourses and reformed inuentions, and therefore more profitable then pleasant) I haue named Hearbes. The third (being VVeedes) might seeme to some iudgements, neither pleasant nor yet profitable, and therefore meete to bee cast away. But as many weedes are right medicinable, so may you find in this none so vile or stinking, but that it hath in it some vertue if it be rightly handled. Mary you must take heede how you vse the. For if you delight to put Hemlocke in your fellowes pottage, you may chaunce both to poyson him, and bring your selfe in perill. But if you take example by the harmes of others who haue eaten it before you, then may you chaunce to become so warie, that you will looke aduisedly on all the Perceley that you gather, least amongst the same one braunch of Hemlock might anoy you. I assure you, my yong blouds, I haue not published the same to the intent that other men hereafter might be infected with my follies forepassed. For though it be a comfort in miserus habere confortem , yet is it small consolation to a fellon, to haue a Coyner hanged in his companie. And I assure you (although you will think it straunge) that I haue not caused them to bee imprinted for anie vaine delight which I haue (my selfe) therein conceyued. For the most of them being written in my madnesse, might haue yeelded then more delight to my frantike fansie to see them published than they now do accumulate cares in my minde to set them forth corrected: and a deformed youth had bene more likely to set them to sale long sithence, than a reformed man can be able now to protect them with simplicitie. The scope of mine intent, and the marke whereat I shoote is double. I meane grounded vpon two sundrie causes: the one that being indebted vnto the worlde (at the least fiue thousande dayes verie vainly spent) I may yeeld him yet some part of mine account in these Poemes. Wherein as he may finde great diuersitie both in stile and sense, so may the good bee incouraged to set mee on worke at last, though it were noone before I sought seruice. The other reason is, that bicause I haue (to mine owne great detriment) mispent my golden time, I may serue as ensample to the youthfull Gentlemen of England, that they runne not vpon the rocks which have brought me to shipwracke. Beware therefore, lustie Gallants, howe you smell to these Posies. And learne you to vse the talent which I haue highly abused. Make me your myrrour. And if hereafter you see me recouer mine estate, or reedifie the decayed walls of my youth, then beginne you sooner to builde some foundation which may beautifie your Pallace. If you see me sinke in distresses (notwithstanding that you iudge me quick of capacitie) then lerne you to mainteyne your selues swimming in prosperitie, and eschue betymes the whir lepoole of misgouernment. Finally, I beseech you, and coniure you, that you rather encourage me to accomplish some worthier trauaile, by seeing these Posies right smelled vnto than discourage me from attempting other labours, when I shall see these first fruites reiected or misused. I have corrected them from sundrie faultes. VVhich if they had not brought suspition in the first copie, be you then out of doubt you had neuer bene troubled with these seconde presents, nor persuaded to flourishe wisely with a two edged swoorde in your naked hands. But as I haue ment them well, so I craue of God, that they may both pleasure and profite you for the furtherance of your skill in any commendable enterprise. From my poore house at VValtamstow in the Forest the second of lanuarie. 1575 aduertisement of the Author witnesseth to the Romaines in his xv Chapter. And in his ninth Chapter of his first Epistle to the Corinthians, hee glorieth that hee coulde (as it were) transforme himself into all professions, therby to winne all kinde of men to God: saying that with the Iewes he became a Iew: with them that were vnder the law, he seemed also vnder the lawe: with the feeble, he shewed himselfe feeble. And to conclude, he became all things to all men, to the ende that hee might thereby winne some to saluation. My Schoolemaster which taught me Grammer, woulde alwayes say that some scholler she woonne to studie by strypes, some other by fayre meanes, some by promises, some other by prayses, some by vainglorie, and some by verie shame. But I neuer hard him repent him that euer he had persuaded any scholler to become studious, in what sort soeuer it were that hee woonne him. For whether the braue Gennet be broken with the bitte, or with the snaffle, whither he be brought in awe with a Spurre, or with a wand, all is one if he proue readie and well mouthed. Thus much I write (gentle Reader) to the ende that myne intent may appeare in publishing of these Posies. VVherein as there are many things morall, so are there also some verses more fauced with wantonnesse than with wisedome. And as there are some ditties which may please and delight the godly and grauer sort, so are there some which may allure the yonger sort vnto fond attempts. But what for that. Hath Terence bene forbidden to be read, bicause his Comedies are rehearsals of many madde prankes played by wanton youthes. No surely. Paracelsus , and sundrie other Phisitions and Philosophers, declare, that in euerie thing naturall there is to be founde Salt, Oyle, and Brimstone. And I am of opinion, that in euery thing which is written (the holy scriptures excepted) there are to be founde wisedome, follie, emulation, and detraction. For as I neuer yet saw any thing so clerkly handled but that therein might be found some imperfections: So coulde I neuer yet reade fable so ridiculous but that therein some morallitie might be gathered. And as the good writer shall be sure of some to bee maliced: so the bad shall neuer escape the byting tongues of slaunderers. But to returne to my purpose: If in the hardest flint there may be found sparkes of liuely fire, and the most knottie peece of Box, may be wrought to a fayre Doogen haste: let these fewe suffice to persuade thee, that I haue not procured the publication heereof to any ende, so much as that the youthful sort might therein take example, and the aged recreation. Nowe if any (misgouerning their owne wittes) doe fortune to vse that for a Spurre, which I had heere appoynted for a Brydle, I can none otherwise laniet it, but to say that I am not the first which hath bene misiudged. Truely (gentle Reader) I protest that I haue not ment heerein to displease any man, but my desire hath rather bene to cotent most men: I meane the diuine with godly Hymnes and Psalmes, the sober minde with morall discourses, and the wildest will with sufficient warning. The which if it so fall out, then shall I thinke my selfe right happie. And if it fall out otherwise, I shall yet neuer bee ashamed to become one of their corporation which reape floutes and reprehension for their trauayles. But bicause these Posies growe to a great bundell, and thereof also the number of louing lynes exceedeth in the Superlatiue, I thought good to aduertise thee, that the most part of them were written for other men. And out of all doubt, if euer I wrote lyne for my selfe in causes of loue, I haue written tenne for other men in layes of lust. For I counte greater difference betweene loue and lust, than there is diuersitie betweene witte and wisedome and yet witte and I did (in youth) make such a fray, that I feare his cosen wisedome will neuer become freendes with me in my age. VVell, though my folly bee greater than my fortune, yet ouergreat were mine vnconstancie, if (in mine owne behalfe) I shoulde compyle so many sundrie Songs or Sonets. I haue heard of an honest plaine meaning Citizen, who (being ouercharged with many matters in the lawe, and hearing of a common solicitor of causes in the Citie) came home to comfort his wife, and tolde hir that he had heard of one which dwelt at Billingsgate, that coulde helpe all men. Euen so (good Reader) I was a great while the man which dwelt at Billingsgate. For in wanton delightes I helped all men, though in sad earnest I neuer furthered my selfe any kinde of way. And by that it proceedeth, that I haue so often chaunged my Posie or worde. For when I did compile any thing at the request of other men, if I had subscribed the same with mine owne vsuall mot or deuise, it might haue bewrayed the same to haue beene of my doing. And I was euer curious in that behalfe, as one that was lothe to bewray the follies of other men. And yet (as you see) I am not verie daungerous to lay my selfe wide open in view of the worlde. I haue also sundrie tymes chaunged mine owne worde or deuise. And no meruaile: For he that wandereth much in those wildernesses, shall seldome continue long in one minde. VVell, it were follie to bewayle things which are vnposible to be recouered, sithence Had I wist doth seldome serue as a blasone of good vnderstanding. And therefore I will spende no more wordes in this Preface, but I pray thee to smell vnto these Posies, as Floures to comfort, Herbes to cure  , and Weedes to be auoyded . So haue I ment them, and so I beseech thee Reader to accept them. Farewell. in English, written at the request of Master Edouardo Donati. Signor Edouards , since promise is debt, and you (by the lawe of friendship) do burden me with a promise that I shoulde lende you instructions towards the making of English verse or ryme, I will assaye to discharge the same, though not so perfectly as I would, yet as readily as I may: and therwithall I pray you consider that Quot homines, tot Sententioe , especially in Poetrie, wherein (neuerthelesse) I dare not challenge any degree, and yet will I at your request aduenture to set downe my simple skill in such simple manner as I haue vsed, referring the same hereafter to the correction of the Laureate . And you shall haue it in these few poynts followyng. The first and most necessarie poynt that euer I founde m eete to be cosidered in making of a detectable poeme is this, to grounde it upon some fine inuention, for it is not inough to roll in pleasant woordes, nor yet to thunder in Rym, Ram, Ruff, by letter (quoth my master Chaucer) nor yet to abounde in apt vocables, or epythetes, unlesse the Inuention have in it also aliquid salis . By this aliquid salis , I meane some good and fine deuise, shewing the quicke capacitie of a writer: and where I say some  good and fine inuention, I meane that I would haue it both fine and good. For many inuentions are so superfine, that they are Vix good. And againe many inuentions are good, and yet not finely handled. And for a general forwarning: what Theame soeuer you do take in hande, if you do handle it, but tanquam in oratione perpetua , and never studie for some depth of deuise in ye Inuention, & some figures also in the handlyng thereof: it will appeare to the skilfull Reader but a tale of a tubbe. To deliver unto you generall examples it were almoste unpossible, sithence the occasions of Inuentions are (as it were) infinite: neverthelesse take in worth mine opinion, and percerve my furder meanyng in these few poynts. If I should undertake to wryte in prayss of a gentlewoman, I would neither praise hir christal eye, nor hir cherrie lippe, &c. For these things are trita & obvia . But I would either finde some supernatural cause where by my penne might walke in the superlative degree, or els I would undertake to aunswere for any imperfection that shee hath, and thereupon rayse the prayse of hir commendacion. Likewise if I should disclose my pretence in love, I would eyther make a straunge discourse of some intollerable passion, or finde occasion to please by the example of some historie, or discover my disquiet in shadowes per Allegoriam , or use the couertest meane that I could to auoyde the uncomely customes of commo writers. Thus much I adventure to deliver unto you (my freend) upon the rule of Inuention, which of all other rules is most to be marked, and hardest to be prescribed in certayne and infallible rules, neverthelesse to conclude therein, I would have you stand most upon the excellencie of your Inuention, & sticke not to studie deepely for some fine devise. For that beyng founde, pleasant woordes will follow well inough and fast inough. 2 Your Inuention being once deuised, take heede that neither pleasure of rime, nor varietie of deuise, do carie you from it: for as to use obscure & darke phrases in a pleasant Sonet, is nothing delectable, so to entermingle merie ieus in a serious matter is an Indecorum. 3 I will next advise you that you hold the iust measure wherwith you begin your verse, I will not denie but this may seeme a preposterous ordre: but bycause I couet rather to satisfie you particularly, than to vndertake a generall tradition, I wil not somuch stand vpon the manner as the matter of my precepts. I say then, remember to holde the same measure wherwith you begin, whether it be in a verse of sixe syllables, eight, ten, twelue, &c, and though this precept might seeme ridiculous vnto you, since euery yong scholler ran conceiue that he ought to continue in the same measure wherwith he beginneth, yet do I see and read many mens Poems now adayes, whiche beginning with the measure of xu. in the first line, & xuii. in the second (which is the common kinde of uerse) they will yet (by that time they haue passed ever a few uerses) fal into xuii. & fourtene, & sic de similibus , the which is either forgetfulnes or carelesnes. 4 And in your verses remembre to place every worde in his natural Emphasis or sound, that is to say in such wise, and with such length or shortnesse, eleuation or depression of sillables, as it is commonly pronounced or used; to expresse the same we have three maner of accents, grauis, lenis , & e circumflexa , the whiche I would english thus, the long accent, the short accent, & that whiche is indifferent: the graue accent is marked by this caracte, / the light accent is noted thus, \ & the circuflexe or indifferent is thus signified ~ the graue accent is drawe out oreleuate, and maketh that sillable long wherupo it is placed: the light accet is depressed or snatched up, and maketh that sillable short upon the which it lighteth:the circumflexe accent is indifferut, sometimes short, sometimes long, sometimes depressed & sometimes eleuate, For exaple of th'emphasis or natural sound of words, this word Treasure, hath the grave accent upo the first sillable, whereas if it shoulde be written in this sorte, Treasure, nowe were the second sillable long, & that were cleane contrarie to the comon vse wherwith it is pronounced. For furder explanation hereof, note you that comonly now a dayes in english rimes (for I dare not cal them English verses) we use none other order but a foote of two sillables, whereof the first is depressed or made short, & the second is elevate or made log: and that sound or scaning continueth throughout the verse, We have vsed in times past other kindes of Meeters: as for example this following: No wight in this world, that wealth can attayne, Vnlesse he beleue, that all is but vayne. measures that the Latinists do vse: and who so ever do peruse and well consider his workes, he shall finde that although his lines are not alwayes of one selfe same number of Syllables, yet beyng redde by one that hath vnderstanding, the longest verse and that which hath most Syllables in it, will fall (to the eare) correspondent unto that whiche hath fewest sillables in it: and like wise that whiche hath in it fewest syllables, shallbe founde yet to consist of woordes that have such naturall sounde as may seeme equall in length to a verse which hath many moe sillables of lighter accentes. And surely I can lament that we are fallen into suche a playne and simple manner of wryting, that there is none other foote vsed but one: wherby our Poemes may iustly be called Rithmes, and cannot by any right challenge the name of a Verse. But since it is so, let us take the forde as we finde it, and lette me set downe vnto you suche rules or precepts that euen in this playne foote of two syllables you wreste no woorde from his natural and vsuall sounde, I do not meane hereby that you may vse none other wordes but of two sillables, for therein you may vse discretion according to occasion of matter: but my meaning is, that all the wordes in your verse be so placed as the first sillable may sound short or be depressed, the second long or elvate, the third shorte, the fourth long, the fifth shorte, &c. For example of my meaning in this point marke these two verses: I understand your meanyng by your eye. Your meaning I vnderstand by your eye. In these two verses there seemeth no difference at all since the one hath the very selfe same woordes that the other hath, and yet the latter verse is neyther true nor pleasant, & the first verse may passe the musters. The fault of the latter verse is that this worde vnderstand is therein so placed as the graue accent falleth upo der, and therby maketh der, in this worde vnderstand to be elevated: which is contrarie to the naturall or vsual vnderstand, and not vnderstand. 5 Here by the way I thinke it not amisse to forewarne you that you thrust as few wordes of many sillables into your verse as may be: and hereunto I might alledge many reasons: first the most auncient English wordes are of one sillable, so that the more monasyllables that you vse, the truer Englishman you shall seeme, and the lesse you shall smell of the Inkehorne. Also wordes of many syllables do cloye a verse and make it unpleasant, whereas woordes of one syllable will more easily fall to be shorte or long as occasion requireth, or wilbe adapted to become circumflexe or of an indifferent sounde. 6 I would exhorte you also to beware of rime without reason: my meaning is hereby that your rime leave you not from your firste Inuention, for many wryters when they have layed the platforme of their inuention, are yet drawen sometimes (by ryme) to forget it or at least to alter it, as when they cannot readily finde out a worde whiche maye rime to the first (and yet continue their determinate Inuention) they do then eyther botche it up with a worde that will ryme (howe small reason soever it carie with it) or els they alter their first worde and so percase decline or trouble their former Inuention: But do you alwayes hold your first determined Inuention, and do rather searche the bottome of your braynes for apte wordes, than chaunge good reason for rumbling rime. 7 To help you a little with ryme (which is also a plaine yong schollers lesson) worke thus, whe you have set downe your first verse, take the last worde thereof and coumpt ouer all the wordes of the selfe same sounde by order of the Alphabete: As for example, the laste woorde of your firste line is care, to ryme therwith you haue bare, clare, dare, fare, gare, hare, and share, mare, snare, rare, stare,  & ware, &c. Of all these take that which best may serue your purpose, carying reason with rime: and if none of them will serue so, then alter the laste worde of your former verse, but yet do not willingly alter the meanyng of your Inuention. 8 You may use the same Figures or Tropes in verse which are used in prose, and in my iudgement they serue more aptly, and have greater grace in verse than they haue in prose: but yet therein remembre this old adage, Ne quid nimis , as many wryters which do not know the vse of any other figure than that whiche is expressed in repeticion of sundrie wordes beginning all with one letter, the whiche (beyng modestly vsed) lendeth good grace to a verse: but they do so hunte a letter to death, that they make it Cramb e, and Crambe bis positum mors est : therefore Ne quid nimus. 9 Also asmuche as may be, eschew straunge words, or obsoleta & inusitata , unlesse the Theame do giue just occasio: marie in some places a straunge worde doth drawe attentive reading, but yet I would haue you therein to vse discretion. 10 And asmuch as you may, frame your stile to perspicuity and to be sensible: for the haughty obscure verse doth not much delight, and the verse that is to easie is like a tale of a rosted horse: but let your Poeme be such as may both delight and draw attentiue readyng, and therewithal may deliuer such matter as be worth the marking. 11 You shall do very well to use your verse after thenglishe phrase, and not after the maner of other languages: The Latinists do commoly set the adiective after the Substantiue: As for example Femina pulchra, aedes altae, &c. it would haue but small grace: for we say a good man, and not a man good, &c. And yet I will not altogether forbidde it you, for in some places, it may be borne, but not so hardly as some vse it which wryte thus: Now let vs go to Temple ours, I will go visit mother myne &c. Surely I smile at the simplicitie of such deuisers which might as well haue sayde it in playne Englishe phrase, and yet have better pleased all eares, than they satisfie their owne fancies by suche superfinesse. Therefore euen as I haue aduised you to place all wordes in their naturall or most common and vsuall pronunciation, so would I wishe you to frame all sentences in their mother phrase and proper Idioma, and yet sometimes (as I haue sayd before) the contrarie may be borne, but that is rather where rime enforceth, or per licentiam Po eticam , than it is otherwise lawfull or commendable. 12 This poeticall licence is a shrewde fellow, and couereth many faults in a verse, it maketh wordes longer, shorter, of mo sillables, of fewer, newer, older, truer, falser, and to conclude it turkeneth all things at pleasure, for example, ydone for done, adowne for downe, orecome for overcome, tane for taken, power for powre, heauen for heavn, shewes for good partes or good qualities, and a numbre of other whiche were but tedious and needelesse to rehearse, since your owne iudgement and readyng will soone make you espie such aduantages. 13 There are also certayne pauses or restes in a verse whiche may be called Ceasures, whereof I would be lothe to stande long, since it is at discretion of the wryter, and they have bene first deuised (as should seeme) by the Musicians; but yet thus much I will aduenture to wryte, that in mine opinion in a verse of eight sillables, the pause will stand best in the middest, in a verse of tenne it will best be placed at the ende of the first foure sillables: in a verse of twelve, in the midst, in verses of twelve, in the firste and fouretene in the seconde, wee place the pause commonly in the midst of the first, and at the ende of the first eight sillables in the second. In Rithme royall, it is at the wryters discretion, and forceth not where the pause be until the ende of the line. 14 And here bycause I haue named Rithme royall, I will tell you also mine opinion aswell of that as of the names which other rymes haue commonly borne hereto fore. Rythme royall is a verse of tenne sillables, and seven, such verses make a staffe, whereof the first and thirde lines do aunswer (acrosse) in like terminations and rime, the second, fourth, and fifth, do likewise answere eche other in terminations, and the two last do combine and that up the Sentence: this hath bene called Rithme royall, & surely it is a royall kinde of verse, serving best for graue discourses. There is also another kinde called Ballade, and thereof are sundrie sortes: for a man may write ballade in a staffe of sire lines, every line conteyning eighte or sire sillables, whereof the firste and third, second and fourth do rime acrosse, and the fifth and sixth do rime togither in conclusion You may write also your ballad of tenne sillables rimyng as before is declared, but there two were went to be most comonly used in ballade, which propre name was (I thinke) deriued of this worde in Italian Tallare , whiche signifieth to daunce. And in deed those kinds of rimes serue beste for daunces or light matters. Then haue you also a rondlette, the which doth alwayes end with one self same foote or repeticion, and was thereof (in my judgement) called a rondelet. This may consist of such measure as best liketh the wryter, then haue you Sonnets, some thinke that all Poemes (being short) may be called Sonets, as in deede it is a diminutive worde derived of Sonate, but yet I can beste allowe to call those Sonets whiche are offeoretene lynes, euery line conteyning teunee syllables. The firste twelue do ryme in staues of foure lines by crosse meetre, and the last two ryming togither do conclude the whole There are Dyzaynes, & Syraines which are of ten lines, and of sire lines, comonly used by the French, which some English writers do also terme by the name of Sonettes. Then is there an old kinde of Rithme called Verlayes, deriued (as I haue redde) of this worde Verd whiche betokeneth Greene, and Laye which betokeneth a Song, as if you would say greene Songes: but I muste tell you by the way, that I neuer redde any verse which I saw by authoritie called Verlay, but one, and that was a long discourse in verses of tenne sillables, whereof the seure firste did ryme acrosse, and the fifth did aunswere to the firste and thirde, breaking off there, and so going on to another termination, Of this I could shewe example of imitation in mine own verses written to ye right honorable ye Lord Grey of Wilton upon my journey into Holland, &c. There are also certaine Poemes deuised of tenne syllables, whereof the first aunswereth in termination with the fourth, and the second and thirde answere eche other: these are more bled by other nations than by us, neyther can I tell readily what name to give them. And the comonest fort of verse which we use now adayes (viz. the long verse of twelve and fourtene sillables) I know not certainly howe to name it, unlesse I should say that it doth consist of Poulters measure, which giueth xii. for one doze and xiiij.for another. But let this suffise (if it be not to much) for the sundrie sortes of verses which we use now adayes. 15 In all these sortes of verses when soever you undertake to write, auoyde proliritie and tediousnesse, ever as neare as you can, do finish the sentence and meaning at the end of every staffe where you wright staves, & at the end of every two lines where you write by cooples or poulters measure: for I see many writers which draw their senteces in length, & make an ende at latter Lammas: for comonly before they end, the Reader hath forgette where he begen. But do you (if you wil follow my advise) eschue proliritie and knit up your sentences as cempendiously as you may,
