 which is well furnished with both: I meane with ample knowledge and excellent speech, hath bene iudged able, and esteemed fit to rule the world with counsell, prouinces with lawes, cities with pollicy, & multitudes with persuasio: such were those men in times past, who by their singular wisdom and eloquence, made sauage nations ciuil, wild people tame, and cruell tyrants not only to become meeke, but likewise mercifull. Hence it was, that in ancient time me did attribute so great opinion of wisedome to the eloquent Orators of those daies, that they called the sacred, holy, diuine, & the interpreters of the goddes, for so doth Horace commending Orpheus , his words be these. Agrestes homines sacer interpresque Deorum, C aedibus, & foedo victudeterruit Orpheus: Dictus ob id, lenire tigres rigidosque leones. The Poet here vnder the name of tigres and lions, meant not beast but men,  & such men as by their sauage nature & cruel manners, might well be compared to fierce tigres and deuouring lions, which notwithstanding by the mightie power of wisdome, and prudent art of perswasion were couerted from that most brutish condition of life, to the loue of humanitie, & polliticke gouernment, so mighty is the power of this happie vnion, (I meane of wisdom & eloquence) that by the one the Orator forceth, and by the other he allureth, and by both so worketh, that what he commendeth is beloued, what he dispraiseth is abhorred, what he perswadeth is obeied, & what he disswadeth is auoided: so that he is in a manner the emperour of mens minds & affections, and next to the omnipotent God in the power of perswasion, by grace, & diuine assistance. The principal instrumets of mans help in this wonderfull effect, are those figures and formes of speech coteined in this booke, which are the frutefull branches of eloquution, and the mightie streames of eloquence: whose vtilitie, power, and vertue, I cannot sufficiently commed, but speaking by similitude, I say they are as stars to giue light, as cordials to comfort, as harmony to delight, as pitiful spectacles to moue sorrowfull passions, and as orient colours to beautifie reason. Finally they are as martiall instruments both of defence & inuasion, and being so, what may be either more necessary, or more profitable for vs, then to hold those weapons alwaies readie in our handes, wherewith we may defend our selues, inuade our enemies, reuenge our wrongs, ayd the weake, deliuer the simple from dangers, coserue true religion, & confute idolatry? for looke what the sword may do in war, this vertue may performe in peace, yet with great difference, for that with violence, this with perswasion, that with shedding of blood, this with pearcing the affections, that with desire of death, this with speciall regard of life. Now, lest this part should seeme an emptie art of wordes, without wisedome or substance of matter, I haue gathered out of the most excellent Orators, & best approued authors, varietie of fit examples for euerie figure by it selfe: which figures or formes of speech, I haue disposed into orders, described by their properties, distinguished by their differeces, noted their singular vses, & added certain Cautions to compasse them for feare of abuse. And now Right Honourable, hauing finished this little booke (although with no little labor) I hope to the good of many, and hurt of none, with sincere affection, & with most humble dutie, I present it to your good Lordship, as to a louer & fauourer of learning, in hope of your fauourable acceptation, being mooued hereunto by log experiece of your lordships excellet wisdome, & costant goodnes, ready at al time, to led your helping hand (in good causes) to them which by necesitie & distresse, stood in need therof, amog which, I am one that haue tasted of your goodnes & cofort: the remebrace wherof, hath bin one principall motiue, of taking this labor in hand, to the end that I among the rest which loue and honour your Lordship, might haue somewhat to signifie my gratitude and bound dutie: beseeching your Honor, albeit this worke be such as your Lordship shall litle need, being so richly furnished by nature, yet for their sakes who may take benefit by it, you will please to shadow and protect it vnder the wings of your honourable fauour. That I may not trouble your Lordship any further, I commend your Honor with my hartie praiers, to the mercifull protection of the Almightie, beseeching him, that by his grace and mercy you may long continue, to her most excellent Maiestie a most faithfull and prudent Counsellour, to the oppressed a reliefe, to innocents a sure protectio, to your country a treasure, to your friends a comfort, to godlie and painfull students a gracious Mec aenas , and to the posteritie of many ages, a renowmed president of equitie. At North Mymmes the 3. of February. 1593. Your Honors Most humble to be commanded , Henry Peacham. the Latines, figures, exornations, lights, colours and ornaments. Cicero and countenances of speech, called them concinnitie that is, proprietie, aptnesse, comlinesse, formes and conformations, comprising all ornaments vnder one name. A figure is a forme of words, oration, or sentence, made new by art, differing from the vulgar maner and custome of writing or speaking. A Figure is either A Trope     or     A Schemate. A Trope is an artificiall alteration of a word, or a sentence, from the proper and natural signification to another not proper, but yet nigh, and likely. three necessity was the first, for whe there wanted words 2 to expresse the nature and propertie of diuerse things, men were vrged and constrained to seeke remedie for the supply of so great a want, whereupon wise men calling to remebrance that many things were verie like one to another in some respect of nature, thought it good to borow ye name of one thing, to signifie another, which did in some part or property of nature resemble it, & thus began they to vse translated speech: declaring their meaning by similitudes and compared significations. And then, seeing that by this meanes matters were well expressed, their meanings more largely vttered, and their inuention well commended, men in 3 their priuate speech, and Orators in their publike orations, refused such words as were proper, and had litle sweetnesse, or could not declare the nature of the thing so well, and vsed other wordes borrowed from like things, both for the grace sake of the similitude, and also for the cause of perspicuitie of the thing expressed. Since vpon good liking, and confirmed iudgement, the wisdome of man hath inuented and found out an Art, not onely teaching where apt translations may be found, but also giuing excellent rules and certaine directions, how they should be most aptly and properly applyed. The places from whence translations may be taken, are infinite, not withstanding there be certaine that be verie vsuall, readie, apt and pleasant, which I purpose hereafter to obserue and note, as the most plentifull fields, yeelding such profitable and pleasant flowers. This excellent Art of translating, amog other profitable rules commendeth to vs this necessarie obseruation to begin with, that is to say, that those things ought to be equal in proportion, which we purpose to compare by translation, that is, of foure things two ought alwayes to be campared to two, as for example, we say the flower of age, here in this translation the herbe and the flower is compared to man and his youth, for the same that the flower is in the herbe, the same is youth in man. By the same proportion the Poet saith, vnhappy Dido enflamed is, in this example Dido and her loue is compared to the wood and the fire. This rule is alwayes most diligently obserued of wise and learned men, whose words and works are by this singular forme of speech both pleasantly beautified, and brightly adorned. The especial commendation of translated speech I will referre it to the proper vse of euerie singular Trope. Tropes are either of Words     or     Sentences. 1\. Metaphora. 2. Onomatopoeia. 3. Catachresis. 4. Synecdoche. 5\. a Metonymis. 6. Antonomasia. 7. Metalepsis. 8. Antiphrasis. signification, to another not proper, but yet nigh and like. for being the retentiue power of the mind, it is the treasure house of mans knowledge, which as it possesseth the formes of knowen things, so is it readie at all times to present them to mans vse, as often as occasion, and cause doth necessarily require. As for example, he that hath seene a caterpiller eating and deuouring the tender buds and blossomes of trees and plants, and after this shall see an idle person liuing by the spoyle of other mens labours, is put in mind to call him a caterpiller: he that hath seene a gulph or gaping sinke, swallowing a continuall streame or mightie quantitie of water, and afterward shall see a man consuming his substance and patrimonie in prodigalitie and riot, is put in mind to call him a gulph of patrimonie or a sinke of wealth. It is to be confessed not withstanding, that memorie worketh not all alone in the framing of translations but hath exact iudgement alwayes to helpe her, for memorie presenteth the former part of the comparison, and iudgement applieth the later, for a man may easily remember what he hath seene, but yet if he want discreete iudgement, he cannot aptly compare to it the thing that he now seeth although there be some fit similitude betweene them, and also some necessarie occasion to vse it: and therefore ample knowledge, perfect memorie, and exact iudgement ioyning together in one mind, are the principall and especiall causes of all apt and excellent translations. that infinite number certaine are chosen out, as most apt, most vsual,  & most commendable, which are these following. pierceth furthest, so is it proued most sure, and least deceiued, and therefore is very nigh to the mind in the affinitie of nature, so farre foorth as an externall sense of the bodie may be compared to an internall vertue of the mind. The consideration hereof causeth men to vse the words which are proper to this sense and that very often, as fit to signifie many vertues of the mind, as the vnderstanding, knowledge, prouidence, carefulnesse, hope, opinion, iudgement and such like. Hence it is that a man may say, I see your meaning, I see your malice, here the translation is from the sight to the mind: for to speake properly we can not say, we see mens meanings, or mens malice, which are inuisible in respect of our bodily sight. But yet in respect of our minds we may perceiue, and vnderstand them, as by some probable coniectures, or likely tokens collected by reason and iudgement. An  4 wisedome of Salomon: now to speake properly she proued & vnderstood the wisedome of Salomon, but see it she could not. Another 5 The King that looketh well about him driueth away all euil: here the word, looketh well about is the translation, and signifieth the regard and carefull gouernement of his kingdome. Another. 6 You looked for much, and lo it is come to litle: here to looke for, signifieth to hope for. or iudgement of the vnwise. for the kingdome of God: by looking backe is meant vnconstancie or wauering of mind. In like maner by this place we may signifie, by looking vp, heauenly meditation, for so doth our Sauiour Christ vse it, where he saith, then looke vp for your redemption draweth nigh. Also by 9 high lookes is very often signified pride and disdaine, by winking parcialitie, by circumspection wisdome and prouidence, by looking awry displeasure, by looking downe discomfort, and sometime view and suruay, by looking vpon due and deliberate consideration. Now as the sense of sight doth aptly expresse many vertues of the mind, so the priuation thereof, which we call blindnesse, may be fitly vsed to signifie the contraries, as for example, Gifts 10 blind the wise, that is, gifts obscureth the vnderstanding, and seduceth the will of wise men: blind are they and the guides of the blind, that is, altogether ignorant and destitute of knowledge. From the hearing the diuerse translations taken, not so much seruing to signifie the powers of the mind, as to expresse the affections of the heart. An example. Heare the coplaint of the fatherlesse and widow, that is, do them iustice, pitie them, and tender their distressed estate. translation refusing to heare signifieth disdaine of correction, and hatred of doctrine. to that counsell which induceth to shed the blood of innocent persons. My sonne heare thy fathers doctrine, that is, obey it. place signifieth the action and execution equitie. Talke thou with vs and we wil heare, that is, we will attend and imbrace thy doctrine. the Prophet. 15 to Abrams petition. Thus from this sense as you see translations be taken to signifie pitie, compassion, ayd, succour, consent, obedience, equitie, attention, foresight, and granting. And by the priuation of this sense many things contrary to these former significations may be expressed, They are deaffe and can not heare, signifying that they are vnapt to accept doctrine. Againe, They will not heare, that is, they are obstinate, and hardened against all good counsell. From smelling these translations and such like may be taken. Being wise & prouident, by his singular foresight did timely smell out the vngratious practises, and priuie conspiracies of the enemies bent against the citie and comon wealth. Here by smelling out, is signified knowledge gathered by prudent suspition, 16 and wittie coniectures. An example of the holy Scripture, A sacrifice of a sweet sauour, that is, a sacrifice acceptable to God. The things which do please this sense, are sweete sauours, and pleasant odors, and therefore the vse of this sense in translation is commonly vsed to signifie the pleasure of the mind, as the contraries are vsed to expresse the hatred and offence of mans heart, as when it is said, that abominations of sinne do stinke and are odious to God and all good men. As also the property of smelling findeth oftentimes the effect before the eye can discerne the cause: so prouidence and foresight, which this sense doth most aptly signifie in translation, do manie times espie and preuent secret practises and priuie conspiracies before they take effect. 17 Scripture, Stretch out thy hand now, and touch him selfe and his flesh: here to touch doth signifie another thing then it doth in the proper signification, for Sathan by touching vnderstandeth a piercing, and plaguing of Iobs the same word, saying, the hand of God hath touched me, that is, hath grieuously smitten and wounded me. pierced with sorrow and repentance. Art thou so senslesse, that thou neither feelest hurt by thy foe, nor benefit by thy friend? Here by feeling is signified vnderstanding, and by the want of feeling is vnderstood the astonishment of mind or lacke of wit. Briefly by this place these translations are vsed, by touching is vnderstood prouoking, by feeling vnderstanding, by nipping taunting or priuie mocking, by wounding confusion, by pricking remorse of conscience, by renting extreame griefe, by smoothnesse faire speech or flatterie, by coldnesse want of affection, by heate vehement displeasure or feruent zeale, by drinesse defect, by embracing loue or possession of pleasure. From this sense and his subiectes, these kinds of translations are taken. Cicero to Atticus: you may tast that man, that is, you may trye & proue him. Man is borne to tast as well the sower as the sweete, that is, as well to suffer aduersitie as to enioy prosperitie. Moreouer by this place we may by sweetnesse signifie pleasure, by bitternesse griefe of mind, or crueltie of speech, and by sowernesse seueritie. here, that shall not tast of death till they see the kingdome of God. Another: And hauing once tasted of the heauenly gifts, in these 22 in sundry respects. Hitherto I haue noted those places which do serue from the bodie to the mind: and now next I will obserue those translations that are taken from the mind and applyed to the bodie. wound angrie, or wofull: a tongue malicious, and also when we say, a pitifull eye, a liberall hand, a wise eare. Now these words angrie, wofull, malicious, pitifull, and wise, do belong properly to the mind, yet by this forme of speaking, they signifie passions and properties of the bodie. 23 An example of holy Scripture, whatsoeuer mine eyes desired I let them haue it. Here Salomon attributeth desire to the eyes, which is a word properly belonging to the mind and not to the eyes, which are parts of the body. 24 Also in like sense he saith, The eye is not satisfied with sight, nor the eare with hearing: by the eye end eare he vnderstandeth the desire of the mind kindled by those senses. men, by which forme of speech mens qualities & conditions are described by the properties of dumbe beasts: by this place, a tyrant is called a lyon, an extortioner a wolfe; a man without mercie a tigre, he that is deceitfull and subtle a foxe, a shamelesse rayler a barking dogge. In praise, the innocent is called a doue, the meeke and pacient man a lambe, the faithfull in loue and wedlocke a turtle. The particular properties of the dumbe creatures are very significent, especially in their Uerbes and Uerbals, for by whining we signifie murmuration & grudging, by stinging secret misciefe, by crowing proud and arrogant insulting, by swimming possession of abundance, or fruition of great felicitie, by roaring impatient miserie, by hissing terrible threatening, or bitter cursing, by houering attending oportunitie, by deuouring consumption, and by fawning flatterie. From the reasonable to the vnreasonable the vsuall translations are these and such like, as to say, the mourning doue, the musicall nightingale, the proud peacocke, the flattering dogge. By the same forme of speech we may call the emmet prouident, the cat circumspect, the spider diligent, the toade mistrustfull, the rauen wise, the serpent subtle. These particular translations serue to shew how neare these creatures do come to man in these rehearsed properties. This part of translation is also very apt and significant, by this place the sea is sayd to swallow, the wind or tempests to rage, the frost to bite, the ground to thirst, field and flowers to reioyce. Also we say, that waters do roare. Also in maner, as if I should say, Doest thou not know that fortune is fleeting? that auarice is insatiable, that loue is blind, tht enuie stingeth where she is fostered, that malice thirsteth after blood? This place is very copious both to Poets and Orators, & also to priuate speech. This place for the most part is the fountaine of the figure called Prosopoeia: hence it is that Poets and Orators do attribute to things which are without life, not only life, but also reason and affection, and sometime speech. An example of Poetrie, The firmament be wailed his funerall, the sunne mourned and would not be seene, and the clouds shed great plentie of sorowfull teares. This kind of fained description, is framed only by attributing life, sense, reason, and affection to things which are voyd of them all. famous renowne do shine, which is onley proper to the planets, as the Sunne, Moone and starres: in like maner we say, a stonie heart, a greene head, a leaden wit, raw youth. Also a bitter people, a crooked nation, a sharpe iudge, a glorious prince, the blossome of tender age, the mist of memorie. In these examples by shine is signified excellent fame and renowne, by stonie heart crueltie, by leaden wit a mind of small capacitie, &c. This place is also very copious, and serueth much to perspicuitie. By this place vices are sayd to bud, desires to burne, beautie to wither, anger to boile, & sometime to flame, In like forme we say, that enuie is the canker of fame, that idlenesse is the rust 25 of a common wealth, that euill words do corrupt good maners. Also by this place are these and such like translations, a golden sentence, a filed phrase, flowing speech, ye waues of worldly troubles, the stormes of aduersitie, the carkasses of mangled and destroyed cities. These significations are euident inough, and therefore I omit their interpretation. and apt for description. 1. From the Magistrate. Examples of holy Scripture, Iudge not and you shall not be iudged, condemne not, and ye shall not be condemned. Here iudging and condemning be Metaphoricall, the authoritie to iudge and condemne pertaineth properly to Iudges who are lawfully deputed by the Princes of kingdomes to that office. 27 Scribes, or Secretaries of Princes, who are wont to register and inroll the pardons of life. 28 I haue fought a good fight. Another. Put on the armour of God, that you may resist in the euill time: also, we wrastle not against flesh and blood, &c. Arme not thy selfe to make warre against God, vndermine not the simple and silly man, wound not the conscience of thy weake brother, clime not too fast to the seate of honor, tread not the poore vnder thy foote, triumph not before the victorie. 30 my people very slenderly. Another, A faithfull friend is a medicine of life. By this place men say, that an iniurie may be salued, that is, may be recompenced, that an ill member of a common wealth ought to be cut off, that is, ought to be executed according to his deserts. 32 4 From the husbandman. examples of Scripture, They that plow iniquitie shall reape the same. 33 34 5 From Artificers many translations are taken, as these and such like, to build, to pull downe, to set vp, to waygh in ballance, to bray in a morter, to plane, to square, to mingle, to ioyne, to digge, to frame, &c. as these following, and such like, Thy word 36 is a lanterne to my feete, and a light vnto my pathes. They haue stumbled against the stumbling stone. They are fallen into the same pit they made for others. Also we say by this place, that impunitie is a gate to all mischiefe, that hypocrisie is couered vnder the cloke of religion, that the hope of an hypocrite is a spiders web, that one euill condition is the staine of life. These also are common Metaphors, a spectacle of vertue, a hauen of peace and rest, a buckler of defence, a fountaine of life, a rocke of refuge, a treasure of goodnesse, a shadow of protection. This place is a verie plentifull streame of translations, and as it is most plentifull, so is it not least pleasant. First to begin with translations taken from the nature and propertie of fire. We say a man of an inflamed mind, the flaming desire of malice doth seldome die till it be quenched with blood. Kindle not wrath, lest thou beest not able to quench it: an euill name is the smoke of sinne. 2 From the aire, His tyrannie neuer ceassed thundring out most dreadfull threatnings, & with his venimous breath he blasted the greene and flourishing prosperitie of his common wealth. By this place we say, The raging tempests of sedition, the whirlewinds of trouble, the infection of ill examples. 3 From water, by this place it is, that one calleth wedlocke a sweete shower mingled with sharpe haile. An example of the holy 40 Scripture. Wish me O Lord and I shall be whiter then snow. Also the Apostle saith, Quench not the spirit: we say in a prouerb, Striue not against the streame. Likewise in this petition, Let the deaw of thy mercy O Lord refresh the heate of my miserie: He 41 shall take me out of many waters, that is, out of many dangers: and in another place he sayth, And leade me foorth by the waters 42 of comfort. By this place we say, the waues of worldly troubles, that men ebbe or flow, thereby signifying either their amendement or decay, whether it be in the state of health or wealth. 4 From the earth are borrowed these & such like translations, a large field of matter, a mountaine of wealth, a wildernesse of doubts, a denne of theeues, a path of pleasure, a way of error, a vale of miserie. So infinite and incomprehensible is the nature of Almightie God, and mans capacitie of so small a compasse, that no one attribute of God can be conceiued by mans weake vnderstanding without the helpe of earthly images and naturall propertie well knowne to man, and therefore forasmuch as mans eye cannot behold inuisible vertues, nor his vnderstanding able to apprehend the incomprehensible wisedome: Almightie God of his goodnesse hath described him selfe by the most excellent and euident letters and caracters imprinted most liuely in his creatures, not only by such as are somewhat secret, but also and most chiefly by such as are euident and manifest to mans vnderstanding and knowledge. Hence it is that he is called a King, a Lord, a Lord of hosts, 43 a Iudge, a father, an husbandman, a planter of a vineyard, a shepherd, a nurse, a guide, a rocke, a buckler in the day of battel, an Egle: these and such like are the letters of comfort, by which we may easily reade and plainely vnderstand the goodnesse of our God towards vs, for by earthly kings, and Lords of armies is described to vs his maiestie and his power, by Iudges his equitie and loue of iustice, by fathers his loue and tender compassion, by shepherds his dayly prouidence and careful custodie of his people, by nurses his most louing regard and manifold benefites, by guides, his gouernement and safe conduction, by rockes his sure defence against all violence and oppression. But in respect of his enemies, he is pourtrayed with letters of another qualitie, he is called a giant to wound, a iudge to condemne, and a fire to consume. This part of translation is called of the Grecians Anthropopathia, that is, an attributing to God humane affections. By this place we giue the titles of highnesse and maiestie to Princes, which are proper to God, yet meete for them in respect of their high dignities & princely thrones, wherin Almightie God the giuer of maiesty hath placed the. An example of the sacred Scripture, I said ye are Gods: by calling the Gods he signifieth 44 from whom they haue their authoritie, whose place they supply, whose person they present, and whose example they ought to follow, both in executing of iustice, and in shewing of mercy. Thus in one word they are put in mind what they are, or what they ought to be, and being as they should be, that they ought so to continue. and pleasant, which is a thing well known to men of learning and wisedome. First, they giue pleasant light to darke 45 things, thereby remouing vnprofitable and odious obscuritie. Secondly, by the aptnesse of their proportion, and nearenesse of affinitie, they worke in the hearer many effects, they obtaine 46 allowance of his iudgement, they moue his affections, and minister a pleasure to his wit. 47 Thirdly, they are forcible to perswade. Fourthly to commend or dispraise. 48 Fiftly, they leaue such a firme impression in the memory, as is not lightly forgotten. 49 Metaphors in respect of their perspicuitie, & light which they 50 2\. In respect of their aptnesse to make descriptions, they are not onely as pleasant colours of all kinds, but also as readie pensils pliable to line out and shadow any maner of proportion in nature. 52 3\. In respect of their firme impression in the mind & remembrance of the hearer, they are as seales vpon soft waxe, or as deep 53 stamps in long lasting mettall. vnlikenesse in steed of a likenesse, as if one should say, the bull 55 barketh, which is very vnlike. Secodly, that the similitude be not farre fetcht, as from strange things vnknowne to the hearer, as if one should take Metaphors from the parts of a ship, and apply them among husbandmen which neuer came at the sea, he shall obscure the thing that he would fainest make euident. Thirdly, 56 that there be no vncleane or vnchast signification contained in the Metaphore, which may offend against modest and reuerend minds. Fourthly, that the similitude be not greater then the matter 57 requireth, or contrariwise lesse. Nominatio, Nominis fictio, Procreatio. It is a forme of speech whereby the Orator or speaker maketh and faineth a name to some thing, imitating the sound or voyce of that it signifieth, or else whereby he affecteth a word deriued from the name of a person, or from the originall of ye thing which it doth expresse. And this form of fayning, & framing names is vsed diverse wayes. First by imitation of sound, as to 58 say, a hurliburly, signifying a tumult or vprore: likewise, rushing, lumbring, ratling, blustring, creking, and many such like. 59 Secondly, by imitation of voyces, as the roaring of Lyons, the bellowing of buls, the blating of sheepe, the grunting of swine, the croking of frogs, the chattering of Pies, the chirping of sparrows, the howling of dogs, the neighing of horses, ye hissing of serpents. called Teucria, from Teucrus and first of all Dardania from Dardanus, so Niniuie of Ninus, so Luds-towne of Lud, and now London. Fourthly, by composition, as when we put two words together 61 and make of them but one, as to say, Oratorlike, scholerlike: also to call a churle thickskin, a niggard a pinchpeny, a flatterer a pickthanke, a glutton a bellygod. Fiftly, by reuiuing antiquity. 62 to the new Shepherds calendar, a most singular imitation of ancient speech. The sixt maner of speaking or writing by this figure is, when we signifie the imitation of another mans property or fashion: this forme of speaking is very vsuall in the Greeke tongue, and somewhat it is vsed in the Latine, as when they say, Patrissare, matrissare, Platonissare, that is to say, to imitate his father, to imitate his mother, to imitate Plato, which forme our tongue can hardly imitate, execept we should say, he doth fatherize, Platonize, temporize, which is not much in vse. Yet the English tongue endeuoreth what it can to speake by this part, as where it saith, I can not court it, I can not Italian it, that is, I can not performe the dutie or manners of a courtier, I can not imitate the fashion of an Italian. This figure serueth fitly to make description of an action, as much as may be signified by noise or sound. Also it presenteth 63 to the hearer the nature of beasts, birds and other things, by the proper imitation of their voyces, by deriuation from the originall, it recordeth a perpetuall memorie fo the first founders of 64 artificially framed: so is it very vnseemely and ridiculous, if Art be neglected, and therefore these obseruations ought to be regarded. First, concerning the imitation of sound, that it be somewhat like to the thing it signifieth, and not vnlike, as if one should call the sound of a cannon, a ratling or cracking, it were farre from the similitude, or if he should call the roaring of a Lion, a blating or a grunting, it were absurd and ridiculous. Secondly, that the extremitie of extension of the voyce be diligently auoyded. For it were also very absurd if the voyce should be extended to the vttermost in the word of imitation, for that were most ridiculous. Thirdly, as is said in the Metaphore, vnchast and vile imitation ought to be shunned, and alwayes a discreet regard to be obserued. wherby the speaker or writer wanting a proper word, borroweth the next or the likest to the thing that he would signifie. An example: They build a horse by Pallas art diuine: here the Poet traduceth that to a beast, which is proper to 68 of the grapes, here the prophet putteth this word blood 69 deuoure. By the licence of this figure we giue names to many things which lacke names, as when we say, the water runne, which is improper, for to run, is proper to those creatures which haue feete, and not to water which hath none. By this forme we attribute hornes to a snaile, and feete to a stoole, & so likewise to many other things which do lacke their proper names. 73 The vse of this figure is chiefly to serue in time of neede, as to yeeld a necessarie supply for the want of a proper word. 74 translation too farre off, or that which is much vnlike. Secondly that we vse it not oft. and it is a forme of speech by which the Orator signifieth more or lesse by a word, which the proper signification doth not expresse: and it is by putting the whole for the part, or the part for the whole. By the whole is meant, the whole of a quantitie, the generall kind, the plurall number, the matter of which things are made. 1\. The whole put for a part. An example: An host so great as dranke riuers drie, meaning a great part of riuers. An example of ye holy Scriptures: All the world came to heare the wisdome of 76 Salomon, vnderstanding a great part of the world, and not all the world as it is expressed. 2\. The generall kind for the speciall kind. An example of the holy Scripture: Preach the Gospell to all creatures, signifying to all men, and not to any other creature. deceiued the people, and seemed Orators, vnderstanding but himselfe. 4\. The matter for the things made of that matter: They eate the finest wheate, and drinke the sweetest grapes, by wheate is vnderstood bread, and by grapes wine. 5\. Things following put for things going before: Thou shalt eate thy bread in the sweat of thy face. Here by sweat following labor, is signified labor going before sweate. Hither to the more is signified, and the lesse is vnderstood. Now contrariwise the part is expressed and the whole is vnderstood. An example of Scripture: I am not worthy that thou shouldest enter vnder my roofe. Here by the roofe is signified the whole house. Another example: Blessed is the wombe that bare 77 . thee and the pappes which gaue thee sucke. There wombe & the pappes do signifie the mother, and in the holy Scripture the soule is often put alone, and signifieth the whole man. 2 The speciall kind put for the generall: It is not my sword that shall helpe me, by sword is vnderstood all kind of weapons, 78 and maner of defence. Another: Man shal not liue by bread only, by bread is signified all kind of food and nourishment. 3\. The singular number for the plurall: A man borne of a woman hath but a short time to liue, meaning all men. The Romane was victor in battel, vnderstanding the Romane host. 4\. By things going before, things following are signified: He put the people to the sword and the citie to the fire. Here by these words svvord and fire is signified the general slaughter of the people, and vtter destruction of the citie, which presently folowed. Another example of the holy Scripture: Say to the sonnes of A[illeg.]on the sword is drawne, here by the drawne sword is signified the slaughter ensuing. 79 The Orator vseth this figure chiefly when he is well perswaded concerning the wisedome of his hearers, that they are of sufficient capacitie and vnderstanding to collect his meaning, whereupon he maketh the bolder to remoue his speech from the vulgar 80 grace which otherwise it should want, forcing the vnderstanding of his hearer to a deeper consideration of the sense and meaning. vpon. First that when a part is put for the whole, there be a discreete choise of that part: the roofe is put many times for the house, but not the window, nor the rafters. 83 2 Secondly, that there be likewise a choyse of the speciall kinds when they signifie the generall. 84 3 Also it is to be remembred that this figure ought not to be vsed in iudiciall pleadings, for there a part may not stand for the whole, nor the whole for a part, without some wrong to the one partie or to the other. 85 4 Lastly, the vse of this figure is very vnfit among ignorant hearers, which for lacke of knowledge may mistake it, and likewise 86 among cauilling and captious persons, which of wilfull peruersenesse may easily peruert the true meaning, either by malice or mockerie. Hypallage, it is a forme of speech, whereby the Orator putteth one thing for another, which by nature are nigh knit together. This change of name is vsed foure wayes. 1\. The cause for the effect. 2\. The effect for the cause. 3\. The subiect for ye Adiunct. 4\. The Adiunct for the subiect. Under the name of the Cause are contained the efficient, the inuenter, the commander, the instrument. . within. By pestilence and famine is signified death the effect of those causes. Another: I haue called for a drought vpon the earth. 88 By drought is vnderstood hunger and famine caused by drought. frute, Bacchus for wine, Vulcane for fire, Mercurie for eloquence, ye author for his work thus, He learned his arguments of Aristotle, & his eloquence of Tullie, he esteemed much of Liuius, and tooke great delight in Plato; signifying by these uthors their 89 Prophets: that is, their bookes and volumes. 3 The commander or gouernour for those which are vnder his gouernement: Hannibal was slaine by Scipio. Here Hanni[illeg.]bal is put for his army which he led against the Romans, and Scipio for the Romans who obtained the victorie. shall not depart from Iuda. Another: The vnlikely haue worne the crowne. Here scepter and crowne being instruments of royal dignitie do signifie a kingdom. He beareth not ye word for nought. 91 Also: There shall no sword go through your land. In the former example is vnderstood by sword, the authoritie of a Magistrate, in the later warre and conquest. Here ballance, and instrument of equitie, is put for equity it self. In like maner we vse to put the chaine for bondage, the key for office, the rod corrrection, and the crosse for persecution. Secondly, the effect is put for the cause; by this we say, Death is pale, feare sad, anger hastie, wine bold. Here is signified, that death maketh pale, and feare maketh sad, and likewise of the rest. An example of holy Scripture: I am the resurrection, christ meaneth that he is the cause of the resurrection. Another: There are two nations in thy wombe. Almightie God speaking this to 93 Rebecca, signifieth by two nations, the author or fathers of two nations, that is, Esau the father or author of the Idumeans, and Iacob the father or author of the Israelites or Iewes. Another: 94 Death is in the pot man of God, that is, a deadly thing, or a thing which is the cause of death. sinne signifieth him selfe, the efficient of his sinne. By this place also, an instrument in respect of his regent may stand as an effect, and signifie his agent. An example: As thy sword 95 hath made many women childlesse, so shall thy mother be depriued of thee. Here Samuel putteth the sword for Agag the regent or agent of the sword. Thirdly, the subiect put for the Adiunct, the subiect is that which containeth, the Adiunct is that which is contained, and this containing is sayd of diuerse things diuersly. 96 1 The possessor for the thing possessed. An example: Iuda shall be inhabited for euermore. Here Iuda the sonne of Iacob is put for the land of Iewrie which was promised to his posteritie, and by them possessed. Another: I pray thee depart not from thy seruant. Here Abraham vnderstandeth his tent vnder the naming of him selfe. By this place cities, lands, houses and ships are often called by the names of their owners. 2 Time put for the things done in time. An example: I haue considered the dayes of old, and the yeares that are past. By dayes and yeares, the Prophet signifieth the peace and prosperity which somtime he enioyed. By this place it is said, that the dayes thought is the nights dreame, that the mornings view correcteth the euenings worke. In these two examples the day and the night, the morning and euening do signifie the actions and accidents in the. Hence it is, that times being put for the accidents in them, are either commended or dispraised, as when we say, O blessed time, O happy age, or as the Poet saith, My happie dayes be past, my ioyfull yeares be gone. In dispraise thus, O wicked world, O malicious age. vnderstandeth 98 the creatures of heauen and earth, which he calleth to witnesse with him. learning, meaning the people in those countreys. An example of the holy Scripture, O Ierusalem, Ierusalem, thou which killest the Prophets. By Ierusalem Christ signifieth the Rulers and the people of that citie. treasures, and goods within his house. which we blesse the comunion of the blood of Christ: In this example ye Apostle putteth the cup for the contents of the cup. Another: 103 There shall be one fold, and one shepherd, that is, one company or flocke. example: For thy temples sake which is at Ierusalem, Kings 104 shall bring presents to thee. Here by the Temple is vnderstood the holy exercises and diuine worship vsed in the Temple. In the same sense men vse to say, The hall is done, meaning the actions in the Courts of iudgement. 4 The Adiunct for the subiect. An example: Righteousnesse hath looked downe from heauen, meaning God in whom righteousnesse resteth. Another: There is no truth, no mercie, no knowledge of God in this land. By these Adiuncts the prophet signifieth 105 that there are none, or at least very fewe, in whom these vertues may be found. Here the flood being an Adiunk, signifieth time the subiect. 106 is of large and ample capacitie to containe matters of great signification, 109 more significant then this. As there are many particular places of this figure: so there may be many faults committed, & therefore especiall regard ougt to be had that they may be auoyded. The most generall fault of all, is, when the Metonimie is not taken from the comon 111 vse, and knowne custome of the word. As for example, if you should put Neptune for the skill of riding, who is reported to be the inuenter of that art, you should make the Metonimie faultie, 112 may not be put for the thing inuented, nor euery cause for the effect, nor euery subiect for the Adiunct, but such as are in knowne vse, and may aptly be put for the things which they signifie. permutatio, that is a naming, or the changing of a name, it is a forme of speech by which the Orator for a proper name putteth another, as some name of dignity, office, profession, science or trade. 114 1 By this figure when the Orator speaketh to a king or a Prince, he saith, your Grace, your Highnesse, or your Maiestie: to a Noble man, your Lordship, your Honor. thus, Reuerend father, honorable Iudge. In this forme speaketh the Apostle Paule where he saith, Dearely beloued, and 115 Salomon likewise bringeth in Christ calling his Church his sister, his loue and his doue, and the Church in like maner calling Christ her beloued. 3 The author by the name of his profession or science, as when we say, the Philosopher for Aristotle: the Greeke Poet for Homer: the Romane Orator for Cicero: the Psalmograph for Dauid. 4 A man by the name of his countrey, as, the Persian, the Polonian, the Germane, the Brittane. 5 Also when we giue to one man the name of another for the affinities sake of their maners or conditions, In praise thus, as when we call a graue man a Cato, a iust dealer an Aristides, a wise man a Salomon. In dispraise, to call a glorious boaster a Thraso, an enuious detracter a Zoilus, a captious reprehender a Momus, a tyrant a Nero, a voluptuous liuer an Epicure. The vse of this figure is both necessary & profitable, for by this forme the orator when he speaketh to high dignities, he boweth 116 (as it were) the knee of his speech, and lifteth vp the eye of his phrase to the bright beames of earthly glory, therby declaring his due reuerence, and their high dignitie. It helpeth much in praising 117 or dispraising, by the equall comparison, it serueth readily for copie and varietie. 118 The faultes that may be committed in this figure are these, To giue a lesse name then the dignitie requireth, as speaking 119 to a king to say, Your worship, or in sted of a name of reuerence to vse another that is base or ridiculous, as speaking to a graue father, to call him gray beard: or to vse amorous termes, as 120 in open apparance, or in shadowed signification. speech by which the Orator in one word expressed, signifieth another word or thing remoued from it by certaine degrees. Virgil by eares of corne signifieth sommers, & by sommers yeares, An example of the holy scripture: 123 The tongues of the sucking children do cleaue to the roofe of their mouth for very thirst. Here by the extreme thirst of the sucking babes, the Prophet signifieth the barraine and drie breasts of the mothers, by the drie breasts the extreame hunger and famine, and by the famine the wofull affliction and great miserie of the people. 124 off by an effect nigh at hand: yet it is a forme of speech seldome vsed of Orators and not oft of Poets, yet is it not voyd 125 of profit & vtility, for it teacheth the vnderstanding to diue downe to the bot. ome of the sense, and instructeth the eye of the wit, to discerne a meaning farre off. For which property it may well be 126 compared to an high prospect, which presenteth to the viewe of the beholder an obiect far distant by leading the eye from one marke to another by a line all direction, till it discerneth the thing that is looked for. 127 The faultes which may be committed in this figure are these, when the word expressed and the thing signified stand too far 128 asunder, that is so many degrees, as the meaning can not be vnderstood, Secondly, when it is vsed in a cause which requireth perspicuitie. the contrary: as when the speaker sayth, wisely, or wittily, vnderstanding the contrary. Also to say You are alwayes my friend, meaning, mine enemie. You are a man of great iudgement, signifying vnapt and vnable to iudge. The especiall vse of this figure is to reprehend vice, and mock folly: for by expressing a vertue, and signifying a vice, it striketh the mind of the offender with the sharpe edge of contrarie 129 comparison, whereby he is compelled to see the great differece betweene what he is, and what he ought to be, betweene what he hath done, and what he ought to haue done: and so by looking in the cleare glasse he may be ashamed of his foule face, I meane his foule fact. neither is it seemely to be vsed of all persons, in respect of the breach of duty: it were vnmeete for the sonne to say, wisely spoken 131 father for it were as much, as to call his father foole: and likewise for a seruant in his anger to vse this figure against his mayster, it were contrary to good maners: and therefore these two things ought to be obserued, that it be not vsed without great 132 cause, nor of any without some authoritie, or at the least matched in equalitie. 1\. Allegoria, 2. Ænigma, 3. Paroemia, 4. Hyperbole, 5. Asteismus, 6. Ironia, 7. Charientismus, 8. Sarcasmus, 9. Mycterismus, 10. Diasirmus. or forme of speech which expresseth one thing in words, and another in sense. In a Metaphore there is a translation of one word onely, in an Allegorie of many, and for that cause an allegorie is called a continued Metaphore. An example: rubbe not the scarre, lest you open againe the wound that is healed, and so cause it to bleed afresh The signification hereof is, Renue not by rehearsall the sorrow which time hath made forgot. and to breake into our fold, to ouercome our shepherd to rent off our skins with his griping pawes, to crush our carkasses with his venimous teeth to fil his insatiable panch with our flesh, and to wallow at his pleasure in our wooll? Another like vnto this: Shall we sit aloofe amazed among boughes and suffer the serpent to climbe our tree, to thrust vs out of our nests, to sucke our blood, to deuour our birds, and to sleepe among our feathers? By these two Allegories, as well by the one as by the other, our enemies are described, who either by open force or secret conspiracie, are prepared and fully bent to make conquest of our countrey, to murder and destroy vs people, to possesse our dwellings, and enioy our wealth. O ship shal new flouds carie thee againe into the sea? --- What doest thou nowe? striue manfully to keepe the port alway. Examples of Poetical Alleggories,   Another. Thou Licinie mayst liue full well, if wisely euermore, Thou doest not thrust into the deepe, nor presse too nigh the shore: for feare of stormes making incursions, and troubling the sea with nauall war, whom he exhorteth to make peace with Augustus. By Flouds he signifieth ciuill battell, and by Port peace and concord. In the later he much commendeth mediocritie. Horace was much delighted in this kind of speech, as may appeare by many of his verses which he wrote Allegorically. 133 Examples of the holy Scriptures: Whose fan is in his hand, and he shall purge his floore, and gather his wheate into his barn, but will burne the chaffe with vnquenchable fire. 134 Another: A brused reede shal he not breake, and smoking flaxe shall he not quench, till he bring forth iudgement vnto victorie. 135 Another: Giue ye not that which is holy to dogs, neither cast ye your pearles before swine, lest they tread them vnder their feete, and turning againe all to rent you. vsuall signification, whereof this may be an example: Why doest thou couet the frute, and not consider the height of the tree whereon it groweth? thou doest not forethinke of the difficultie in climbing, nor danger in reaching, wherby it cometh to passe, that while thou endeuorest to climbe to the top, thou fallest with the bough which thou doest embrace. This Allegorie describeth although somwhat obscurely, yet verie aptly, the danger, vanitie, and common reward of ambition. The words which retaine their proper sense are these, couet, consider, and forethinke, which words do make it a mixt Allegorie. of things, and to present them vnder deepe shadowes 136 to the contemplation of the mind, wherein wit and iudgement take pleasure, and the remembrance receiueth a long lasting 137 respect of beautie, brightnesse and direction: so may an Allegorie be fitly likened to a signe compounded of many stars, which of the Grecians is called Astron, and of the Latines Sidus, which we may call a constellation, that is, a company or coniunction of many starres. be pleasant, become peeuish and altogether vnprofitable: also vnlikenesse 140 aenigma a kind of Allegorie, differing onely in obscuritie, 141 darknesse, the sense may hardly be gathered. Examples: I consume my mother that bare me I eat vp my nurse that fed me, then I die leauing the all blind that saw me. Meant of the flame of a candle, which whe it hath consumed both waxe and weeke, goeth out, leauing them in the darke which saw by it. Another: As long as I liue I eate, but when I drinke I die, vnderstood of the fire, which continueth so long as it hath matter to burne vpon, except it be quenched with fire, which may be tearmed the death of that nature. 142 Ten thousand children beautifull, of this my body bred, Both sonnes and daughters finely deckt, I liue, & they are dead: 143 My sonnes were put to extreme death by such as lou'd the well, 144 My daughters died in extreme age, but where I cannot tell. 145 Anatomie of wonder great I speake, and yet am dead, 146 Men sucke sweet iuyce, from these blacke veines, which mother wisdome bred. 147 This figure although it be full of obscuritie, and darknesse yet it is found in the sacred Scriptures both in speech and in visions, the dreames of Pharaos chiefe Butler, and chiefe Baker, and also Phafos owne dreames were Ænigmatical, whose significations Ioseph expounded. proportioned in the similitudes, for vnder the forme of a goodly tree, both him selfe and all the parts of his prosperitie are most excellently described. By the place where it was planted, were described his seate and kingdome: by the height, his dignitie: by the ample aspect, his great glory, and dread of nations toward him: by the strength of that tree, his great power: by the beautifull leaues, his gorgeous apparell and glorious pompe: by the frute, his wonderfull rents, tributes, and reuenues: by the meate of that tree, the wealth and prosperitie of his people: by the shadow, the safe protectien of his subiects: by the birds among the branches, his prudent counsellers, and mightie princes; and by that, that it is said, that all flesh did eate of it, is vnderstood the great plentie of all necessaries. Hitherto is described the wonderfull felicitie and glorie of this mightie Monarch. And now in like manner, the ouerthrow and confusion of all this is proclamed by the Angel, saying as followeth, hew downe the tree, breake off his branches, and scatter his frute abrode, that the beasts may get them away from vnder him, & the birds from his branches, neuer the lesse leaue the stumpe in the earth, &c. The familiar and proper speech. For being a figure of deepe 149 obscuritie, it is opposed to perspicuitie, the principall vertue of an Orator. 150 Sometime notwithstanding darknesse of speech causeth delectation, as that which is wittily inuented, and aptly applyed, and so proportioned as that it may be vnderstood of prompt wits and 151 apt capacities, who are best able to find out the sense of a similitude, and to vncouer the darke vaile of AEnigmatical speech. For 152 in deede this figure is like a deepe mine, the obtaining of whose mettall requireth deepe digging, or to a darke night, whose stars 153 be hid with thicke cloudes. 154 it absurd, if strange, they make it obscure and vnpossible to be interpreted, 156 oft it hath bene to many a mans destruction, nor amongst 160 simple and silly persons, which are vnapt and vnable to conceiue the meaning of darke speech, and therefore a vanitie. vsed, and commonly knowen, and also excellent for the similitude and significatio: to which two things are necessarily required, the one, that it be renowned, and much spoken off, as a sentence in euerie mans mouth. The other, that it be witty, and well proportioned, whereby it may be discerned by some speciall marke and note from common speech, and be commended by antiquitie and learning. The tumbling stone doth seldome gather mosse: teaching that riches and wealth are not gathered by wandering. He that maketh his fire with hay, hath much smoke and litle heate: meaning that many words and litle matter, make men wearie but neuer the wiser. All are not theeues that dogges barke at: declaring that ill tongues do as well slander good men, as speake truth of the euil. One swallow maketh no sommer, that is, one vncertaine coniecture proueth no veritie. While the grasse groweth the steed starueth: signifying that present neede requireth present helpe. The sweetest rose hath his thorne, meaning the best man is not without his fault. It is good to strike with the hammer while the iron is hote: a prouerbe commending the benefit and goodnesse of oportunitie. Many drops do pierce the marble stone: a singular prouerbs declaring the vertue of constancie and continuance. Amongst all the excellent formes of speech there are none other more briefe, more significant, more euident or more excellent, then apt Prouerbs: for what figure of speech is more fit to 161 teach, more forcible to perswade, more wise to forewarne, more sharpe to reproue, more strong to confirme, or more piercing to imprint? Briefly, they are most profitable, and most pleasant, & may well be called, The Summaries of maners, or, The Images of humane life: for in them there is contained a generall doctrine of direction, and particular rules for all duties in all persons. Finally, for their perspicuitie they are like the most bright 162 and glorious starres of the firmament, which as they are more excellent then others in brightnesse and glorie, so are they more looked vpon, more admired, and more beloued, and as they excell others in the dignitie of light, so are they more distantly remoued and more thinly dispersed. In like maner ought Prouerbs to be sparingly sprinkled, both in priuate speech, and in publike orations, 163 and then not without some fit occasion to vse them, for prouerbs being fitly applyed and duly placed, do extend their power and shew their dignitie: otherwise they loose their grace, and the oration his strength. There are diuerse vices which ought to be auoyded & banished out of Prouerbs, strangenesse, vnlikenesse, vncomelinesse, barrennesse, and vntruth. Strange Prouerbes are those which 164 are either framed by similitudes of strange things litle known, or taken from strange tongues disagreeing to ours, when the Prouerbes be translated. vile similitudes, which proceed for the most part from vnchast minds and polluted mouthes. whereby they should teach and delight. reproue. Superiectio, and it is a sentence or saying surmounting the truth onely for the cause of increasing or diminishing, not with purpose to deceiue by speaking vntruly, but with desire to amplifie the greatnesse or smalnesse of things by the exceeding similitude. saith he (meaning Pompey) moe battels then others haue read, and conquered moe prouinces then others haue desired. Now in this excesse of his praise, Cicero meant not so much as he spake, but by making an incredible report, he doth signifie that the noble actes of Pompey were so worthy, and his victories so many, that they were almost incredible. This figure is either simple or compared. Simple, as to call the belly of a great glutton bottomlesse him that is most hastie in his furie brainelesse, a notable coward heartlesse: who knoweth not that the meaning of these sayings is otherwise then the words do properly expresse? For by this kinde of large speech the excesse of those vices are aptly signified. Another example: Streames of teares gushed out of her eyes, and the greatnesse of her griefe rent her heart in sunder. Here by these incredible reports, her incredible lamentation and sorrow is signified. This forme of speech is found in the sacred Scriptures, and that in many places. Examples: Dauid saith, that his eye is consumed 169 for very heauinesse, and that his bones are putrified for the sorrow of his sinne. 170 Iob saith, that his feare was so great, that it did terrifie his bones, and made them to tremble. 171 And in another place, he saith yt his bones did cleave to the skin. 172 haue plucked out your own eyes & haue giuen them to me. Hyperbole is compared two maner of wayes. First by equalitie of comparison as, to call a beautifull virgine an Angell, a good man a Saint, a shrew a deuill, a drunkard a swine, an extortioner a wolfe. Secondly by the comparatiue degree, & that from many places. 1 First from like things, as, sweeter then hony, whiter then snow, lighter then smoke, heauier then lead. 2 Secondly from liuing creatures, as, swifter then the swallow, slower then the snaile, more louing then the turtle, more odious then the toade. 3 Thirdly from fained and false gods, as, mightier then Mars, fairer then Venus, wiser then Pallas, more eloquet then Mercurie. 4 Fourthly from persons fained in fables, as, wearier then Sisiphus, then Grillus. 5 Fiftly from persons in Comedies, as, more glorious then Thraso, more couetous then Mitio. 6 Sixtly from persons in histories, as, more enuious then Zoilus, 7 Seuenthly from Nations, as, more cruell then a Scithian, more false then a Cretian, more wanton then a Miletian. 8 Eightly from dignities, offices, and conditions of life, as, more stately then an Emperour, more vigilant then the watchman, more base then a swineheard, more vaine then a vice, more hated then a hangman. greatest degree, or diminished in the least: by this figure the Orator either lifteth vp high or casteth downe low, either stretcheth things to the vttermost length, or presseth them to the least quantitie: so high is the reach, & so wide is the com passe of this figure, 175 that it mounteth to the highest things, compasseth the widest, and comprehendeth the greatest. one that this figure be not vsed to amplifie trifles, or diminish the estimation of good things, by the one it becometh a vice of speech called Bomphiologia, by the other it is turned into Tapinosis:  177 for these two are faults of speech offending in contrary extremities. The other, that albeit matters require (and that worthily) 178 to be amplified, that yet there be not too great an excesse in the comparison: but that it may be discreetly moderated, vt nequid nimis. and gracing of speech with some merie conceipt: it is vsually taken for any mirth or pleasant speech which is voyd of rusticall simplicitie & rudenesse, and the merie & pleasant sayings of this figure are called facetiae 179 that is to say, the pleasures and delights of speech: which are taken from diuerse places, but chiefly from these, from Equiuocation, as when a word hauing two significations, is exprest in the one, and vnderstood in the other, either contrary, or at least much differing, which as it is most wittie, so is it most pleasant. Secondly the occasion of mirth may be taken from a fallace captiously taken, and turned to another sense, contrary or much differing from the meaning of the speaker, as in this example: To one demanding of Diogenes a knocke vpon his pate, he made this answer, that he would take an helmet. Now he that made the demand, meant, what hire, and not what defence. To one that said, he knew not if he should be put out of his house where to hide his head: another made him answer, that he might hide it in his cap. There are many and sundry other places from whence wittie mirth may be fitly taken, as from pleasant imitation of mens speech and fashions, from similitudes and comparisons, from pleasant reports of merrie actions and accidentes, and from manie moe which I shall not here neede to rehearse. Now for to giue to euery particular place an example, it whould be too tedious, and peraduenture to some offensiue. He that desireth further examples of this figure, let him reade Facetias Brusonij, Poggij, Bebelij, and Apophthegmata Erasmi Roterodami, Licosthenis, and other moe authors handling the like argument. The vse hereof is pleasant and commendable, especially among good wittes, and men of merrie and delightfull natures, but yet more meete for priuate companie, then publike orations, if it be discreetly vsed with the due obseruation of circumstances, as place, time, persons, causes, and occasions, it ministreth grace, and pleasure, and mirth to the hearer, wherby the time is pleasantly passed, and the dull and wearisome minds of men are much refreshed. Heede in the vse of this figure ought to be taken, that it offend not against charitie, chastitie, nor pietie. It offendeth 182 against charitie, whe the mirth toucheth some person to his griefe or shame, whereby he is moued to take it in euill part. It offendeth 183 against chastity, when the iesting consisteth of vnchast speech, or containeth vnchast significations, which albeit it may moue laughter, yet it offendeth modest and chast minds: it committeth a great offence against pietie, when the occasion of mirth & laughter 184 is taken from ye abuse of reuerend matters, as the holy scriptures, the iudgements of God, magistrates, parents, & such like, or when sport is made at the miseries and calamities of men: by all which abuses Almightie God is prouoked to displeasure and wrath, which in iustice is wont to reuege all insolency & inpietie. Illusio, it is a Trope in which one contrarie is vnderstood by another, not so well perceived by the words, as either by the pronunciatio, by the person, or by the nature of the thing. Antiphrasis and this are of very nigh affinitie, onely differing in this, that Antiphrasis consisteth in the contrarie sense of a word, and Ironia of a sentence. (quoth he) they knew not you after I had shewed them your good condicions, and made mention of your vertues. Then answered Thraso, you did like an honest man, I thanke you with all my heart. Here both the saying of Gnato, This figure of some is deuided to be godly, and wicked, that is, according to the matter or end, not according to the forme, for the forme remaineth the same. said, Behold, the man is become as one of vs, 186 miserie, whereinto he was fallen by ambition. 187 Another: Go and crie vnto the gods which you haue chosen, let them saue you in the time of your tribulation. 188 Another: Sleepe on and take your rest. This saying Christ speaketh in a contrary sense, meaning that trouble was nigh at hand to waken them out of their securitie. 189 190 how glorious was the king of Israell this day. 191 and also to iest and moue mirth by opposing contraries. 193 some vrgent cause, or to iest without some fit occasion, nor often vsed, lest he that vseth it be either taken for a common mocker, or else for such a one, as men can not tell how to vnderstand him, or when to beleeue him. Neither is it a meete forme of speech for every sort of people to vse, especially of the inferior toward  194 the superior, to whom by some reason he oweth dutie, for it is against the rule of modestie and good maners, either to deride his better, or to iest with him in this forme and maner. matters with pleasant words. by Alexander why he and his companie had so done, made this answer, had not the wine fayled (sayth he) we had spoken much worse. By which answer he signified, that those words proceeded rather from wine then malice: by which free and pleasant confession, he asswaged Alexanders great displeasure, and obtained forgiuenesse. Salomon commendeth that answer which may turne away 195 displeasure, and pacifie wrath. as it were in sted of a salue to heale the wounds of displeasure, or in place of a vertuous medicine to stanch the bleeding vaines of vnkindnesse, or to coole the boyling inflammation of reuenge, for which respects it may well be compared to the wind called Fauonius, which by his warme and nourishing breath, appeaseth 197 the displeasure of all creatures, conceiued against ye same Element, when it puffed out his cold and bitter blastes from the contrary coast called Subsolanus. is a shame, the other a sinne. An example:  Demosthenes taketh vpon him (quoth Demades ) to correct me, what? Sus Mineruam? That same Minerua (quoth Demosthenes) was the last yeare taken in adulterie. He obiecteth adulterie to Demades for as much as the Poets make Minerua a virgine. intreated of a friend, that he should vse his diligence, eloquence and fidelitie in the cause of his client. After all the plea ended, Cicero that of so many things which your friend did request, you would performe none? of Sion. This saying was vttered in scornful and insulting maner against the poore Israelites being captiues in Babylon. 201 Another: Thou which doest destroy the Temple, and build it againe in three dayes, saue thy self and come down from ye crosse. Another: He saued other, him selfe he cannot saue. Let that Christ the king of Israell come downe now from the crosse, that we may see and beleeue him. These examples of the Iewes against Christ are here set down to teach the forme of this figure, and not to confirme the abuse. 202 wicked insolencie, and sometime leud miserie: for indeede this figure is like to most bitter corrections in Phisicke, 203 which are seldome or neuer applyed, but to vehement and desperat diseases, which although they be painfull and bitter, yet for the most part they bring profit, as by remouing the diseases, and restoring health: euen so the benefit of an enemies mocke to a wise man, is the knowledge of his fault, and the amending of it. 204 Let it be first prouided that this figure be not vsed without some great cause which may well deserue it, as arrogancie, insolent pride, wilfull folly, shamefull lecherie, ridiculous avarice, or such like, for it is both folly and rudenesse to vse derision 205 without cause: but to mocke silly people, innocents, or men in misery, or the poore in distresse, argueth both the pride of the mind, 206 and the crueltie of the heart: which euils and wicked properties, being made knowne by wicked practise, the scorner and common mocker becommeth odious to all men. priuie but that it may well be perceiued. Diogenes answered him thus: My friend, farther I haue done thee no harme, but this I must say to thee, I do much commend the haires that are fallen from thy head, for I suppose they were wise, in that they made hast to leaue the companie of so foolish a scull. Philosophers did vse to eate sweet cakes. Demonax made this answer, Doest thou thinke (quoth he) that bees gather their hony for fooles onely? more generall, and this more speciall, that more easie, and this more hard. The chiefe vse of this figure serueth to represse pride, rebuke folly, and taunt vice: and may be likened to 208 a blacke frost, which is wont to nip a man by the nose, before he can discerne it with his eye. 209 This figure must not be too obscure and darke, for by that it may loose the vertue and vse, if it be not perceived, and therefore 210 it is not to be vsed to simple and ignorant persons, which do want the capacitie & subtlety of wit to perceiue it. Neither must 211 it be rude or rusticall, which is the vtter disgrace of it. either depraued or reiected. Cicero for Murena against Cato, the Ciuill law. This figure is for the most part made either by some base similitude, or by some ridiculous example, to which the aduersaries obiection or argument is compared, whereby it is either made ridiculous, or at least much disgraced. As for to shew examples of this figure I iudge it needlesse and superfluous, considering the dayly plentie of them almost euerie where, both priuate and publike: and therefore it may suffise to shew the vse, and forewarne the abuse of it. 212 to make an euasion out of the subtle snare of a captious argument, or to reiect such obiections as are curious, foolish, or obscure, or to abate, the pride and arrogancie of a proude and insolent disputer. 214 The especiall warning that is to be obserued in this figure is, that in all graue and weightie controuersies it ought to keepe silence, as in solemne disputations, & iudiciall pleadings, except there be the greater cause to vrge it. In graue disputations it is vnseemely, and in law pleadings iniurious, in both it may outface the truth, or at least hinder it. And therefore it were to be wished that the abuse of this figure might be banished from the barre of pleading, and presence of the iudgement seate, where the truth ought alwayes to be supported and not suppressed, for by the 215 abuse of this figure, good causes may be scorned, honest persons disgraced, and true testimonies depraued. take away the wearisomnesse of our common speech, and do fashion a pleasant, sharpe, and euident kind of expressing our meaning: which by the artificiall forme doth giue vnto matters great strength, perspicuitie and grace, which figures be deuided into three orders. The first order containeth those figures which do make the oration plaine, pleasant, and beautifull, pertaining rather to words then to sentences, and rather to harmonie and pleasant proportion, then to grauitie and dignitie, and the figures of this first order I deuide into fower kinds, according to their sundrie formes, of which the first are of Repetition, the second of Omission, the third of coniunction, 1\. Epanaphora, 2. Epiphora, 3. Symploce, 4. Ploce, 5. Diaphora, 6. Epanalepsis, 7. Anadiplosis, 8. Epizeuxis, 9. Diacope, 10. Traductio, 11. Paroemion. These are called the figures of repetition, by which one word may with much comelinesse be rehearsed in diuerse clauses, and may ten maner of wayes be pleasantly repeated: and likewise one and the same letter by Paroemion may be repeated in the beginning of diuerse words. diuerse members, still with one and the same word. 1\. First in long periods. An example of Cicero in the praises of Pompey: A witnesse is Italie, which Lucius Cilla being victor confessed, was by the vertue and counsell of this man deliuered: A witnesse is Celicia, which being enuironed on euery side with many and great dangers, he set at libertie, not with terror of warre, but quicknesse of counsel: A witnesse is Africa, which being opprest with great armies of enemies, flowed with the blood of slaine men: A witnesse is France, through which a way was made with great slaughter of Frenchmen for our armies into Spaine: A witnesse is Spaine, which hath uery often seene, that by this man many enemies haue ben ouercome and vanquished. 3\. By short periods. Examples of holy Scriptures: The Lord sitteth aboue the water floods. The Lord remaineth a king for euer. 216 The Lord shall giue strength vnto his people. The Lord shall giue his people the blessing of peace. 217 3 By Comaes. An example of Scripture: Whom they loued, whom they serued, whom they ran after, whom they sought and worshipped. 218 4 By Interrogation: Where is the wise? Where is ye Scribe? Where is the disputer of this world? 5 By a double Epanaphora in an Antithesis, thus, The couetous man is euer poore. The contented man is alwayes rich. The couetous man is an enemie to him selfe. The contented man is a friend to others. The couetous man is full of care. The contented man is full of comfort. 6 By a certaine increase in the clauses following, thus, I desire you for the loue I haue borne to you, for the loue you haue borne to me, and for the loue which our good God doth beare to vs all, that you will remember these my last words, vttered with my last breath. 219 The vse hereof is chiefly to repeate a word of importance, and effectuall signification, as to repeate the cause before his singular effects, or contrariwise the effect before his seuerall causes, 220 or any other word of principall accompt. It serueth also pleasantly to the eare, both in the respects of the repetition, and also of the varietie of the new clause. Although this figure be an exornation of great vse, yet it may be too often vsed in an oration. Secondly ye repetitions ought not to be many, I meane the word ought not to be repeated too oft, as some do vse it, in a most wearisome Tautalogie. Thirdly heede ought to be taken, that the word which is least worthie or most weake, be not taken to make the repetition, for that were very absurd. one and the same word. An example: Since the time that concord was taken from the citie, libertie was taken away, fidelitie was taken away, friendship was taken away. spake as a child, I vnderstood as a child, I imagined as a child. cast out deuils in thy name? and done miracles in thy name? Ambition seeketh to be next to the best, after that, to be equall with the best: last, to be chiefe and aboue the best. causes, it serueth to leaue a word of importance in the ende of a sentence, that it may the longer hold the sound in the mind of the hearer. by eloquent authors, but sparingly, and as it were thinly sprinkled, as all exornations are, and therefore it ought not to be too much in vse, if we desire to follow the examples of the most eloquent authors. following to haue the same beginning & the same ending which the first had going before, comprising both the last ornaments in one. Carthaginias? Who were they that made cruell warre in Italie? the Carthaginians, Who defaced all Italie? the Carthaginians. Who craue pardon now? the Carthaginians. Another: Him would you pardon and acquite by your sentence, whom the Senate hath condemned, whom the people of Rome haue condemned, whom all men haue condemned. Carthage. Dido builded renowned Carthage. By the increase of a word in diuerse clauses: O cruell death, why hast thou taken away my father, my deare father, my deare and most louing father, and hid him in the darke, where I cannot find him? 226 This figure may serue to any affection, and is a singular ornament, pleasant to the eare, which of some is called the Rhetoricall 227 it is so much more pleasant as it is vsed more sparingly. 229 Too many members of this figure do much blemish the beautie of it, and bewrayeth the affectation, for this ornament is much deformed if it be stretched with the tenters of foolish fancie, as oft it is, and likewise many others. signifieth another thing. place Memmius is the proper name of a man, but in the second, it signifieth his manners, which were well knowne. Another: In that great victorie C aesar was Caesar, that is, a mercifull conquerer. a louer of his countrey, and a most faithfull patrone of the common wealth. This exornation serueth aptly to signifie the constant nature or permanent qualitie of a man well knowne, by the repetition of his name: it containeth in it also a repetition pleasant the repeated name. repeate be ye name of such a one, as is or hath bene wel known, and likewise his maners and naturall inclination: otherwise it must needs be a sounding repetition without sense. that Ploce repeateth a proper name, and this a common word. An example: What man is there liuing but will pitie such a case: if he be a man, in the repetition man signifieth humanity, or compassion proper to mans nature. Another: If your cause be iust, feare not the Iudge, for he wil do right because he is a Iudge. In the former place Iudge signifieth his person and authoritie, in the later, the consideration and speciall end of possessing that authoritie. Another: Phisition heale thy selfe if thou beest a Phisition, that is, if thou hast the skill and science of Phisicke. be a word of importance, that may containe in it an effectuall signification, and not euery common word, for that were absurd: considering that many words may be repeated without change of signification. sentence with one and the same word. Hector manie things. returnedst againe at midnight. 236 ye be brought in feare, O ye carelesse cities. 237 238 in the beginning of a sentence to be considered, and in the end to be remembred, and also it hath a sweetnesse in the sound 240 of the repetition. 241 Too many members or words betweene the beginning and the end, do drowne the first word before the last be heard: whereby it looseth the grace and sweetnesse of a repetition. On the other side, it ought not to be repeated too soone, lest it returne barraine 242 and emptie. the beginning of the second. steede. Another: With death, death must be recompenced. On mischief, mischiefe must be heapt. 243 a good land, a land that floweth with milke and honie. children, children that refuse to heare the voyce of the Lord. vnto the Lord. sound, but also to adde a certaine increase in the second member. Of some this figure is called the Rhetoricall Eccho, for that it 246 carrieth the resemblance of a rebounded voyce, or iterated sound, vehemencie, and nothing put betweene: and it is vsed commonly with a swift pronunciation. moued? warre to C aesar, willing to turne all vpside downe. Another: Awake, awake and stand vp O Ierusalem. This figure may also be ioyned with other repetition, as in this example of king Dauid be wailing the death of his sonne Absolom, O my sonne Absolom, my sonne, my sonne Absolom, would God I had died for thee, O Absolom my sonne my sonne. 252 or any such like, in respect of pleasant affections it may be compared to the quauer in Musicke, in respect of sorrow, to a double 253 a weapons point. 255 VVords of many syllables are vnfit for this repetition, for if one should repeate abhomination, it would both sound ilfabvouredly, and also be long a doing: for the difference is great 256 betweene saying O my sonne, my sonne, and O abhomination, abhomination, the one hath breuitie and beautie, the other prolixitie 257 and deformitie. betweene, or at least verie few. with me. 258 259 This figure may be vsed to expresse any affectio, but it is most fit for a sharpe inuectiue or exprobration, as, Thou knowest not foolish man, thou knowest not the price or value of vertue, and 260 also an apt ornament for meditation: Thou art my portion O my God, thou art my portion. I haue sinned, O Thou maker of men, I haue sinned, and what shall I do? 261 The repetition of a wanton or idle word is a vice to be shunned in this figure, which is a fault (I confesse) in the matter and not in the forme, but the faults in the forme are either in the word repeated or in the interposition: in the word repeated, when it is too short, as to say, O sicke and very sicke, O sicke and like to 262 die. In the interposition, when likewise it consisteth of too fewe syllables, thus: Will, I say, will is the cause of my woo, which forme of speaking doth rather offend the eare then please it. one sentence, making the oration more pleasant to the eare. of kings. with God, and God was the word. downe from heauen, euen the sonne of man which is in heauen. the sentence with oft repetition, or to note well the importance of the word repeated. which is a tedious and wearisome repetition of one word, either [illeg.]n an vnorderly fashion, or too often repetition, thus, If you haue a friend, keepe your friend, for an old friend is to be preferred before a new friend, this I say to you as your friend. 271 and the same letter, making the sentence more readie for the tongue, and more pleasant to the eare. An example: What can it preuaile you, to sit and weepe vpon your wound, or what may it profit you to mourne vpon your miserie? the one is no salue, the other no succour. Another: Let comfort banish care, and hope releeue heauinesse. Let wisedome keepe your thoughts from wandering. This figure may proceed to moe repetitions in poetrie then in prose, for in poetrie there are found sometime fower of fiue words beginning with ye same letter, & lawful inough for light matters. An example of Poetrie: When friendly fauor flourished, I found felicitie but now no hope doth helpe my heart in heauinesse so hard. 272 This figure giveth a pleasant facilitie in a Prouer be or short sentence, as, to hold with the hare, and hunt with the hound: soone ripe, soone rotten: faire words make fooles faine, and many other such like: which facilitie and pleasantnesse of sound, do cause such prouerbes and sentences to be the better esteemed, and the oftner vsed. 273 of the eare, which taketh pleasure in repetition ioyned with varietie, as there is in this figure, where the same letter bringeth with it a new word. The affectatio of this figure is wont to fall into two faults, either into excesse of repetition, or into a iarring sound called 275 Casemphaton, into excesse, as thus, A planted place of pleasure plaine, where pleasure shal me please, or thus, This mischieuous money, maketh many men, maruellous mad. What folly there is in this forme of speach children may discerne. 276 In a harsh and iarring sound, thus: Neither honor, nor nobilitie. Another: In my drowsie and dreadfull dreame, me thought I saw a Dragon drinking blood. tanta tyranne tulisti. These examples of the faults are sufficient to the wise to auoyd the vice of like excesse in this figure. Zeugma threefold 1\. Prozeugma, 2. Mezozeugma, 3. Hypozeugma, Asyndeton. In these figures there is some word omitted, which a full contruction doth require, which notwithstanding hath by the omission a pleasant grace of breuitie. in the first clause, and omitteth it in the other following. An example of Cicero: For neither art thou he Catiline, who at any time shame could call backe from dishonestie, either feare from perill, or reason from madnesse. Here the verbe could call backe is the common word which is exprest in the first clause, and vnderstood in the rest following. downe Corinth, ouerthrew Frigellas. In this example the people of Rome is the common word. Another: Pouertie hath gotten conquest of the riches, shame of the pride, danger of thy safetie, folly of the wisedome, weakenesse of thy strength, and time of thy imagined immortalitie. 2\. Mezozeugma the second kind, when the common word is put in the middle clause. An example: What a shame is this, that neither hope of reward, nor feare of reproch could any thing moue him, neither the perswasion of his friends, nor the loue of his countrey. 3\. Hypozeugma the third kind, when the common word is put in the last clause. An example: The foundation of freedome, the fountaine of equitie, the safegard of wealth, and custodie of life, is preserued by lawes. of the eare, as to a comendable kind of breuitie, wherby the tedious repetition of a word is artificially auoyded. 278 There ought to be in this figure an obseruatio of a meane, that there be not too many clauses, lest the commo word be obscured 279 with too great a multitude: for if there follow too many members after the first, it may be forgotten, & likewise of a word in the midst: but if there be too many clauses, put before the last clause wherin it is exprest, it doth hold the mind of the hearer in too long dispense. It is good to auoyd this figure in writing of testaments 280 and euidences, least it may breed ambiguitie and contention. As for example: I bequeath to my son Ambrose an hundreth pounds, to my sonne Robert first clause, but not in the other: nowe that the same word is vnderstood in the other it is likely, but not proued: and therefore may breed a question. the helpe of any coniunction. Another of Cicero: Neither did he thinke any thing wel accomplished which he commanded: for there was nothing which he him selfe would not take in hand, preuent, labour, he was able to suffer cold, thirst, hunger. 281 An example of Scripture: For in her is the spirit of vnderstanding, which is holy, the onely begotten, manifold, subtle, moueable, cleare, vndefiled, euident, harmelesse, louing the good, &c. 282 This forme of speech is chiefly vsed to auoyd the tedious repeating of a coniunction, partly for the better sound of the speech, 283 vtter things of like nature. The greatest fault that may be committed in this figure is, when it vttereth contraries, as if one should say, pleasure paine, peace warre, life death, it were very vnapt in sense, and ill sounding in the eare. Homeoteleuton, Paregmenon: these figures do ioyne the parts of our speech together, either by coniunction of Grammer, or by similitude of sound. with many coniunctions, contrarily to that aboue. An example: He was both an enemie to his countrey, and a traitor to his Prince, and a contemner of lawes, and a subuerter of cities. neither life, neither Angels, neither rule, neither power, neither things present, neither things to come, neither height, neither depth, neither any pther creature shall be able to separate vs fro 287 the loue of God. Another: Ye obserue dayes, and moneths, and times, and yeares. of like nature together, and to distinguish and separate contrary matters asunder, and for this cause it may be called the 289 chaine of speech, for asmuch as euery chaine hath a coniunction of matter, and a distinction of linkes 290 Too long a continuance in adding coniunctions bringeth a deformitie to this figure, and therefore ought to be auoyded. figure which endeth diuerse clauses with like cases, but in respect of the English tongue which is not varied by cases, we may call it setting of diuerse nownes in one sentence which ende alike then spied out Africa: and after that came with his armie into Sardinia. Another: In actiuitie commendable, in a common wealth profitable, and in warre terrible. Another: Art thou in pouertie? seeke not principality, but rather how to releeue thy necessitie. Let God be worshipped the king obeyed, & thy parents honored. 291 This figure giueth an excellent grace and facilitie to certaine prouerbes and briefe sentences, as to these and such like: Foolish pitie vndoeth many a citie, A friend in neede is a friend indeede, In space commeth grace. These & many other of this forme are very ancient, and may be vsed in graue causes. 292 The vse of this exornation tendeth chiefly to delight the eare by the like fall, and similitude of the sounde, wherein the nature of that sense take singular pleasure. 293 shunned, lest it cause excesse which alwaies doth bring with it sacietie and wearines of the hearer as it doth in the daintiest  294 meates and sweetest musicke, also heed ought to be taken that the members be not compounded of iust numbers, lest the sentence fall into a rime, or verse in meeter. which endeth diuerse members alike in such partes of speech, which haue no cases, that is in Uerbes and Aduerbs. An example: He is esteemed eloquent which can inuent wittily, remember perfectly, dispose orderly, figure diuersly, pronounce aptly, confirme strongly, and conclude directly. is either wilfully despised, or carelesly neglected, either openly scorned, or secretely abhorred. of sound, and also giveth a pleasant perspicuitie to the word first expressed. 296 great affection be shunned. following. man was the Lord from Heauen heauenly. There are sometime three wordes of like affinity set in one sentence, thus Neuer maruel at that which is so little a maruel, except it were more maruellous. be an example: He wished rather to a die a present death, then to liue in the misery of life. sound, and to moue the mind with a consideration of the nigh affinitie and concord of the matter. 301 304 Merrie mirth, mournfull mourning, friendly friendship. Secondly when the deriuation is vnapt, or not in vse. Paranomasia, Antanaclasis, Articulus, Membrum, Compar, Hypozeuxis, Taxis. These I call figures of Separation, in respect that they do separatef words & clauses one from another, either by distinguishing the sound, or by separating the sense. of letters, either added, changed, or taken away. Added thus, be sure of his sword, before you trust him of his word. Another: so fine a launderer, should not be a slanderer. Changed thus, More bold in a butterie then in a batterie. A fit witnesse, a fit witlesse. Taken away, thus, This is not stumbling, but plaine tumbling. 305 and taking away. This figure ought to be sparingly vsed, and especially in graue and weightie causes, both in the respect of the light and illuding forme, and also forasmuch as it seemeth not to be found without meditation and affected labor. 307 As the vse ought to be rare, so the allusion ought not to be tumbled out at aduenture. Also heede ought to be taken of whom it is vsed, and against whom it is applied. significations and the one of them contrary, or at least, vnlike to the other. An example: Care for those things which may discharge you of all care. Care in the first place signifieth to prouide, in the last the solicitude and dread of the minde. Another: In thy youth learne some craft, that in thy age thou mayst get thy liuing without craft. In this example craft in the first place signifieth science, occupation or trade; in the second, deceit and subtiltie. This figure as it vniteth two words of one sounde, so it distinguisheth 308 them asunder by the diuersitie of their sence, wherby it moueth many times a most pleasant kind of ciuile mirth, which 309 or vntimely vse, which follie and boldnesse do oft commit. Also regard ought to be had that this figure be not framed of an vnperfit equiuocation. oration thus: By thy follie and wickednesse thou hast lost thy substance, thy good name, thy friends, thy parents, and offended thy Creator. Another example: My friends and faithful souldiers, now is the time to shew your selues valiant, couragious, hardie, bold, & constant, considering for what value you shal fight, for your religion, for your wiues, your childre, your goods, your libertie, your liues and your countrie, either to die with honor, or liue with renown. 312 313 a prouerbe, a scorne, a shame, I will make them desolate, wast, despised, hissed at, and accurssed. 314 to expresse any vehemet affections: in peaceable and quiet causes it may be compared to a sembreefe in Musicke, but in 316 causes of perturbation and hast, it may be likened to thicke & violent strokes in fight, or to a thick & thundring peale of ordinance. 317 It is not conuenient & agreeable to the propertie of this figure to vse words in it which haue many sillables, for long words are repugnant to the swiftnesse and hast which this exornation doth cheefly respect. the sence. An example: Thou hast neither profited the commonwelth done good to thy friends, nor resisted thy enimies. thou comforter of our life, thou hope of our generation. 318 the spirit, seene among Angels, preached to the Gentils, beleeued on in the world and receiued vp in glorie. 319 for graue causes. There ought not to be in this exornation too great a difference in the quantitie of the members, neither ought the members to extend to too great a number, for by the one the delectation of the sound is interrupted, by the other the sence is obscured. figure or forme of speech which maketh the members of an oration to be almost of a iust number of sillables, yet the equalitie of those members or parts, are not to be measured vpon our fingers, as if they were verses, but to bee tried by a secret sence of the eare: vse & exercise may do much in this behalfe, which maketh it an easie matter to make the parts accord in a fit proportion. First, when the former parts of a sentence, or of an oration be answered by the later, and that by proper words respecting the former. be a monumet of victory, of clemencie, of continencie, that men might see, what he had coquered, what he spared, what he had left: compare ye the parts of the later clauses with the former, and you shall see how fitly they are matched. of two members, thus: The Ox hath knowne his owner, and the Asse his maisters crib. as a mightie streame. Also it coopleth contraries, thus: An innocent although hee be accused, he may be acquited, but the guiltie except he be accused he cannot be condemned. Also by this figure effects may be made to answer their efficients, consequents their antecedents, habite priuation: also contrariwise, and that by a very pleasant forme and proportion. This ornament is very often vsed of Solomon in his Prouerbs, and of Esay in his Prophesies. This figure of all others is most straightly tied to number and proportion, and therfore is most harmonicall. The vse 325 wherof doth cheefly consist in causing delectation by the vertue of proportion and number, albeit holy authors doe vse it, yet they do it in easie & plaine forme, but if the most artificial and exact forme of this figure be respected, ye vse of it is more agreable for pleasant 326 matters then graue causes, and more fit for Commedies then Tragedies. Inequalitie of number is the fault which doth most disgrace the beautifull forme and proportion of this ornament, and therfore 327 to be most diligetly auoided, neither ought this exornation in the most artificiall forme be vsed in graue and serious causes, for as 328 much as it may bewray affectation, which in grauitie is misliked. a due verbe, which is the contrarie to Zeugma An example: Such is mans depraued nature and peruerse inclination, that taking away the vse of gouernment, euery kind of euill shal quickly oppresse euery part of goodnes, ambition shal striue for honor, pirde shall disdaine obedience, malice proceede to murder, theft depriue true possessors, idlenes neglect labor, impietie scorne religion, and raging tumults violate peace, and turne a happie state into a miserable confusion, where vpon it insueth that open rebellion is raised, good men murdered, virgins defloured, holy places polluted, houses burned, cities defaced, lawes despised, the whole earth confounded, and the omnipotent power of God either little regarded or vtterly forgotten. 329 and varietie of the matter, but also very pithie in respect of the causes and effects accompanying one another, and is fit for 331 graue causes, notwithstanding it may be vsed in others also. 332 to moe things then one, nor one verbe be more the once repeated. subiect his most proper & naturall adiunct. 335 An example: The feare of so great a danger and the terror of so likelie a destruction, caused noble men to consult, the minds of wisemen to doubt, the faces of valiant captains to wax pale, the hearts of lusty youth to quake, old men to tremble, and women to weepe. 336 Another: Princes for their dignities, magistrates for their authoritie, rich men for their wealth, captains for their courage, counsellors for their wisdome, & holy men for their profession, are assaulted of the mightie, and enuied of the wicked, from whence it commeth that they are often either depriued of their liues, or spoiled of that they possesse. 337 his woonders are recorded, his iudgements pondered, his promises beleeued, his threatnings feared, his goodnesse praised, and his iustice duly regarded. Iudges to heare causes & giue sentence, Aduocates to plead, subiects to obey, the wise to giue counsell, and the rich to giue almes. This figure is a singular ornament of eloquence, well deseruing that commendation, and that in sundrie respects first for 339 that it ministreth a pleasant harmonie to the eare, secondly, for that it presenteth proper countenances of persons to the eye of the minde. Thirdly, for the excellent breuitie in noting the adiuncts 340 of persons, duties of degrees, and proper words with their proper relations. 341 The especiall regard to auoyd the abuse, which this figure may commit, is to take heed that we do not attribute vnproper adiunctes 342 to the subiectes, for it were not onely verie vnporper, but also verie absurd to attribute weeping to valiant Captaines, and consultation to youth: or to say that rich men are enuied for their wisedome, and holie men for their wealth, which forme of speech is verie vnproper. And this vice or fault is called, Acyrologia: which is an vnproper speaking in forme and sense. Figures of Sentences are those by which either our affections are elegantly expressed, or matters mightily magnified. The difference betweene the figures of words, and the figures of sentences is great, found both in their formes and effectes, for the figures of wordes are as it were effeminate, and musicall, the figures of sentences are manly, and martiall, those of words are as it were the colour and beautie, those of sentences are as the life and affection, which are diuided into figures of affection, and figures of Amplification. Figures of the second order are such as do make the oration not onely pleasant and plausible, but also verie sharpe and vehement, by which the sundrie affections and passions of the minde are properly and elegantly vttered, and that either by the figures of Exclamation, Moderation, Consultation, or Permission. Vnder the name of Exclamation I do comprehend all those figures which are vsed most commonly to vtter vehement affections in vehement formes, not only such as do expresse the passions of the mind by a forme of outcrie, but also all those which are of a vehement and sharpe kind, and of nigh affinitie to Exclamation. gladnesse, sorrow, anger, maruelling, admiration, feare, or such like, bursteth foorth into an exclamation or outcrie, signifying thereby the vehement affection or passion of his mind. thy tabernacles thou Lord of hosts? 344 345 Of Hatred? O most wicked presumption, from whence art thou sproong vp to couer the earth with falshood and deceit? 346 thy sting? O Graue where is thy victorie? O how ioifull a thing is mercy in the time of anguish and trouble? 347 low. Another: O lamentable miserie, alas for pitie. 348 Of anger: O cursed tyrannie, O most detestable crueltie. 349 child of the diuell, &c. God, &c. knowledge of God, &c. examples are here set for the explication of singuler affections or passions, yet notwithstanding many and diuerse affections may meete and ioyne in causing of our exclamation, as may be seene in the example of Paul to Timothie last expressed: O man of God flee such things. danger. There is feare in Paul, for that which he possesseth by loue, he feareth lest it should be lost by negligece. disswade Timothie. There is in Paul a care of Gods glory lest it should be obscured in his owne seruant: all which affections ioyning together caused the Apostle to say: O thou man of God flee such thinges. The princpall end and vse of this figure is by the vehemency of our voice and vtterance to expresse the greatnesse of our affections 354 and passions, and thereby to moue the like affections in our hearers. There are diuerse and necessarie obseruations to be considered concerning the vse of this figure. First that it be not vsed without some great cause that may iustly moue to so vehement a forme of speech, for it is a manifest 355 token of follie to vse an exclamation vpon small occasions, and for light causes. Secondly, that it be not too often vsed lest it become odious. or publike Oration: it were ridiculous to begin a publike speech with this figure, crying, O, or Alasse: it might sooner moue 357 laughter then lamentation. 358 Fourthly regard ought to be had, that the vtterance of the exclamation fall not into an extremitie, either offending in defect 359 or in excesse, for too low and soft an exclamation, betokeneth a cold affection, and contrariwise, that which is too much 360 strainde, signifieth either extremitie of passion, or want of discretion. Lastly, that it be not put in the conclusion of an oration or publike speech, for in so doing it might be the cause of merry effect. the Orator detesteth, and curseth some person or thing, for the euils which they bring with them, or for the wickednesse which is in them. 361 An example of Detestation: O most abhominable impietie, worthie to be buried in the bottome of the earth. 362 An example of Cursing: Wo to the bloodthirstie Citie which is full of lyes and robberie. 363 him, and let Sathan stand at his right hand, when sentence is giuen vpon him, let him be condemned, and let his praier be turned into sin, let his daies be few, &c. 364 This figure is the fit instrument of speech to expresse the bitternesse of the detestation within vs against some euill person, or euill thing, and forasmuch as it sendeth forth the flame of reuenge 365 kindeled in our affections, it may well be compared to the casting of wildfire, or poysoning of shotte, to destroy the enemie. 366 The vse hereof ought to be verie rare, and not to rise but against intollerable impietie, not measured by mans malice, but assigned 367 signifie when God doth curse, as doth the Prophets and Apostles. Orator pronounceth a blessing vppon some person for the goodnesse that is in him or her. Lord, that ye haue shewed such kindnesse vnto your Lord Saul, that you haue buried him. shall finde waking. people which haue the Lord for their God. 373 which maketh happie, and to declare the happinesse and felicitie of the pessessor, and also it is a forme of speech which doth much moue to the loue of the thing which is the cause of blessednesse. 375 As the vse hereof is verie effectuall & forcible to worke a loue and delight in men to the cause which make men happie and blessed, so is the abuse of it odious, as when blessing is pronounced vpon false causes and wrong persons, as to say, Blessed are 376 the rich, blessed is the glutton, happie are the proud, for this is the opinion and saying of the Epicure, but Eliphas proueth the contrarie, saying: I haue seene the foolish deepe rooted, and suddenly I 377 his habitation. Orator maketh a complaint, and craueth helpe. the vngodlie for his owne lust doth persecute the poore. And after his long complaint against the wicked for their pride against God, and for their oppression of the poore, he turneth to God by petition, crauing his helpe to succour the poore, and his iustice to punish the oppressors, saying: Surely thou hast seene it, for thou beholdest vngodlinesse and wrong, that thou maist take the matter into thy hand. The poore committeth himselfe vnto thee, for thou art the helper of the friendlesse, breake thou the power of the vngodlie and malicious, take away his vngodlinesse and thou shalt finde none. 379 Another: For thy sake also are we killed all the day long, and are counted as sheepe appointed to be slaine, &c. 380 This forme of speech as it riseth from the griefe which is suffered for iniuries, so doth it tend by complaint & praier to seeke succour and redresse, by this forme billes of complaint are exhibited to the Courts of iudgement, and supplications to Princes. 381 This figure or forme of speech of all others is most common, and oftenest abused, for what is more common then complaints, and what speech oftener vsed without iust cause then complaining one of another. Therefore in vsing this figure regard ought to be had, that the complaint be not a false accusation, or as the prouerbe is of the swine, a great crie and a litle wooll, much ado about nothing, a hue and crie and no robbery. by which the Orator lamenteth some person or people for the miserie they suffer, or the speaker his owne calamitie. 382 mine eyes a fountain of teares, that I might weepe day and night, for the slaine of the daughter of my people. forme of speech. Iob lamenteth his owne miserie in this maner: Why died not 383 I in the birth? why did not I perish assoone as I came out of the wombe? why set they me vpon their knees? why gaue they me sucke with their brests? serueth and is most forcible and mightie to moue pittie and compassion in the hearer. As this forme of speech is most passionate, so ought it to be most serious and voyd of fiction & faining, for counterfait lamentation 385 doth seldome moue pitie, for it is commonly bewrayed or knowne either by the cause or by the person, by ye cause, as fained lamentations in Tragedies, by the person, and that either by his condition, or by some signes of his affection, by his condition, as the lamentations of common beggers, which are commonly 386 counterfaited, by signe of affection, as when the speaker expresseth a lamentable matter with a cold or carelesse affection. 387 Also heed ought to be taken that the lamentatio be not great whe the cause is litle, or litle when the cause is great, the one of these 388 is found in children lamenting for litle losses, the other in stoicall nature or carelesse people. speaker expresseth a solemne promise or vow; either made with condition, or rising from some vehement affection. Iacob vowed a vow saying: If God wil be with me, and will keep me in this iourney which I go, and wil giue me bread to [illeg.]te, and cloth to put on, so that I come againe vnto my father in safetie. Then shall the Lord be my God, and this stone which I haue set vp as a pillar, shall be Gods house, and of all that thou shalt giue me, will I giue the tenth vnto thee. thou shalt deliuer the children of Ammon into my hands then that thing that commeth out of my house to meet me when I come home in peace from the children of Ammon, shall be the Lords, and I will offer it for a burnt offring. An example of a vow rising from affection, and without condition, is expressed in the Psalme 132. 389 This forme of speech is vsed cheefly to signifie our gratitude and thankefull remembrance for the thing obtained by our petition. 390 speech by which the speaker persuadeth a securitie and safetie to his hearer by offering himselfe a suretie for the confirmation of his warrant. 393 this forme of speech, saying: I will be suerty for him, of my hand shalt thou require him, if I bring him not to thee, and set him before thee, then let me beare the blame for euer. Also it is made in a mightie forme thus: My blood for thy blood, my life for thy life, my soule for thy soule. 394 This figure or forme of speaking is most apt and forcible to ad courage in dreadfull aduentures, and to giue comfort and assurance 395 in doubtfull causes, which is a singular vertue of speech and worthy of great praise, namely if it be vsed in certaintie and truth. warrants may dayly teach. And therefore the most notorious abuse of this figure is to deceiue by a false warrant, and deceitfull countenance of speech. Clients are often incouraged by this figure to enter into contention, and confidently to proceed, till an empty pursse parteth the fray. And likewise many a sicke patient is most warranted his life, when his death is neerest at hand. orator or speaker promiseth and protesteth his constancie concerning something. An example of Tertullian: Let Lions clawes teare out our bowels, let the Gibbet hang vs, let the fire consume vs, let the sword cut vs asuder, let wild beasts tread vs vnder their feet: yet we Christians are by praier prepared to abide all paine and torments. Christ? shall tribulation, or anguish, or persecution, or famine, or nakednes, or perill, or sword And by and by after he addeth: I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, neither things present, nor things to come, neyther height, nor depth, nor any other creature shalbe able to separate vs from the loue of God, which is in Christ Iesus our Lord. Therefore the stags so light of foote, like birds shall feede in th'aire, The seas shall faile, and fishes leaue all bare vpon the shore, The Parthian Pilgrime first shall drinke of Arax riuer cleere, Or one of Germanie shall drinke of Tibris flowing streames, The bounds of both gon round about, & passed far and neere, Before this face and countenance shall slip out of my brest. The fish shall flie the floud, the serpent bide the fire, Ere euer I for gaine or good will altar my desire. 398 This figure or forme of speech serueth most aptly to declare the firme & vnremoueable purpose of the mind, and to make manifest the deepe rooted affection of the heart, and that by sundry 399 formes, as by contempt of torture and death it selfe, by comparison of impossibilities, or vnlike things as is alreadie shewed by 400 example, and by diuerse other like formes of speaking. 401 The speciall warning that may concerne this figure, is that it be not vsed in euill causes, or in light and trifling matters, for to protest and promise a sledfast mind in an euill thing, looseth the vertue and dignity of the figure. speaker continueth and persisteth in the same cause, much after one forme of speech. 402 the Sodomites, saying: if there be fiftie righteous within the Citie wilt thou destroy, and not spare the place for the fiftie righteous that are therein? That be far from thee, &c. And thus he continueth perseuerantly his suite and praier to the six request. 403 me more then these? feede my sheepe: which saying he repeateth three times, oen shortly after another. 404 By this forme of speech the greatnesse of the desire is signified. either by often crauing that which necessity requireth, or many times commaunding that, which reason directly By this figure and maner of speaking the condemned man doth often pray 405 & crie for mercie: the hungry repeateth his request many times, and necessitie will haue no nay: whereby it commeth often times to passe, that albeit once or twise faile, yet many times may preuaile. 406 And likewise in rules, comnaundements, and warnings twise may be remembred when once may be forgotten. Albeit that the propertie of this figure, consisteth in the multitude of requestes and often warnings, yet moderation ought to restraine it from excesse and importunate requestes, 407 which betokeneth either notable impudency, or shamelesse folly: a notorious vice in the greatest vse among beggers, in whom it is bred and brought forth by long custome. earnest request, petition, or praier. for our old friendships sake, which hath continued euer since wee were children which time hath also encreased, and for thy onely daughters sake, & my sons, whom I haue committed wholly to thy gouernement, helpe me in this matter. mercies sake, discharge vs from this scare, specially that we may not so much as suspect that any part of anger remaineth in thee, for thy right hands sake I beseech which thou ganest to Deiotarus in promise. Another: If innocency may deserue fauour, if misery may moue to pittie, or praiers preuaile with men: let your mercy for Gods sake relieue misery, and your compassion extend to vs that are ready to perish. do vse as a meane whereby to seeke, and obtaine reliese and comfort in their miseries, as in hunger for food, in perplexity for counsaile, in perill for defence, in trouble for deliuerance, in the state of condemation for mercy and life. when the name of God is vainely vsed in requests and petitions, as it is vsually of common beggers and vagabonds, charging and as it were, adiuring men to giue them. by wishing to God or Men. might rather haue giuen thankes to Seruius Sulpitius being aliue, than now to examine his honours being dead. 411 Another of the holy Scripture: I would to God, that my Lord were with the Prophet that is in Samaria. 412 413 The vse hereof tendeth to signify our desires by our wishing, which we cannot accomplish by our power. 414 In this forme of speech these obseruations are to be remembred, that wee wish not such thinges as are either vnlawfull, or 415 vnpossible, the one although it be very vsuall, yet it is not without corruption of will, nor the other without vanity of minde. Orator declareth how much hee maruelleth at some thing as either why a thing is done, or left vndone, or at some strange effect, whose secret cause maketh him to wonder. 416 maruellous things without number. 417 Another: O the deepenes of the riches, of the wisedome and knowledge of God. &c. in great reuerence and admiration, to the extolling of his glory, and open confession of their owne wickednesse. By this figure the Orator sometime wondereth, at the boldnesse and impudency of wicked deedes. Sometime at the negligence of men, in not preuenting danger, or at their brutish security when the battel axe of destruction hangeth ouer their heads. Sometime at impunitie, when he seeth great wickednes passe free without punishment or rebuke. Sometime at the accusation of some person, in whom he hath a good opinion. The vertue of this Figure is very great and Emphaticall in a prudent Orator, and serueth to sundry and excellent purposes, as in praising highly persons or things: As when the Orator 418 declareth his admiration at their goodnesse and excellency. In dispraising most hatefully: As by wondring that such a notorious & wicked person is not either cut off by ye lawes of men, 419 or destroied by the iudgements of God. In reprouing and rebuking, as in saying: I maruell or wonder much what moued you to do it, or to be so far ouerseene as to take it once in hand: & likewise in blaming the negligence and omission of some necessarie and profitable thing, and that by a maruelling at the cause: to speake briefly, it hath many vses, and is very significant, and Emphaticall. The speciall parts of this Caution do tend to giue warning that this forme of speech be not vsed to maruell at common things, or small matters, and also that it be too often vsed, lest too 420 common a custome of admiration and wondring weakeneth the strength of it, and impaireth the dignitie, and may also betoken an ignorance in the speaker, according to the common saying, Qui s aepe admiratur nescire videtur. which the speaker vpbraideth his aduersary of ingratitude, and impietie. benefices which he had receiued of her, and accusing him of vnkindnesse & cruelty now purposed toward her, and by comparing these together she increaseth her wrath, & in the middest of her flaming furie she bursteth forth and exclaimeth against him thus: And a little after she addeth: 421 frutefully planted and carefully fenced, doth set before the peoples cies, Gods goodnesse and mercy towards them. And by the wild and euill frute, which that vineyard brought forth, he accuseth them of most sinful ingratitude. 422 The vse hereof is easily seene, and may therefore be the sooner noted: it tendeth most specially to reproue and rebuke ingratitude, a most ill weede wheresoeuer it groweth, and therefore well worthy to be pluckt vp by the rootes, with the weedehooke of rebuke and shame. 423 VVisedome and charity ought to direct the vse of this figure, lest it be vsed for euery little displeasure as foolish persons 424 are wont to do, making a new account of an old reckoning, which is an absurditie offending against good manners, a folly 425 repugning wisedome, and an effect of mallice opposed against charitie. speaker expesseth an oath for the beter confirmation of something affirmed or denied, which doth necessarily require a sure and high testimonie. you this day, that you shal shortly perish from the land where vnto ye go ouer Iordan to possesse it. 427 and speake comfortable vnto thy seruaunts, for I sweare by the Lord, except thou come out, there will not tarry with thee one man this night, and that will be woorse vnto thee, then al the euill, that fell on thee from thy youth hitherto. serue in my spirit in the Gospell of his sonne, that without ceassing I make mention of you alwaies in my prayers, &c. Somtime the speaker vseth to confirme his saying by swearing by his faith, credit, and truth, or such like formes of confirmation. to confirme matters either by high and diuine testimonie, or by the gage of the speakers faith and credit, and therfore if is best 430 beseeming a graue man which is indued with age and credit. that we call not those things to witnesse with vs, which cannot giue witnesse, as to swear by creatures. & to omit the testimony of the creator, as did Ioseph when he did sweare by the life of 432 Pharaoh, and Nabucodonezer by his throne. Secondly that we 433 Herod the Tetratch to the daughter of Herodias. Fourthly, that 436 Iewes, thereby to deceiue them, or as Peter did when he sware he knew not the man. 437 439 often swearing cannot be without sinne, it becommeth obious to the hearer, and diminisheth the credit of the speaker. Speaker calling to remembrance matters past, doth make recitall of them Sometime matters of sorrow, as did Dido a litle before her death saying: 440 wept there, when we remembred Sion. 441 Another of the prodigall sonne: Then he came to himselfe and said, how many seruants at my fathers house, haue bread inough, and I die for hunger, I will rise and goe to my father, &c. 442 father, saying: With my staffe came I ouer this Iordan, and now I haue two droues. 443 to mind thy wonders of old tune. 444 despised correctio, & haue not obeied ye voice of the that taught me, nor inclined mine eare to the, ye instructed me? I was almost brought into al euill, in the middest of the congregation & assembly. 445 The vse of this figure serueth in sted of a necessarie memorial of time past, whereby we are put in mind what we haue beene, what we haue done, what we haue heard or seene, what we haue suffred, what we haue receiued, and so to compare it with the time present for the profite of our selues and of our hearers. 446 The cheefest respect of this Caution is, that euill matters bee not remembred, as to call into remembrance offences forgiuen and long forgotten, or occasions which may renew vnprofitable 447 sorrow or moue anger, or action a or of vanitie which were better to lye buried than to be reuiued. Orator exhorteth and perswadeth his hearers to do some thing. what doth appertain to your name, estimation, and safetie of the common wealth. Wherefore Iudges tooke to your selues, your wiues, your children and goods, maintaine and vphold the renowne, and safetie of the Romane people. Another: If euer God haue had respect to a iust cause, or euer gaue victorie where it was due, or euer lent his hand to equitie against tirannie, or euer preferred his people, and confounded his enemies, he will this day fight with vs, and for vs, and giue vs a glorious victorie, be our enemies neuer so many, and we neuer so few, and therefore shew your selues this day valiant, couragious and constant, fight this day for your honour, and for your countrie, cast off this day all feare that may make you weake, & arme your selues with hope that may make you strong, and be ye assured of an honourable and glorious conquest, after which shall ensue incomparable ioy, great wealth, and immortall fame. Examples in the holie seripture are most plentifull, and may euerie where be found. The vse of this figure is great, and often necessarie and needfull to be vsed, the vertue and power whereof is worthie of high praise and commendation, for when commanding cannot force, 449 nor promises allure, nor commination terrifie, as alone by themselues working in their single strengthes: yet Adhortation hauing al these conioyned with it, and also sundry reasons of mightie power, as helping hands to force and moue the mind forward, to a willing consent, doth preuaile in his purpose. It is necessarie to obserue, that eueie exhortation or imparatiue mood is not an Adhortation, as to say, do this, or do that, eschew euil, and do good, seeke peace and ensue it, and such like, these formes are not Adhortations, but onely bare commandements without any reasons annexed the authoritie of the commander excepted: but ye forme of speech which deserueth the name of Protrope or Adhortatio, hath not only the forme of a commandement or of a promise, but also sundry & mightie 450 reasons to moue the minde and vnderstanding of man not only to a willing consent, but also to a feruent desire to performe the thing adhorted. The greater power that this figure hath, the more mischiefe it may worke, if it be peruerted and turned to abuse, and therfore it is necessarie to forewarne and forbid those euill partes which may peruert and abuse so excellent a vertue and instrument of counsell. 451 It is abused by mouing and leading to vnlawfull things, as by mouing of sedition, tumults, or rebellion among the simple 452 people, by leading ignorant persons into dangers and miserie, by seducing vnstable mindes into false religion and vanities, and by many mo like effectes, which Sathan doth alwaies further to the vttermost of his power. of the vse and end, and therefore the contrarie being explicated and knowne, it shall not be needfull to make any further declaration of this, cosidering it may be vnderstood by the examples, vse & Caution of the other contrary. speaker expresseth an admonition, or warning to his hearers. of persent peace, you bring not in continual warre. By this warning Cicero 453 An example: Beware of false Prophets which come vnto you in sheepes cloathing, but inwardly they are rauening wolues, 455 you shall know them by their frutes. if they say come with vs and we will laie wayt for blood, &c. and to dehort the hearer from them, a singular vertue proceeding from goodnesse, loue, and faithfull friendship, and therefore 458 ought to be accepted as singular benefit. There are two faultes which may be committed in giuing admonition or warning, the one by ambiguitie, the other by importunitie, by ambiguitie, as when the warning is giuen in a 459 doubtfull forme of speech which may be taken and vnderstood two maner of waies, whereof the one is false and deceitfull, in such forme were the blinde prophesies signified in times past, which as they say gaue noble men warning but in such ambiguitie and obscuritie, that the true meaning could neuer be knowne, till destruction had ended the strife. admonition commeth too late. Orator denounceth a threatening against some perosn, people, citie, common wealth or country, conteining and declaring the certaintie or likelihood of plagues, or punishments to fall vppon them for their wickednesse, impietie, insolencie, and generall iniquitie. Examples hereof are most plentifull in the holie Prophets agaynst Nations and Citties, but most chieflie agaynst Ierusalem, agaynste Babell, the Philistines and Moabites, with many other moe. 461 This figure pertaineth properly to deterre and driue men from sinne and wickednesse, and to force them to repentance, the effect whereof is seene in the example fo the Niniuites, Ionas 3.5.6.7. There is in this forme of speech required discretion and wisedome, to denounce comminations, whether priuate or publike, lest by the folly and vnaptnesse of their forme, they loose their effect and vertue, which folly may diuerse waies be committed, 462 first by inequalitie, as when the Orator threateneth greater punishments then the offences do deserue by equitie, as to threaten destruction and desolation, when it deserueth not so great a correction. 463 stinke against perfumes, baldnesse against dressing of the haire, sackcloth against stomachers, &c. 464 The like maner and forme of relation Christ vseth where he threateneth, saying: Wo be to you that are full, for ye shall hunger:Wo be to you that now laugh, for ye shall waile and weepe. Also by inequalitie, as when the Orator vseth lesse threatnings then their desertes require, as to threaten whipping to offences which deserue hanging: this looseth his effect by faintnesse. 465 Secondly, folly of commination may be committed by threatening and denouncing incredible punishments, as to threaten destruction by a diluge or a conquest, and desolation by the Antipodes or by a people eithere vnknowne or farre distant. forme of speech by which the speaker openeth and detecteth some secret wickednesse of his aduersary, and laieth it open before his face. with me in the dish, he shall betray me. of all subtiltie and all mischiefe, thou childe of the diuel, and enemie of all righteousnesse, wilt thou not cease to peruert the strait waies of the Lord? Doeg of great wickednes, but chiefly of the mischiefe of his toong. corruption. and intollerable impietie. The most speciall poynt in this Caution is, that the accusation be not false, as those are many times which proceede from malice 470 or enuy, as the accusations of the Iewes against Christ, and like wise against Paul. Secondly, that it be not amplified without 471 maner, when it requireth a serious and sharpe forme. Fourthly, that it be not applied out of due time and fit place. expresse his ioy, either for the cause of some good thing obtained, or some euil auoyded. gloriously, the Horse and him that rode vppon him hath he ouerthrowne in the sea. Here Moses extolleth the glory of the victory, 474 and triumpheth with great ioy, praising the lord, and his power which was the cause; and describing the effect which was the drowning of Pharaoh and his hoste. To this forme of speech perteineth this saying in the song of the virgine Mary: From henceforth all generatio, is that call me 475 blessed. And also this: He hath filled the hungry with good things, and the rich he hath sent emptie away. 476 Another: O death where is thy sting? O graue where is thy victorie? 477 This vse of this figure hath his principall palce in triumphs and ioyes for victories, and may be likened to the Trophes of martiall fame. Hence saith Horace, Et potius noua cantemus Augusti troph aea. This figure after a sort is liuely represented in the Larkes song, which the singeth euerie morning, in ioy that the darknesse is gone and the light come. 478 The most especiall poynt of this Caution is, that this figure be not vsed to insult vpon the oppression of the poore, or affliction of innocents as Dauids enemies did, saying there, there, so would 479 we haue it, and also where is now thy God? speech which the speaker vseth to signifie how much he hateth and abhorreth some person, word, deed, or thing, and it is vsed commonly in a short forme, and in few words. Against a person thus: Out vpon him wretch. Against an odious word thus: Peace for shame. Against an odious deed, thus: Fie vpon it. Against an odious thing, thus: Away with it, I loue not to heare of it, I abhorre it: Auoyd Sathan, Mat.4. Sometime with mo words, thus: No more for shame, bury it in silence, whose eyes can looke vpon it, and not loath if, or whose eares can heare it, and not abhorre it? 480 The vse hereof, tendeth onely to make things as odious to the hearer, as they are to the speaker, or at the least of signifie how odious they are, and what hatred they deserue. And the Caution hereof, tendeth to warne that it be not vsed either aginast things worthie of loue, or things indifferent. Orator prouketh his aduersary to the conflict of the controuersie, and that either by a vehement accusation, or by a confident offer of iustification. By accusation, this of Eliphaz prouoking Iob, may be an example: Is 481 it for feare of thee that I wil accuse thee, or go with thee into iudgement? Is not thy wickednesse great? and thine vngratious deeds abhominable? for thou hast taken the pledge from thy brother for nought, and spoyled the clothes of the naked. accusation. where he saith: Which of you can rebuke me of sinne? let him die, and we also will be my Lords seruants. 484 & countenance a good cause,  & in respect of our lawes, itmay be compared to the partie which hauing a good cause, maketh hast to ioyne in issue, & also it may well be compared to the touchstone 486 which either iustifieth the gold, or bewrayeth the brasse. the speaker signifieth that he casteth away all hope concerning some thing, & turneth it another way. me on euery side, and I am gone, and he hath remoued mine hope like a tree. Iob in these words signifieth that he hath no more hope of worldly prosperitie and comfort, and therefore he turneth the eye of his hope of heauen, saying: I know that my redeemer liueth, &c. Whereby he comforteth himself ye better to indure ye suffer 488 so great and heauy a burthen of misery. 489 Ezechias despairing of life, turneth himselfe to praier and weeping. Another: Let the widow weepe, and the father lesse children lament: Let insfolke sorrow, and f[illeg.]ndes mourne, yet cannot all this preuaile, for he is gone, and cannot be called againe, his absence must needs be suffered, when his presence cannot be redeemed, and therefore thinke on men that liue, and let the dead rest. 490 As the sicke patient being forsaken by his phisition, and despairing both of health and life. betaketh himself to God to whose custodie he commendeth both his bodie and soule, expecting the graue for the one, and heauen for the other. 491 And as a besieged citie fainting in hope of her strenght against the force of her enemy, turneth to supplication, or parling, euen so this figure by a pitifull complaynt of despaire vnder a heauy 492 burthen, helpeth mightely to moue compassion, considering that of all miseries, the greatest misery, and most to be pitied, is to be in misery without comfort of friends, or hope of reliefe. 493 This figure is most abused when the sufferance and despaire is counterfayted. Secondly, when the passion and misery is declared, 494 and the hope omitted, which is the sinew and life of sufferance. Figures of Moderation are such, as are lesse vehement then those which I haue alreadie spoken of vnder the name and title of Exclamation. These following pertaine to more milde affections, and do require a more moderate forme of pronuntiation and vtterance then those aboue rehearsed, which are proper to vehement affections and mightie possessions. Orator or Speaker confirmed some thing by his owne experience. seene the foolish deepe rooted and suddenly I cursed his habitation great prosperitie, and florithing like a greene. Bay tree, I passed by, and he was gone. old, yet I neuer saw the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging their bread. they speake, by the experience which they had in their tune seene come to passe Likewise ye Euangelist Iohn sayth: That 498 which was from the beginning, which we haue heard, which we haue seene with our eies, which we haue looked vpon, &c. The Orator by this forme of speech speaketh of things remoned from the knowledge of his hearers, & alledgeth his owne testimonie, 499 grounded vpon his owne knowledge, The iudge reciteth the causes or cases falling out in his time and determined with the consent of the best opinions in his presence or place of authoritie. eures, and sometime doth record them to the great benefite and good of the posterity. assaults, defences, and encounters, and hath had experience in many stratagems, doth teach ponger souldiers, and confirmeth that whih he counselleth by his owne testimonie sounded vpon often proose. where hee hath beene, and declareth the sundry fashions, and strange manners of far nations and people. 503 confute, especially if the Orator or speaker be a man of grauity, and knowen credit, whom this figure doth best beseeme. Also 505 it causeth a diligent attention and ioyned with delectation: for by nature men take more pleasure to heare the author of experience speake himselfe viua voce, then either to reade his experience written, or to receiue it from others by report and tradition. 506 This figure being a forme of speech of so great, graue, and necessarie vse, it is so much the more to be regarded that it 507 bee not abused by the vntruth of the testimonie which is wont to be the roote and Fountaine of many vanities, and wicked errors in the World, or by publishing the proofe of euill conclusions, whereby the practise thereof may be further increased. of speech by which the Orator groundeth his saying vpon generall and common experience, it differeth from Martyria in this, that in Martyria the Orator confirmeth his saying by the testimony of his owne knowledge, in this he inferreth his reason, and confirmation, from knowen principles, which experience doth proue and no man can deny. 508 whatsoeuer a man soweth that shal he also reape. grasse grow without water? not be burnt: or can a man go vpon coles, and his feet not be burnt? Here in these two examples taken from the experience of Nature, are the reasons of their conclusions grounded. in ships, and occupy their businesse in great waters, they see the workes of the Lord, and his wonders in the deepe. To this place do belong many Prouerbs and common sayings which are taken from generally proofe and experience, hence is this saying: Trust not a horses heele, nor a dogs tooth. And likewise this: Fire and water haue no mercy. Briefly the greatest part of all notable saings and common Prouerbs were first framed vppon experience, and are still supported by it: among which there are diuerse in meeter as this here following and manye such like: I haue heard my father say, and eke my mother sing, There is no fishing to the sea, nor seruice to the king. Which saying proued is proued most true by the experience of all timer. vpon the strong foundation of experience confirmed by al times, allowed of in all places, and subscribed to by all men. There are diuerse faultes which may be committed in the abuse of this figure: First when the sentence of experience is 511 a doubt, and proueth nothing. That wheat will turne into darnell is a maxime of husband meu approued: contrariwise that darnell wil turne into wheat, some men say they haue proued it, but others will not beleeue it. Also when the saying is partly true and partly false, then is it no good maxime. rehearsal of a saying: It is a forme of speech by which the Orator reciteth some saying or sentence of another worthy of remembrance and obseruation. An example of the holy Scripture: O hyppcrites Esay, prophecyed 513 their mouth and honoureth me with their lippes, but their heart is far from me. 515 beeing, as certaine of your owne Poets haue sayd, for we are also his generation. 516 By this place it is, that the Orator for the cause of better confirmation, 517 Scriptures, and the excellent sayings of ancient and learned fathers, in the profession of the lawes, the recorded opinions and determinations of the most graue and prudent Iudges, in the doctrine of Phisicke, the rules and directions of the best approued Authors: in the lectures of Philosophy the most high and prudent reasons of the most renowmed Philosophers, and so consequently in all others. The first and chiefe point that is to be obserued concerning this figure by way of Caution, is to take heed that good sayings 521 be not applyed to euill purpose, which commeth many times to passe by mans ignorance, insolency or mallice, or by Satans subtiltie. By ignorance men mistaking the sence of the authority 522 persons do oft apply sacred sentences to most prophane and vile vses wresting chast sayings to vnchast sences. By malice, 524 hipocrites and heretikes do most wickedly peruert the true sence and meaning of the holy Scriptures, as did the Scribes & Pharisyes the law of Moses. 525 either to the glory of God or the saluation of man: as may appear in the 4\. of Matthew and 6\. verse, where he most deceitfully and 527 maliciously abuseth that saying of the Prophet: He shall giue his Angles charge ouer thee, with the rest following. authority, opinion or sentence of some person: for the error or wickednesse in it. and die, made this answere saying: thou speakest like a foolish woman. Epicures: Let vs eate and drinke, for to morrow we shal die, which he reiecteth thus: Be not deceiued (saith he to the Corinthians)  529 euill words corrupt good manners. reiecteth the subtil attempts and false allegations of Satan by the mightie power and truth of his answeres. is most apt to refell errors and heresies, and to reiect euill counsell and lewd perswasions. be had that it be not bet against the truth, which the enemies of the truth are wont to do, as did ye Philosophers of the Epicures sect at Athens sayd, he is a setter forth of strange Gods. Prognostication of good, and it is a forme of speech, by which the Orator either interpreteth an vncertaine thing to the better part, or else declareth before that some good thing shall come to passe afterward, which he speaketh from diuine reuelation, or else collecteth it by some likely signes and tokens. there shalbe no losse of any mans life among you, but of the ship onely. To this figure or forme of speech do belong the prophetical blessings of Iacob concerning the happy successe that should come to 533 his posteritie long time after. signes and tokens the likely effectes of good causes, and to foretell them, as by the good towardnesse of youth to prognosticate the vertue and felicity of the future age, for a good beginning doth promise a good end, a good cause a good effect, a holy life a happy death, whereupon I may say mentioning some good man, and now dead, I speake of him that is in heauen. 534 This figure perteineth properly to consolation, hope and incouragement, and may be compared (in respect of the early 535 and prognosticate seuerity, or to the prosperous spring, which ministreth hope of a plentifull haruest. 537 The greatest abuse that this figure may comit is, when it turneth away from the right and lawfull vse to deceaue and seduce 538 by flattery and malice, or by the false interpretation of dreames. The abuse of this figure hath prognosticated and promised to many men felicity, crownes and kingdomes, and haue performed wofull miserie, captiuity and destruction, and therefore needfull to be forewarned and good to be auoided. 539 Ominatio is sometime taken in good part, and then is it Euphemismus last spoken of, but it is more oft put for the contrary, and then it is a forme of speech, by which the Orator foretelleth the likeliest effect to follow of some euill cause. purposes, beleeue me thou canst not long continue. An example of holy Scripture: How long wilt thou sleep O stuggard, when wilt thou arise out of thy sleepe, &c. Therefore thy pouerty commeth vpon thee as one that trauelleth by the way, & thy necessity like an armed man. By this figure the Orator foresheweth beggery to the slothfull, shame to the proud, mischiefe to the quareller, and the gallowes to the thiefe. hearer, whether it be applied against him, or against any other. The principall effect whereof is, that by the consideration of the euill end foreshewed, ye cause of that euill effect is oftetimes by grace and wisedome auoided. This forme of speech is abused diuerse wayes: first when it riseth from anger and malice without any likely coniectures 541 gathered from causes, such as men do commonly vtter in their rage, making malicious prognostications against the parties with whom they be angry, as that they wil be hanged, or that the Deuill will one day fetch them, it would be a very wofull world if all such Prognostications should proue true: but for as much as they seldome take effect, the malicious planet is generally conteinned, and the false Prognosticator is commonly derided. life or death of men by the tune of their birth: as collected by constellation, and influence of some malicious Planet. Thirdly it is abused by foretelling of ill fortunes, and that either by Phisiognomy, or Palmistrie, which are nothing else 543 but meere illusions and vanities more worthy to be abhorred, than to be beleeued. of men, foretelling the death of great men, the mutation of kingdomes, the great mortalily of men, and the vtter confusion of all the world with the prefired and forenamed times, as the yeare, the day, and sometime the houre, which haue so often failed, and proued false, that wise men will beware how to beleeue the. Fiftly, it is wont to be abused by foolish obseruations of certaine accidences, as to gather coniectures of some trouble, losse, 545 death of some frendes, and such like, by dreames, by bleeding of the nose, by spots vpo the hand, by the stumbling of a horse, by the death of beese, by a hare crossing the way, and by an infinite number more of such like vncertaine signes and false causes of coniectures. Rhetorick it is a forme of speech, by which the speaker or Orator commendeth certaine profitable rules and precepts to his hearers and to the posterity. 546 thine eare vnto my prudence, that thou maist regard counsell, & thy lips obserue knowledge, &c. Another: My sonne keepe thy fathers commandements, and forsake not the law of thy mother. After these presepts, he addeth the rules, and partes of his counsell: Iosephgeueth instruction to his brothers what answere they should make to Pharaoh, 547 Paul deliuereth rules to Timothic concerning Bishops, Deacons, widowes and seruants. Peter geneth good precepts to wiues concerning their subiection 548 to their husbands, and their modestie in apparell. Iudges, saying: Moreouer prouide thou among all the people, men of courage, fearing God, men dealing truely, hating couetousnesse, & appoint such ouer them to be rulers ouer thousands, rulers ouer hundreds rulers ouer fifties, & rulers ouer ten, and then let them iudge the people at all seasons, &c. and authoritie in the speaker and rule giuer: Examples hereof are the Patriarks, Apostles, Lawmakers, magistrates, parents & gouernours, for from these (as conduits of wisedome, ordeined by almightie God for our direction) we receiue the holesome rules and profitable counsell of life, by which we are guided through ye wildernesse of this life illuminated in the middest of our darkenesse, and supported from falling into wilful confusion. By this forme, the wisedome of the Creator giueth precepts to his creatures, Patriarks to their posterity, Prophets to their people, Princes to their subiects, Parents to their children, and old age to tender youth. the corruption of men, abusing their wittes as by giuing vngratious and euil counsailes, or their authoritie by making vngodly lawes and edicts, or by commanding & persuading things blameworthy as did Rebeccah, commanding and counselling her 552 Esau his elder brother. Briefly this forme of speech is abused by 553 false prophets and teachers, by wicked Princes, vngodly parents, and vngratious counsellers. precept, of vertue a promise of reward, and to the contempt of a precept, he denounceth a punishment, whereof this example of Moses may sufficiently shew the forme, where he saith: If thou shalt obey the voyce of ye Lord 554 thy God, and obserue and do all his commandements, which I command thee this day, then the Lord thy God wil set thee on hye aboue all the nations of the earth. And all these blessings shall come vpon thee &c. But if thou wilt not obey the voyce of ye Lord 555 thy God, to keepe and do all his commandements, and his ordinances, which I command thee this day, then all these curses shal come vpon thee, and ouertake thee, &c. for by the promise it worketh a hope of that which men desire, and by the threatning it moueth hate, and by them both an 558 obedience of that which is commaunded: what forme of speech in this respect can do more, or what so much? of punishment, are vsed to moue and further the obedience of vnlawfull precepts, or the performance of wicked counsell. As did Balake the King of the Moabites, promising Balaani promotion of honour, and great gifts to curse his enemies the Israelites. 560 his golden image, should be cast into a firie furnace. These two examples may suffice to shewe how much the wicked abuse their willes, in wicked precepts their wealth in allurements, and their power intennors, al which tend to the abuse of this excellent forme of perswasion. transitu, and properly in Rhetoricke it is called a form of speech by which the Orator telleth or maketh mention of something, that it may be a fit occasion or introduction to declare his further meaning, or principall purpose, which is a speciall and artificiall forme of insinuation. A verte apt example we haue in the 1 7. of the Acts, of Paul who tooke an occasion by the Aultar which he saw in Athens as he passed by, both to reproue the idolatry of the Athenians, and also to teach them the true worship of the liuing God. The Euangelist Luke doth thus record it: Then Paul stood in the midst of Mars street, & said: Ye men of Athens, I perceiue that in all things ye are too superstitious, for as I passed by, I found an aultar wherein is written vnto the vnknowne GOD, whom ye then ignorantly worship, him shewe I vnto you, God that made the worlde, and all things that are therin, seeing he is Lord heauen & earth, dwelleth not in templesmade with hands, neither is worshipped with mens hands, as though he needed any thing, seeing he giueth to all life and breath and all things, and so consequently, he proceedeth to the full declaration of his purpose. It is verie necessarie to foresee that the narration may be like to the purpose that shall follow, and then this figure becommeth 561 as it were an artificial & cunning key of speech to open the doore of occasion wherby ye purpose & desire of the mind do find an apt and easie enterance into the desired libertie of vtterance, and the way that is thus prepared, is both readie, profitable, and worthie of singular praise, and no doubt a speciall point of wisedome. forme of speech by which the speaker alledgeth a premeditated excuse conteining reasons of such might as are able to vanquish all obiections. A most artificiall example whereof is found in the answere of Aeneas to Dido, in the 4\. booke of Aeneidos, whereof I haue gathered the summe both of the obiections of Dido, and of the answeres & excuses of Aeneas, and haue put them into partes as they stand in the Author, and first of her obiection then after of his excuse and answere. and very likely signes, his vnkinde and wicked purpose to steale away from her, to whom she declareth her most feruent loue, charging him with his promise, faithfully plighted to her. Princes, and despised of her owne people, that for his sake her high and exalted fame were vtterly lost. wilfully persist, & wickedly proceed in this his euil purpose, which did most wofully and grieuously appeare vnto her. followeth: First he confesseth her kindnesse, goodnesse, and liberalitie. Secondly, he vtterly denieth that euer his entent was to depart by stealth. Thirdly, he telleth her that wedlocke was neuer his meaning, nor his comming. Fourthly, he saith, yt he greatly desireth to restore his ancient citie of Troy. to Italy. Sixtly, he argueth from equall comparison that if the might take delight and pleasure to dwell in Carthage her natiue Citie and country, why might not the Troyans likewise repaire to the land which they most loged after? Seuenthly, he sheweth her thathis fathers ghost doth euery night warn him away. Eightly that he did wrong to his sonne Ascanius, to withhold him so long from Italy, his promised enheritance. Ninthly, he signifieth that by a message from God himselfe, both appearing to his eyes and sounding in his eares, he is commanded to remoue and depart from thence, and therfore wisheth her to content her selfe, and cease her wailing for his loue which might not preuaile, and therefore in vaine. 571 This figure is a singular frame, and fortresse of speech, able to repell all the violence ad force either of vntrue and surmised 572 accusations, or vnreasonable requestes: or a ready fountaine to quench all vehement expostulations, and burning complaints of vnkindnesse vniustly conceiued. 573 The true and lawfull vse of this figure, is opposed by fained and false excuses, whereof there be too many examples in the world, and therefore the lesse need here to put an example. forme of speech by which the speaker perceiuing the might of his aduersary to be too great and too strong against him vseth gentle speech, faire promises, and humble submission, to mitigate the rygor and crueltie of his aduersary: we haue a notable example hereof in Iacob: Who searing the malice and might of his brother Esau, vsed this meanes to appease his rage and crueltie. He commeth before his family, assoone as he saw Esau, he shewed a signe of dutiful submission he bowed himselfe seuen times most humbly before he came neare to him, calling him his Lord, and himselfe his seruant, his family also children came likewise in seemly and suppliant order, and humbled themselues at his presence, yeelding obeisance and reuerence vnto him, by meanes whereof the strery and flaming wrath of Esau was turned into teares of compassion. where the Embassadors of the Israelites, do deliuer their humble submission to Olophernes, in these words saying: Behold we are the seruants of Nabucodonozor the great King, we lye downe before th ae, vse vs as shall be good in thy fight behold our houses and all our places, and all our fieldes of wheate, and our flockes, and our heards, and all our lodges and tabernacles lye before thy face: vse them as it pleaseth thee. Behold, euen our Citties and the inhabitants thereof are thy seruants: come and take them as it seemeth good to thee. So the men came to Olophernes and declared them vnto him after the same maner. of ciuill pollicie and spirituall wisedome, in respect of ciuill pollicie it often appeaseth the malice of enemies, mollifieth the cruell hearts of tyrants, saueth the life of innocents, and preuenteth the destruction of Cities and countries, which the histories of times do sufficiently confirme. In respect of spirituall wisedome this forme of humble submission of man to his high iudge, & imperiall prince moueth compassion, turneth away his heauy displeasure, and obtaineth grace and mercy. If Achab being a wicked man found fauour in Gods sight to escape present punishmet due to his iniquitie, onely by humbling himselfe before him, how much more shal good men in the true and contrite humilitie of repentance preuaile with the same God, who neuer desireth the death of a sinner, but rather that he may conuert and liue? it thus: There is some (saith he) that being about wicked purposes do bow downe themselues, and are sad, whose inward part purne altogither with deceyt. And also he sheweth 576 that such a one vnder colour of humble submission, will execute his malice vpon thee before thou shalt be able to preuenth.m. the Orator or speaker being a pacient of many and great inturies, or of some one great and greeuous wrong, pronounceth pardon and forgiuenesse to his aduersary, who was the worker of all his miserie. 577 saying: Father forgiue them, for they knowe not what they do. 578 voice, saying: Lord late net this sinne to their charge. 579 The vse of this figure doth aptly serue to commend the elemencie, charitie and mercy of the speaker, and also to note the impietie of the malefactor, and that significantly in the forme of remission, 580 and signification of iniury. In the vse of this figure it is necessarie and also a speciall poy it of wisedome to take heede, that forgiuenesse he not graunted, 581 lenitie and readinesse to forgiue, is the manifest supporting of impunitie, whereupon the common prouerbe did first rise: That foolish pitie, vndoeth many a Citie. is done by proclaiming or pronouncing forgiuenesse to hun which hath done no iniury, as for to say: God forgiue him. This saying is a hinde of accusation, and sufficient to raise a suspition, and yet expresseth nothing. Orator reciting a sentence or saying of some Authour, addeth and deliuereth his opinion or iudgement upon it, and that either in the praise or dispraise of it, or in giuing light to it, which to best performed in a short addition. In praise, as when the Orator hauing recited some notable saying of an Author worthie of obseruation, he addeth his commendation to it, commending it for the excellency, in respect of the wisedome, equitie, holinesse, comfort, pleasantnesse, or profit contained in it. In dispraise, as when the Orator deliuereth his iudgement vpon a saying which seemeth to him euill, and worthie of that note, dispraising it in the respect to the folly, iniquitie, prophanesse, vntruth, or absurditie which it containeth. In giuing light to it, as when the Orator perceiuing ye words, or sentence of an Author to be obscure or ambiguous to his hearer, sheweth his knowledge iudgement or opinion vpon it, wherby maketh that plain and euident, which was before darke and hard to be vnderstood. An example of our Sauiour Christ, saying: Ye haue heard that it was sayd to them of old time, Thou shalt not commit adultery. 583 but I say vnto you, That whosoeuer looketh on a woman to lust after her, hath committed adultery with her alreadis in his heart. This figure in respect of the praise which it giueth to a sentence or a dectrine, causeth attention and loue, attention when the 584 praise go before the sentence, loue when it follow after. In respect of the dispraise it worketh the contrary, except when the saying is first odiously noted to procure attention to the large declaration following. it is an ordinary meane to auoyd errors, and a lanterne of light to direct int he darknesse of speech. The most vsuall and common abuse of this figure, groweth either of ignorance or enuy, for ignorance often commendeth that which deserueth hatred, and enuy is readie so detract and diminish the estimation of good things. And as concerning the addition of light to the sense, ignorance is alwaies a deceitfull guide to lead the iudgement into errors. Orator vseth to take away, or diminish a sorrow conceiued in the minde of his hearer. (quoth be) that many a vvo haue bid, & borne ere this, Worse haue vve seene, an lithese also shall end, vvhen Gods vvill is. excellent, president for a profitable forme of consolation. First, he obserueth oportunitie, staying til time had made a preparation for the salue of consolation, and then he commeth as a most prudent and diuine Phisition, and ministreth his medicine of spirituall comfort, in these words saying: Blessed is the man whom God correcteth, therefore refuse not thou the chastening of the almightie, for he maketh the wound and bindeth it vp, he smiteth and his hand maketh whole. After this he addeth many branches of Gods mercy, louing kindnesse, and fatherly protection towards his children, and thereupon concludeth that Iob ought to apply all these considerations to himselfe, as most precious medicines able to minister consolation and strength to his fainting spirit. The vse of this figure is great and most necessarily required in this vale of misery, where mens harts are often fainting, and their mindes falling into despaire, for so great are means losses in this fratle life, and so little is their fortitude to beare them, that they fall downe in their weaknesse lying still opprest vnder their heauy burthen, neuer able to rise againe, without the strength of comfort and consolation: for so great is the infirmitie and frailty of man being left alone to himselfe in affliction and misery, that he is compared to the ware that melteth at the heate of the fire & to the smok ye is driuen away with ye power of ye wind. Against this weaknesse, consolation ministreth strength & restereth men to life and ioy, that were dying in misery and sorrow. to take heede that consolation be not applyed where correction and commination be more needefully required, as they do which apply the vse of comfort to hypocrites and scorners of Gods iudgements. soone, when the wound is new made, and the bloud running swiftly in the streame of effusion, I meane the sorrow newly be gun, and the affections confounded with the beholding, and consideration of the wofull losse or miserie: or too late, as when the sorrow is either forgotten, or wel asswaged, for then it may by a needlesse remembrance rather renew and call againe the sorrow nye at an end, then vtterly quench it. Thirdly, that it be not vnproper and impertinent to the cause and necessitie to which it is applyed. Fourthly, that it be not weake by reason of the foundations consisting only in Philosophy and humane wisedome which do many times rather increase sorrow then diminish it: these and many mo such like faultes offending against the true forme of consolation ought most carefully and diligently to be shunned, otherwise the vse of consolation shall take small effect. which the speaker geueth thankes for benefites receiued. yea great thankes wee yeeld to thee. Another of our sautour Christ: Father I thanke thee for that thou hast heard me. This forme of speech is vsed much with acknowledging the benefites receiued, and the vnworthinesse of the receiuer, whereof we haue an example in Iacob these words: I am not worthy of the least of all thy mercies, and all the truth which thou hast shewed vnto thy seruant, for with my staffe came I ouer this Iordan, and now I haue two droues. Sometime it is ioyned with a confession of the vnablenesse of the receiuer to requite the giuer, after the example of Dauid, where he saith: What shal I giue vnto the Lord for all the benefites 589 towards me? or, for all the benefites which he hath bestowed vpon me? 590 goodnesse of the giuer by whom the speaker or thankesgiuer hath been fauoured, relieued, enriched, aduaunced, instructed, pardoned or protected. And to expresse the mindfull gratitude of 591 the receiuer, who by his giuing thankes declareth that he hath neither buried the benefite, nor forgotten the giuer, but setting them both before the eies of his mind, acknowledgeth his bounde 592 duty towardes so great fauour and goodnesse, and that he ought therefore both to loue the fountaine with his heart, and to praise him with his mouth. 593 To giue small thanks for great benefits argueth ingratitude or folly: and contrariwise to yeeld great thankes for trifles betokeneth flattery: To repeat thanks openly without some fit occasion inducing to it, is a point of folly. So in giuing thankes to name the benefites, namely if they be very small and scarce worth thanks, is an absurdity in the speaker, and a disgrace to the giuer: to giue scornful thanks for frendly gifts is a most wicked and impudent ingratitude: To giue compelled thankes doth accuse the receiuer either of ingratitude, or of forgetfulnesse. answere, conteining a reason of that which he hath said or done, prouing thereby that he ought not to be blamed. of impaciency and anger, of sinne and folly, replyeth thus: O that my greefe were well weied, and my miseries layed together in the ballance: and by and by after he addeth, saying: Doth ye wild 595 asse bray whe he hath grasse or looweth ye Oxe whe he hathfodder? In this forme of speech our Sauiour Christ doth many times 596 defend his doings against the accusatio of his enemies: as, for healing the man with the withered hand on ye Saboth, he saith vnto them: Is it lawful to do good or to euil on the Sabboth? to saue a man or to destroy him: And also in  Matthew: which of you hauing one sheepe, if it fall into a pit on the Sabboth, wil not pull it out and raise it vp? In like manner he desendeth his Disciples being accused for pulling the eares of corne on the Sabboth day, by alledging the example of Dauid eating the shew bread in his great hunger. Secondly by shewing his authority being Lord of the Sabboth. And thirdly by citing a sentence of Ose, which he thus applyeth: If 597 you knew saith he) what this meaneth, I will haue mercy and not sacrifice, you would not haue condemned the Innocentes. And being also accused by his enemies for eating and drinking 598 with Publicans and sinners, he answereth saying: They that are whole neede not the Phisition, but they that are sicke: And also I am not come to call the righteous but sinners to repentance. lawfulnes of ye cause before he taketh it in hand to defend: for to maintaine wicked sayings or lewd deedes is a manifest iniquity, An example whereof we haue in  Roboam Salomons sonne, who 602 both vnwisely and vniustly defended the rigor and oppression of his gouernment, making this cruel answere to his people that complanined: My Father (saith he) chastised you with roddes, but I will chastice you with scourges. Also to regard that his answere may containe a sufficient reason, and not to alledge will for reason, or answere as Pilate did to the Iewes, finding fault with his superscription, that I haue written (saith he) I haue written. conteining the summe and conclusion thereof: And first of a matter vttered. 603 Another of the holy Scripture: So mightily grew the word of God and preuailed. 604 Lo, we haue for saken all and followed thee. 605 heare, and the dumbe to speake. 606 admiration of the speaker in respect either of the 607 called the Rhetoricall plausus, for it euermore endeth with a proclaimed liking, or much maruelling, that is to say, an amplifying of honesty, wickednesse, pleasure, dignity, profit, losse. 608 would we haue it: or as did Herods hearers, shouting and saying: the voice of a God and not of a man: Figures of consultation I call such, which by reason of their forme and interrogation seeme to consult and deliberate with the hearers, the figures of this order are of great strength and force in an oration, and as it were the principall motion and life thereof: they quicken the dulnesse of the hearer, they cause attention, and do vrge the hearer to the consideration of the answere, or to the expectation thereof: they are mighty, and also most apt to confirme or confute, to praise or dispraise, to accuse or defend, and briefly they are most fit formes for a most earnest and vehement oration. one simple and plaine, which is, when we aske with desire to receiue an answere: as did the Mariners of Ionas: Tell vs (say they) for whose cause are we thus troubled? 612 what is thine occupation? and whence commest thou? what countrieman art thou? and of what nation? And as ye wise men did, saying: Where is he that is borne king of ye Iewes? The other kind of interrogation is figuratiue, and it is when we 613 aske not with intent or desire to receiue an answere, but onely because we would thereby make our speech more sharpe and vehement, and much better further our purpose: and this forme of speaking may serue very wel and aptly to expresse any affection, as may appeare in these examples following. vnto mythroat? 3\. Desire: How long tarriest thou Lord? our Sauiour Christ: O fiathlesse & crooked generation 617 how long shall I be with you? how long shall I suffer you? not vrge and compel mortal men so attempt? 6\. Doubting: What shall I do, whither shal I go, to whom shal I flee for succour? 7\. Wishing: Shal I not see him before I die? ye is, I would I might. 8\. Sorrow or pittie: Why dyed not I in my birth? why set they me vpon their knees, and gaue me sucke with their breastes? what sea may me (now wretch) receiue? what shall I do? This figuratiue demaund hath many and diuerse kindes differing among themselues as their descriptions and examples shall declare. something strongly. 618 dissimulation? 619 abominable? 620 peruert iustice? can a rush be greene without moisture, or may the grasse grow without water? that is to say, it cannot. 621 the supporting of good causes, and also very, necessary to countenance truth and verity: and it may aptly be compared to the point or edge of a weapon, wherewith the Champion desendeth himselfe, and woundeth his enemie. 623 dency, as either in accusing falsly, or in denying shamelesly. and vse many questions in one place, whereby he maketh his speech very sharpe and answered with one word either graunting or denying, but this not without many. Cicero for Roscius: In what place did he speake with them? with whom did he speake? did he hire them? whom did he hire, and by whom? To what end, or how much did he giue them? himselfe for euer, and will hee be no more intreated? Is his mercy cleane gone for euer? and is his promise come vtterly to an end for euermore? hath God forgotten to be gracious? and will hee shut vp his louing kindnesse in displeasure? the former, it is mighty to confirme, to confute, to prouoke, to cause attention, to mooue affections, and it is well and aptly 628 632 not be vsed to deceaue the hearer by the multitude of questions, and thereby to countenance falshood and oppresse the 634 demaund. defied and blasphemed? against whom hast thou lifted vp thy voice, and exalted thy proud lookes? Euen against the holy one of Israel. grace may abound? God forbid. any woman of one offence, they deemed her by plaine iudgement to be conuicted of many: by what reason? for whom they iudged vnchast in life, they esteemed also guilty of poysoning: why so? because it must needes be, that she which addicteth her body of vnlawful lust doth scare many: who be they? her husband, her parentes, and others of whom she seeth the infamy of her dishonesty doth concerne: what then? it must needes be that by any meanes shee may, shee will indeuor their destruction, whom she seareth so much: wherefore? because there is no honest means to hold her backe whom the greatnesse of the offence maketh fearfull, intemperancy bold, and womans nature rash. What iudged they of her which was condemned of petsoning? Also of necessity vnchast of body: wherefore? because nothing might sooner moue her to that wickednesse then dishonest loue and intemperat lust. Forasmuch as they thought that the body of that woman could not be chast whose mind was corrupt: what, did they not obserue the same in men? no: why so? because any desire doth thrust men forward to any one mischiefe, one desire leadeth women to all mischiefes. Another example of the same Author: Our elders did wel prouide this law, that it should not be lawfull to put to death any King whom they should take in battaile: why so? because it were against reason and equity to imploy that power which fortune hath giuen to vs, in the punishment of those whom the same fortune had a little before placed in a most high and honorable estate: what for that he brought his army as an enemy? I do forget it: why do you so? because it is the part of a constant and valiant Captains to esteeme them his enemies which do contend for the victory, and to iudge them men which are ouercome, to this end, that fortitude may diminish warre, and humanity encrease peace: but would he haue done the like if he had won the field? I am perswaded he would not haue been so wise: why then dost thou spare him? because I haue alwaies vsed to contemne, and not to imitate such solly. conuenient to garnish eloquution, for that it reteineth ye minde of the hearer in attention, as well with the comelinesse and grace 637 of speech, as with the expectation of the reasons and answeres ensuing. take heed that the questions be necessary, and the answeres direct, and furnished with sufficient reasons: and therefore both in 639 the inuention, and also in the vse of this exornation, there is necessarily required both wit and iudgement, lest it fall into a barenesse of matter, and want of due forme. doubteth, either where to begin for the multitude of matters, or what to do or say, in some strange and doubtfull thing. Cicero for Roscius; Of what shall I first complaine O Iudges? or where shall I first begin? Of what or of whom shall I call for helpe, of the immortall gods, or of the Romane people? or shall I most pitifully craue your defence, who haue the highest authoritie? Another example of the same Author: whether he tooke them from his fellowes more impudently, gaue them to an harlot more lasciuiously, remoued them from the Romane people more wickedly or altered the more presumptuously, I cannot wel declare. Sometime the speaker vseth many doubtes, together, thus: Where shall I seeke? where shall I search? whom shall I aske? which way shall I go? Sometime he doubteth what word to vse, I know not what to terme it, folly or forgetfulnesse, ignorance or wilfulnesse. matters, or ambiguitie of things can direct nothing, or say very litle. 642 many doubts or to doubt where there is litle need, 643 miratur, nescire videtur. counsell of his aduersary, or to deliberate with the Iudges what is to be done, or what ought to haue bene done. needed not your helpe there, but you in a maner mine, should I haue contended with priuate weapons agaisnt the peoples Tribune? 645 will you set vp vnto him? shall the caruer make him a carued image? or shal the Goldsmith couer him with gold? 646 spirit by the workes of the law, or by hearing of saith preached? 647 fitly to reprehension, and confutation. 648 649 iust that the Iudges may not condemne it, without oppressyng of manifest equitie. Figures of Permission, or Concession, are such formes of speech as do after a sort commit the cause in hand, or matter in controuersie to the consideration and iudgements of others, as either of the iudges or of the aduersaries, and these formes do serue most specially to confirmation. to his cause, giueth leaue to the Iudges or to his aduersaries, to consider of it with indifferencie, & so to iudge of it, if it be found iust and good, to allow it, if euil to condemne and punish it. lawfull right of my cause, which I haue declared, and commit it vnto you to iudge and determine it, as reason and wisedome shall direct you. foote hath made hast to deceiue. Let God wey me in the iust ballance, and ye shall know mine vprightnesse if my steppe hath turned out of the way, or my heart hath walked after mine eye, or if any blot hath cleaued to my handes: let me sow, and let another eate, yea let my plants be rooted vp, Hereby Iob sheweth wherein his vprightnesse consisteth, that he was guiltlesse and innocent before men, not offending against the second table. God, to hearken vnto you more then vnto God, iudge ye. of triall and equitie: for this forme of speech committeth the examinatio of the cause to be tryed by the touchstone of proofe, and by the ballance of equitie and conscience. cause be good, for otherwise he condemneth himself, & vtterly excluded fro mercy & fauour by his owne offer & sentence. Secondly, 656 it behoueth him so to commit his cause ye he may not withstading resume it if there be found parcialitie, peruerse affectio, or gresse ignorance in the persons to who such comission is granted. thing ironically, as much in meaning as an earnest forbidding, although the wordes be otherwise. Simo in Terence seemeth by his words very willingly to graunt, that his sonne might marry Glycerye, when in verie deede, he endeuoureth with all diligence to withdraw him from her, yes quoth he, let him take her, God speed him well, let him go dwell and keepe house with her. 657 hart cheer thee in thy yoong daies, & walke in the waies of thine owne heart, and in the sight of thine eyes. The plaine and true meaning hereof, is opened in the verse following. 658 hands together to sleepe a litle: but he addeth to expound his minde in the next verse. 659 The vse hereof, [illeg.]pertaineth most vsually to forbid, to threate and 660 an ironicall permission. 662 to take heed that it be not vsed where ignorance and simplicitie not perceiuing the figure, may take the meaning according to the words, and so commit that as it were by leaue and licence, which is most earnestly forbidden. to be true, by saying he would not haue beleeued it, or that it is so straunge, so great, or so wonderfull, that it may appeare to be incredible. 663 Paul being accused to King Agrippa, as a teacher of erronious doctrine, made his answere in ths forme: For the which hopes sake, O King Agrippa, I am accused of the Iewes, why should it be thought a thing incredible vnto you: that God should raise againe the dead. I also thought in my selfe that I ought to do many contrary things against the name of Iesus of Nazareth, which thing I did also in Ierusalem, for many of the Saints I shut vp in prison, hauing receiued authoritie of the high Priest, and when thy were put to death I gaue the sentence. Here Paul sheweth, that not long before he was of the same opinion that his aduersaries and the iudge were now of, and was in the like maner an open enemy to the professor of that name. This figure is then to be vsed, when the thing which is to be taught is new, straunge, incredible, and repugnant to the 664 kindes of men, that is, in old men and trauellers, from the one sort we haue the benefit of tradition, and from the other the frute of Geographie, the one kind of these men are messengers of auncient tunes, the other are Ambassadors of farre places. & of credit, lest ye which he affirmeth be either lightly regarded, or ridiculously scorned: also regard ought to be had, that ye things 668 which we report or teach by the forme of this figure be true. A far traueller that is a lyar, filleth the world full of wonders, and an 669 old man delighting in reporting vntruthes, leaueth many vanities, and false traditions behind him. whom he feareth, or ought to reuerence, & hauing some what to say that may either touch themselues, or those whom they fauour, preuenteth the displeasure and offence that might be taken, as by crauing pardon afore hand, and by shewing the necessitie of free speech in that behalfe, or by some other like forme of humble submission and modest insinuation. what sort you may take my words, but for my continuall desire that I haue to maintaine and augment your dignitie, I pray and beseech you, that if my speech be either bitter or incredible vnto you at the first hearing, yet that you would accept it without offence spoken of Marcus Cicero: Neither that you will reiect it before I haue plainlie declared the whole vnto you. by which he made an apt enterance, and ready pathway to his purpose; which was boldly to blame the Senate, & sharply to rebulte their vnconstancie, for that they were now about to toyne in peace with Anthony, who a little before was adiubged and taken for their vtter and extreme enemy: and now hauing changed their minds, were purposed to make him their friend. In the beginning he vseth a defence or mittigation, saying that hee speaketh with peril, & feareth in what sort or part his words may be taken, notwithstanding he promiseth that, that which he hath to say, shalbe for the manintenance & honour of the Senate, by which wise & lowly preparation, be obtained their fauour to heare him: then next be praieth them not to reiect his wordes before he hath declared the whole, how so euer displeasant they may seeme at the first. And finally, that it might please them to take in good part, whatsoeuer he should expresse and vtter, promising that al should be for their profit and aduancement, and also protesting that it should proceed from good will and entire affection. 670 for if I should go about to please men. I know not how soone my maker will take me away. Here Elibu declareth his purpose of free speech, and addeth his reason, but he made his insinuation before. 671 about to please men? for if I should, I were not the seruant of Christ. 672 This figure serueth to insinnate admonish, and reprehend, and may fitly be called the Herald or Ambassoador of speech, which neither magistrates that peruert lawes, nor Princes that do abuse their kingdomes. who is best able to moderate the forme of his speech, and to restrain it from that rude boldnesse which doth more hurt then 676 good, from whence there oft springeth a malice in the hearer against the speaker: a contempt of his doctrine, and sometimes a 677 a Coram nobis. As for the Prophets they were extraordinary 678 not to be imitated. his cause by equitie, or excuseth it by necessitie, or else doth extenuate it by alledging some other occasion. complained, but should I not come for mine acquaintance and friends behalfe against a stranger? should I not come against fauour gotten not with shew of vertue, but with gallantnesse of youth? should I not come against iniury, which he hath obtained by the helpe of a wicked partaker, and not by the lawe of procurators? Another: I forsooke my friend, but the lawes compelled me: I kept friendship most faithfully, as long as the lawes permitted me, and now I am not cast off by will, but by force of law to armour which is put on against fight, and put off against flight: for if defence saile, this figure turneth of excusation, if excusation cannot serue the turne, it flieth to exclamation, as the last refuge. 683 In vsing this figure we ought to regard that the defence be not iniurious, nor the excuse false, nor the extenuation excessiue or wicked. from the former frame of his speech to another, that is, when he hath long spoken of some person or thing, he leaueth speaking of it, and speaketh vnto it, which is no other thing then a sudden remouing from the third person to the second. Cicero in his Orations, hath plentie of examples of this figure, where sometimes he speaketh to Dolobella. Antony, and others being absent as if they were present, by this figure also the Orator turneth from his direct passage, to entertaine some historie or Apologie, which are fit for his purpose, but the most vsuall forme of this figure is in turning our speech from the third person to the second. leaueth speaking of Israel, and speaketh to Israel saying: O Israel thine iniquitie hath vndone thee. 684 This forme of speech serueth to a pleasant variation, by remouing from one person to another, and it is verie apt to vehement obiection, & grieuous complaints, and sometimes to praise, and it is well represented in a double forme of warre, as when a  685 puisant army after long siege, turneth vpon the sudden to a violent assalt and battery. 686 The speciall points to be here obserued are these. First, that the auersion be not too abrupt and violent. Secondly, that the to the second person, then that which was spoken of the third: for it is alwaies counted a fault to speake more behind the backe, then before the face, I meane in the speech of an aduersary. when the speaker leadeth away the mind of his hearer, from the matter propounded or question in hand, which maketh much against him. The way and cunning to do this, is manifold & almost infinite. Cicero when he should haue answered to an accusation, in which it was obiected that C aelius poison prepared in his house: and furthermore that the force of that poison was tried in a seruant of his, he digressed by and by to Metellus death, and maketh a suspition that he was poisoned by the mischieuous deede of Clodius: he sigheth, weepeth and bewaileth that death, whereby he staith and appeaseth his aduersaries, and causeth them to mourne with him, and to be strike (as it were) with the same wound, and so by his vehement and forcible perswasion turneth the mindes of the Iudges from the cogitation of the fact, now and then touching it a little, and slipping from it againe. or escape from a difficultie or hard obiection, or when the cause of the Orator is weake, and not able to abide the vttermost 689 triall. The other to asswage sorrow by leading the minde of the mourner from the matter of greese to new obiects: in respect of cuasion it may be compared to the subtilityes of war called strategems, 690 which do consist more in prouident counsell then in confident strength, by which means it commeth often times to passe, that a few preuaile against many, and wisedom against strength. 692 necessarie forme of speech, yet may it be abused by euill conscience, subtilty and craft, as when it is vsed to smother good causes, 693 and to shift out with euill matters, an abuse God knoweth too common. affection, as either of feare, anger, sorrow, bashfulnesse or such like, breaketh off his speech before it be all ended. 694 to thee: breaking off by the interruption of sorrow. Another: I am loth to vtter that with my mouth which is now in my minde, staying from further prouocation. Modesty bids me stay, here bashfulnesse is the cause of silence. 695 The vse of this forme of speech serueth either to stay the vehemency of our immoderate affections, proceeding to some excesse 696 or outrage, or to signifie by the halfe what the whole meaneth, that is, to raise a sufficient suspicion without danger of the 697 aduersary, & it is not vnlike to a truce in war, or sounding to the retreat. 698 If the sentence be borken off too soone, it leaueth the sense most vncertaine: contrariwise, if it be continued too long, it maketh 699 that manifest that should be secrete and shadowed with silence. If it be vsed in malice, it commonly leaueth the venome of some 700 false suspicion behind it, all which faultes are in wisedome and charity to be eschewed. themselues, wherof there be two kinds, the one when the worthiest word is set first, which order 701 is naturall, as when we say: God and man, men and women, Sun and Moon, life and death. And also when that is first told that was first done, which is necessary and seemly. The other kind of order is artificiall, and in forme contrarie to this, as when the worthiest or weigbhicst word set last: for the cause of amplifying, which the Rhetoricians cal Incremetum: the description whereof shalbe set downe among the figures of Amplification. and solemne customs of nations, where the worthiest persons are alwaies first named and highest placed. worthy, contrarie to ciuil obseruation and comelinesse, as to say, it pleased the Counsell and the king to make this law: My Mistresse and my Maister haue them commended to your worship. Hypallage, and Synchisis: all which are fauites of speech consisting in disorder and confusion. The figures of this order be such, which for the most part do both amplifie, and also garnith matters, and causes, and may be deuided into sower distinct orders, according to thier formes and effects, that is to say, into Distribution, Description, Comparison and Collection: these be the sower generall partes,whereof the whole body of Amplification consisteth, and are as it were the sower mighty and plentifull streams of copious eloquence, which are continually sed and filled with ye perpetuall and pleasant springs of mans wit: I meane those figures and formes of speech which the reason of man, the principall part and power of his minde, hath by long and diligent search found out, to the admirable vtterance of his knowledge, and glory of his wisedome, Now as the figures of the first order haue their speciall regard to the placing of words, and their proper grace in a musicall proportion, wherein the mind and wit of man euen by a naturall instinct taketh pleasure and delight: And also as the figures of the second order do attend vppon affections, as ready handmaids at commaundement to expresse most aptly whatsoeuer the heart doth affect or suffer: euen so the figures of this the third order do properly serue to matters, causes, and things themselues, as artificiall and cunning instruments apt and ready to amplifie & garnish with speech any cause or purpose, which mans wit can inuent or his capacity conceiue: for things by distribution are set forth plantifully, by description euidently, by comparison amply, and by collection strongly. Which forms of speech with their speciall kindes are commonly called the figures of amplification. And for asmuch as the principall part of Cloquence standeth by increasing and diminishing, distributing and describing, comparing and collecting: I will first shew what amplification is, how it is diuided, the vse of it, and also what matters ad causes are meetest for it, and after I will proceede to the particuler treatise of euery figure in their seuerall orders. Amplification is a certaine affirmation very great and weighty, which by large and plentifull speech moueth the mindes of the hearers, and causeth them to beleeue that which is said. Amplification in respect of the matter wherein it consisteth is either of words or of things: of words when a very great word is put for another word which is not so great, or contrariwise, when a lesse word is put for another word which is not so little, or when a word is such and so applyed, as doth amplify the thing it expresseth: of things, when things themselues are especially respected and amplified. name of a figure, yet as a generall of many specials, and vnder kindes, and that of such as do either increase matters, or enrich the Oration with apt and pleasant speech: and those figures may conueniently be diuided into sower orders, as aforesaid, that is to say, into Distribution. Description, Comparison, and Collection: of all which I will speake and intreat in their seuerall places, and also of their speciall kindes, in like maner, as I haue hitherto obserued in the figures. This Exornation was first deuised to increase causes, and to augment the Oration with words and sentences: wherby the hearers might the sooner be moued to like of that which was spoken: and indeede it is a singuler art, and mighty to delight and perswade the mindes of men to the purpose and drift of the speaker: It is full of light, plenty, and variety, causing 709 drawing the mindes of his hearers to his owne will and affection: he may winde them from their former opinions, and quite alter the former state of their mindes, he may moue them to be of his side, to hold with him, to be led by him, as to mourne or to maruel, to loue or to hate, to be pleased or to be angry, to fauour, to desire or to be satisfied, to seare or to hope, to enuy, to abhorre, to pittie, to reioyce, to be ashamed, to repent, and finally to be subiect to the power of his speech whither soeuer it tendeth. The Orator by helpe hereof either renteth allin peeces like the thunder: or else by little and little, like the flowing water creepeth by gentle meanes into the consent of his hearers. Matters which fall into this kind of exornation, ought to be great, excellent good, or notorious euill, cruel, horrible, maruellous, pleasant, or pittifull: after which may follow and that worthily, desire, hatred, feare, admiration, hope, gladnesse, mirth, pittie, weeping, and such like affections. The places from whence Orators do fetch these causes be noble and famous enterprises, great and worthy vertues, wonderful & strange accidents, wicked and horrible factes, as murders, parricides, destructions of Citties, tirannie & slaughter, rapes & whoredome, periuries, conspiracies, robberies and briefly what soeuer is commendable, and do merit high praise or abominable, and deserueth punishment: whatsoeuer is very pleasant or very lamentable, whatsoeuer is thought deare and precious, profitable, admirable, detestable or dangerous, may minister matter to Amplification: and finally all such thinges as cannot be heard without a great motion of minde: Examples whereof are plentifull and almost euerywhere to be found in the orations of Tully. He doth amplifie the theftes, the sacrileges, the robberies, the letherous life of Verres, and also his new deuised paines, and punishments: the drunkennesse, the bold presumptions, the prodigalitie, and other such like wicked offences of Antony, the crueltie of Chrysogomus, the impudencie of Erutius, the homicides of Capiton, he doth vehemently inuey against Pi[illeg.]o, vehemently against Clodius, but most vehemently of all against Catiline. Contrariwise he doth highly praise and commend the vertues of his frends, as the knowledge, quicknese and happinesse of Pompcius in warlike affaires and martiall enterprises: he extolleth to the Cloudes C aesars liberality towards his frends, his mercie towards his captiues, and magnifieth most maruellously the nuber of his victories. The orations of this Orator are plentifully replenished with these exornations, and with many other like vertues of speaking, who excelled all others of his time, for by his eloquence he oft cast downe his aduersaries from their estate and dignitie, oftentimes by his copious speech and vehemencie of pleading, he frayed most excellent Orators from their frends defence, by the force of his speech he compelled C aesar to pardon Legarius, whom he came most greedily to condemne, and made Catiline (a most audacious traitor) dumbe in the Senate, with great vehemeney and copie, he disputeth much of religion, of duties, of the generall safetie of Citizens, of liberty giuen of the auncestors, of bondage odious to nature, of the intollerable euils of Antony, and other enemies of the countrey & common wealth. like to insue: from whence as from a most plentifull fountaine may be taken most excellent and apt examples of Amplification. which we dilats and spread abroad the generall kinde, by reckoning vp the speciall kindes, the whole by diuiding it into parts, and the subiect by rehearsing the accidents: the first distribution is by diuision of the generall, the second by partition of the whole, the third by enumeration of the subiects. There are besides diuers other figures which are kinds of distribution, but yet differing from these three: for I conteine all those figures vnder the name of Distribution, which do consist either in number or distribution. the generall kind into the special kinds, yet not in a dialecticall forme, but in a rhetorical maner 713 Aske the cattaile, and they shall inform thee ye fowles of the aire & they shal tel thee, the increase of the earth, and it shal shew thee, or the fishes of the sea, and they shal certifie thee, by which answere of Iob to his frends he declareth ye their wisedome was no other then such as the very brute beastes do daily teach, which he diuideth into sundry kinds, whereby he doth pithily & elegantly set forth & amplifie their grosse ignorance. By this figure not only liuing creatures, but also plats, trees flowers, the lights of heaue, the stones of the earth, mettals & all other such like may be diuided into their seueral kinds, whereby the large and bountifull worke of nature is spread abroad, and many secret causes are plainly discouered and brought into open light. 714 bosome of nature and to shew her branches, to that end they may be viewed and looked vpon, discerned and knowen. And also 715 so to spread out at large both vertues and vices in their kindes, whereby the oration is enriched with copie, & granished with variety, which do occupy the mind of the hearer with a pleasant beholding of new matter. 716 As a diuision may be vnperfect by defect, as in numbring too few kinds, so may it be superfluous in extending too far, by 717 enriched: by the other it is ouerburdened with too great a multitude of one sort. Also the diuision is much deformed if things of another kind be mingled with it: for by mingling of many kinds together it falleth in an odious confusion. 719 parts. Salomon diuideth his whole knowledge thus: for he hath geuen me the true knowledge of the things that are, so that I know how the world was made, & the powers of the elements, the beginning, the end & middest of times, how the times alter, and the change of seasons, the course of the yeare & situation of the starres, the nature of liuing things, the furiousnes of beastes, the power of the winds, the imaginations of men, the diuersities of plants, and vertues of roots, & all things both socret and knowen do I know: for wisedome the worker of all thinges hath taught it me. In like manner he reckneth vp, & rehearseth the parts of his prosperity in the 2. chap. of his 720 plough to get his liuing his bed to take his rest, some frute of his labour for his frend, his bow & his spear for his enemy, his bow to meet him far off, & his speare to wound him nigh at hand, mourning at burials, mirth at mariages, & religious worship in their Temples. Here the generall custome of nations is the whole, which as you see is diuided into certaine partes. and varietie of matter, and of many fountaines or figures of eloquution, 721 there is not one that may be found more frutefull then this, or more plentifull in the multitude of branches. he did, that diuided his Oration into these foure partes: Why? wherefore, for what cause, and to what end, this is called the diuision, or partition without a difference. into the antecedents, the effect into the causes, and into things annexed and following after the effect. 1 Of the subiect into accidents. An example: what may we thinke of man, whe we consider the heauy burthen of his miscrie, the weaknesse of his patience, the imperfection of his vnderstanding, the conflicts of his counsels, the insatietie of his mind, the breuitie of his life, and the certaintie of his death? prosperitie, his brestes are full of milke, and his bones runne full of marrow. Another dieth in the bitternesse of his soule, and neuer eateth with pleasure. Time likewise may be distributed, as the time of peace, the time of warre, the time of plentie, the time of dearth and famine which are the accidents of time. 2 A matter into the antecedents, and meanes by which it is brought to passe. That Cicero repressed the purposes of Catiline, thus it may be set foorth. The mischieuous enterprises of Catiline, who went about the vtter destruction of Rome, Marcus Tullius Cicero the Confull, by his prudent foresight did quickly smel out by his singular vigilance sought out, by his high prouidence found out, and by his maruellous loue to the common wealth shewed out. And then by his incredible eloquence he conuicted them, by his graue authoritie repressed them, by his might abolished them, and by his great happinesse quite ouerthrew them. 3 The numbring vp of the causes, is when we declare not the matter or effect nakedly, but rehearse the occasions and efficients whereby it began, proceeded, and continued, as if one should in making report of warre, shew also the occasion of the first kindeling, what were the causes of debate, who were motioners of enterprising the same warre, what hope of ech side to get victorie, what boldnesse on both parts in their meeting. Examples hereof are easily found in Poets and writers of histories: specially in Liuius. 4 The numbring and rehearsing of effects and consequents, when we do not declare a matter simply, but shew those things 726 warre, of three slaine armies of Romane people, of the death of many noble Citizens, of ouerthrowing the authoritie of the Senate, and finally of all euils whatsoeuer. 5 Also by this figure, the Orator distributeth to particular persons their particular duties, to Princes and subiects, maisters and seruants, to persons publicke and priuate, and briefly to all degrees. Also to number and rehearse the multitude of vertues or vires knowne in some person, to his great commendation, or deserued blame. Cicero for Cluentius, what man can there be remembred wiser then Publius Octauius? in law more learned, in faith, religion, and office more diligent, more deuout, and who in praising more pithie then he? more bitter in blaming? more wittie in sentence? more suttle in speaking and disputing? 727 the Oration with varietie, and also to enrich it with plentie. 729 Regard ought to be had in the vse of this figure, that it numbreth not too great a multitude of matters, nor rehearseth 730 false caules, effects, or duties, which maketh yt distributio absurd. diuideth the generall into the specials, but this remouing one thing from another, endeth them both by shewing a reason. Cicero for Ligarius. I demaund now, whether you will reuenge your owne iniuries, or the iniuries or the common wealth: if you do reuenge the iniurie of the common wealth, what answere will you make concerning your constancie in that behalfe? If that you do reuenge your owne, beware you erre not, which thinke that C aesar will be angry and retaine displeasure with your enemies, when he hath forgiuen his own. Also, either couetousenesse or pouertie compelled hin thus to do, not couetousnesse, for the maner of his life doth shew that he was neuer couetous, neither pouertie for he hath great riches. Another: Why should I now laie any thing to thy charge, if thou beest good, thou hast not deserued it, but if thou beest naught, thou carest not for it. reward, but If I do it against my wil, not withstanding a dispensation is committed vnto me. haue well spoken, why smitest thou me? a conclusion. this forme of speech. pith of some thing, and it is chiefly vsed, when there is a difference sought for betweene two words, which by defining, this findeth foorth. 1 An example: This is not fortitude but temertie, for fortitude is a contempt of perils by honest reason: temeritie is a foolish enterprise of perils, without respect of vertue. 2 Cicero for Marcus Marcellus: for neither is this to be counted thy life, which is contained in thy bodie and breath, but that is thy life (O C aesar I say) which shall liue and floorish in memorie vnto the worlds end, which posteritie shal nourish, which eternitie shall euer behold. 3 Glorious victorie consisteth not in slaying of poore people, as women, children, and impotent persons, with hunger and famine, wherein resteth neither fortitude, prudence, nor pollicie, but in subduing of couragious Captaines ouercomming of valiant souldiers, and winning of strong and mightie Cities. To this distinction, a lyke answere is made, a glorious victorie consisteth not so much in crueltie as in humanitie, not so much in shedding of blood, as in shewing of merry. Fire doth consume, & the sword doth deuour, but famine by litle and litle maketh tame the most puissant nations and stoutest people of the world. By this exornation also a word or an action, is eloquently distinguished in degrees by certaine generall wordes, thus: To powre forth thy curse against thy aduersary is malignity, against an innocent crueltie, against thy parent impietie, against God blasphemie. Another example: To refuse good counsell is folly, to contemne it is wickednesse, to scorne it is madnesse. 737 This figure is most apt and excellent to distinguish betweene words or matter of nie affinitie, or to separate one thing from brightly adorned with the shyning beames of glorious eloquence. signifying a certaine diuersitie in the parts which are diuided. Vlisses wound made come behind. made then that, that was betweene vs to day, I with bearing the blowes, and he with giuing them, till we were both weary. sweete sauour of Christ in them that are saued, and in them which perish, to one the sauour of death vnto death, to the other, the fauour of life vnto life. euident diuersitie, it confoundeth the partition with obscuritie and darknesse. forme of speech, which doth not only number the partes before they be said, but also doth also order those partes, and maketh them plaine by a kind of definition, or declaration. By definition, an example: follow, riches, pleasures, and honors, riches are the nurces of sinne and iniquitie, pleasures are the daughters of dishonesty, and guides which lead to misery: Honors are mothers and nurces of worldly pompe, and vanitie. There are three sorts of men which do dispose of all that a man hath, the Lawyer, the Phisition, and the Diuine. The Lawyer disposeth of his goods, the Phisition of his bodie, and the diuine of his soule. 747 Another of scripture: These be foure small things in the earth, yet they are wise and full of wisedome, the Pismire a people not strog, yet preparc they their meat in sommer, the Cunnies a people not mightie, yet make they their houses in the rockes. The Grashopper hath no king, yet they go forth by bands, the Spider taketh hold with her hands and is in Kings Palaces. 748 These things reioyce me, and by them am I bewtified before God and men, the vnitie of brethren, the loue of neighbors, a man and a wife that agree togither. Three sorts of men my soule hateth, and I vtterly abhorre the life of them: A poore man that is proude, a rich man that is a lyar, and an olde adulterer that doteth. 749 for the great plentie and copie of matter which it ministereth, and pleasaunt for the varietie which the seuerall partes containe. 751 It is verie behouefull to take heed that when the parts be numbred in generall, they be not sorgotten in the particular prosecution: as he that promised to expound the twelue articles of the Creed, and after could remember but nine. and it is when the Orator faineth and maketh as though he would say nothing in some matter, when not withstanding he speaketh most of all, or when he the time before he came to the office and gouernment of the common wealth, he shall go free. I will make no mention of his drunken banquets nightly, & this watching with bawdes, dicers, whoremaisters. I will not name his lesses, his luxuritie, and staining of his honestie, let him take his olde infamy for a vantage, the rest of his life shall alone, that I may make losse of his leaudnesse. Another: I do not say thou receiuedst brides of thy fellowes, I busie not my selfe in this thing, that thou spoyledst Cities, Kingdomes, and all mens houses: I let passe thy thefts and thy robberies: Paul to Philemon. So that I do not say, how that thou 752 swest vnto me thine owne selfe also. by the same forme. excepted, or when of things first expressed, some alteration is noted. 1\. Cxception out of the generall word. side, yet are we not in distresse: in pouertie, yet not ouertome of pouertic: we are persecuted, but not forsaken: cast downe but we perish not. 2 Another: The high thrones of Princes are glorious, yet changeable: dignities are sweet, yet they be dangerous: riches are good things, yet full of trouble: pleasures are the floures & frutes of life: yet are they full of the causes of miserie, and deceitfull baites of death and destruction. 759 2 Noting of alteration: I haue seene the wicked in great prosperitie and flourishing like a greene bay tree, yea, he passed away, and loe he was gone, I sought him but he could not be found. 760 and moderate great and swelling speeches, to mingle and temper commodities with their discommodities, as felicitie with miserie, 762 and contrariwise, as cares with comfort. And also to note imperfection, in things which seeme perfect. 763 It behoueth to take heed that the exception be not too generall, as if one should say we are in pouertie, yet we want nothing. 764 This kinde of exception disproueth the former assertion. Also that the exception be not too small, as if I shold say, dignities are sweete, yet they are enuied, this abateth nothing of the former praise. Orator doth multiply and heaue manie words togither, signifying diuerse things of like nature. 765 An example of the scripture: Thus all things were mixed togither with blood, manslaughter, theft, and deceit, corruption, and vnfaithfulnesse, sedition, periury, disquieting of good men, vnthankfulnesse, defiling of soules, changing of byrth, disorder in marriage, adultry, and vncleannesse. 766 are these: Adultery, fornicatio, vncleannesse, wantonnesse, worshipping of images, witchcraft, hatred, variance, zeale, wrath, strife, seditions, sectes, enuying, murther, drunkennesse, gluttony, and such like. Contrariwise, the frutes of the spirit, is loue, ioy, peace, long suffering, gentlenesse, goodnesse, faithfullnesse, meeknesse, temperance. This figure may be applyed to many purposes, as to praise, dispraise, accuse, defend, and confute, in vehement affections it is like the violent strokes of battaile, but in mildnesse it may be compared to a plentifull shower in a time of neede. VVeought in the vse of this figure of foresee that we make not too great an heape, and that of the same heape nothing be contrary one to another. the word which endeth the clause going before, beginneth ye next following, thus: The empire of Greece was the Athenians, the Athenians were conquered of the Spartans, the Spartans were vanquished of the Thebans, the Thebans were ouercome of the Macedons, who in short space ioyned Asia, being subdued by war, to the empire of Greece. Cicero 767 spring couetousnesse, from couetousnesse there bursteth out boldnesse, by boldnesse all wicked & vngratious deedes are furthered. lawes, and the keeping of her lawes is perfection, & an vncorrupt life maketh a man samiliar with God: He that receiueth you receiueth 769 In the beginning was the word, and the word was God, and God was the word. bringeth experience, experience bringeth hope. for the augmentation of matters, it consisteth often times of fower degrees, but commonly of three. 774 In vsing this figure we ought to obserue a meane, that there be not too many degrees and also to foresee that the degrees following, 775 may rather increase then diminish in signification and lastly, that they so ascend that they may end with a clause of importance. and a description is when the Orator by a diligent gathering together of circumstances, and by a fit and naturall application of them, doth expresse and set forth a thing so plainly and liuely, that if seemeth rather painted in tables, then declared with words, and the mind of the hearer therby so drawen to an earnest and stedfast cotemplation of the thing described, that he rather thinketh he seeth in then heareth it. By this exornation the Orator imitateth the cunning painter which doth not onely draw the true proportion of thinges, but also bestoweth naturall colours in their proper places, whereby he compoundeth as it were complexion with substance and life with countenance: for hence it is, that by true proportion and due coloure, cunning and curious Images are made so like to the persons which they present, that they do not onely make a likely shew of life, but also by outward countenance of the inward spirite and affection. So great and singuler is that science, that there is no creature vnder heauen, no action, no passion, no frame in art, nor countenance in man, whose true proportion and externall forme is not finely counterfaited, and wonderfully imitated. Trees and plaints in their colours, flowers in their bewty, beastes & birdes in their natures, men in their countenances and habite, some graue, some smiling, some angry, some weeping, some yong, some old, some asleepe, some dead, also in their degrees, as Princes and subiects, magistrates and prisoners, riche men and beggers, men of artes and occupations, ladies, gentlewomen, maidens, old women, captains, souldiers, finally al kind of persons in their countenance, gesture and apparell: euen so doth the Orator by his art and his speech describe and set forth to the contemplation of mans mind, any person, deede, thing, place or time, so truly by circumstances, that the hearer shall thinke that he doth plainly behold the matter described, Now vnder the generall name of Description, I do not only reckon speciall kindes of description, but also all other figures, which do chiefly respect circumstances and adiuncts without form of comparison seruing onely to make matters euident and lightsome. man as of a fained, is by his form, stature, maners, studies, doings, affections, and such other circumstances seruing to the purpose so described, that it may appeare a plaine and liuely picture painted in tables, and set before the eies of the hearer, The circumstances by which such descriptions he made are many, yet the most principal and most vsuall are these, parentage, nation, countrey, kind, age, education, discipline, habite of body, fortune, condition, nature of mind, studie, former deedes, apparell, &c. By these and such like circumstances the whole ma is liuely painted and portraited as wel his mind as his body, and as wel his qualities as his quantity: as for example, we may by the circumstances of age describe an old ma 776 in this manner, with crooked limmes, and trembling iointes, his head white, his cies hollow, his sight dimme, his hearing thicke, his handes shaking, his legges bowing, his colour pale, his skin 777 wrinkled, weake of memory childish yet couetous, suspicious testy, greedy of newes, credulous, misliking of the present world, and praising the former times: also by this form great persons are described, as emperours princes, bishops, noble captains, holy patriarks, graue iudges, & great authors. By this figure Cicero pain teth out Ebucius, and against Verres, he describeth Theomastus,  778 Quintius he painteth out Neuius with Quintius by an Antithesis. The descriptio of fained persons doth properly belong to poets, & is seldom or neuer vsed of orators: by this figure diuerse historiographers do most liuely describe noble captains, Kinges & Emperours to looke vpon. 779 descriptions of great persons. 782 and truth of the circumstances. and dunibe we faine a fit person, or attribute a person to a commonwelth or multitude: This figure Orators do vse as wel as Poets: the Orator by this figure maketh yt commonwealth to speake, to commend, to dispraise, to aske, to complaine, also life and death, vertue and pleasure, honesty and profite, wealth and pouerty, enuy and charity: to contend and plead one against another, and sometime he raiseth againe as it were the dead to life, and bringeth them forth complaining or witnessing what they knew. Sometime to Cities, townes, beastes, birdes, trees, stones, weapons, fire, water, lights of the firmament, and such like things he attributeth speech, reason, and affection, and to no other end then to further his purpose and to confirme and make his cause euident, as for example: If an orator hauing occasion to commend some vertue to his hearers, as truth or such like, he may after he hath sufficiently praised truth, faine it a person, and bring it in bitterly complaining how cruelly she is oppressed and how litle estoemed, how often outfaced, and how much abhorred, how many be her enemies, how few her frends, how she wandreth hither and thither without intertainment, and remaineth without habitation, he may faine her complaing against false ballances, weightes and measures, against false testimonies, lies and periurie, against wicked hipocrisie and cursed heresie, against feare, fauour and auarice which are her enemies in the seals of iudgement conspiring against her and violently throwing her downe from thence, and cruelly treading her vnderfoote, also he may cause her to accuse flatterie and detraction, theft, violence, and fraude, and to make a most true and long complaint, as well against persons that be her enemies, as against vices which do oppose and oppresse her. to reprehend, to confirme, and to commend, but the vse of it ought to be very rare, then chiefly, when the Orator hauing 785 were constrained to call for helpe and aide else where, not vnlike to a Champion hauing broken his weapons in the force of 787 his person and cause, or to an army hauing their number diminished, or their strength infeebled, do craue and call for a new supply. fained persons without some vrgent cause compelling him thereunto, Secondly, it is necessarie to prouide that the person 790 fained may speake to the purpose of the matter propounded, and giue strength to the fainting cause, and also minister a pleasure to the hearer: for other wise this figure shal be vsed without cause, 791 speake without profit, and be applied without pleasure. maketh him speake much or litle according to comelinesse, much like to the figure next before, but yet they differ in this whe the person whom the Orator faineth, speaketh all himselfe, then is it Prosopopeia, but when the Orator answereth now and then to the question, which the fained person obiecteth to him, it is called Sermocinatio as in this example of Ose. Ephraim thinketh thus: Tush, I am rich, I haue goods enough, 792 be it so, yet I am the Lord thy God which brought thee from the land of Aegypt, & yet wil I make thee dwell in tabernacles,  793 as in the daies of the solemne feast. In this figure warinesse and wisedome must be vsed that the speech may be agreeable to the person that is fained, and that it be no other wise then in likely the same person would vse, otherwise it will seeme foolish and absurd: therefore in this place it behoueth vs diligently to consider the circumstances both of persons and thinges, what is their estate, condition, kind, age, disposition, manners, studies, affections, fortune, cause, place, time, and such like: for one maner of speech may become some manner of persons, which is vnseemely for others: the speech of children is not so well seasoned with reason as of ye elder sort, a countrey man hath not so fine phrases as hath a courtier, souldiers are not so ciuil as citizens, Iudges are graue in giuing their opinions, & definitiue sentences, ruffins contrariwise are rash, running headlog vpon mischiefe, ye poore man speaketh submissiuely, the rich man more audaciously, the victor (for ye most part) speaketh much with insulting and much in deriding, yt vanquished person fearfully & pleasingly which is well obserued of poets: Dauus speaketh after one sort, and Simo after another. Thraso vseth boasting & bragging, Gnato flattering, but Chremes faithful & sober talke, poets & orators haue alwaies been diligent in obseruing a comelinesse: Cicero in this behalfe was maruellous cunning & most artificiall, who euermore gaue meet speech to yt person whom he fained to speake, whether he were his aduersary or his frend: he brought in Milo impudently, euer framing their speech according to their nature. The most necessary points of this caution are before sufficiently obserued and noted. onely what one said, but also his vtterance, pronunciation and gesture, imitating euery thing as it was, which is alwaies well performed, and naturally represented in an apt and skilfull actor. The perfect Orator by this figure both causeth great attention, and also bringeth much delight to the hearers, for whether he imitateth a wise man, or a foole, a man learned or vnlearned, insolent or modest, merrie or sorrowfull, bold or fearfull, eloquent or rude, he reteineth the hearer in a diligent attention, and that for a threefold vtilitie, in the imitated gesture a pleasure to the eie, in the voice a delight to the eare, and in the sense, a profit to the wit and vnderstanding. double forme, it may be compared by a double similitude as to a glasse and an eccho, the one representing the gesture and countenance, 797 799 by excesse or defect, which maketh the imitation vnlike vnto that it ought to be, which is wel described in Aesops Asse, vnaptly imitating the sawning dog. gathering together all circumstances beloging to them, doth as plainly portray their image, as if they were most liuely painted out in colours, & set forth to be seene: If one should say the citie was ouercome by an assault: he hath (saith Fabius) comprehended all in a summe, but if thou wilt open and set abroad all things, and euerie particuler effect included within that summe, there shall appeare many fires and scattered flames vpon houses and Temples, the noyse if houses falling downe, a confused sound of many thinges, and wofull cries, some flying with great perill, others imbracing their frends, and bidding them farewell for euer, infants scriking, women most bitterly weeping, olde men reserued by most vnhappy destinie to see that day, the spoiling of temporall, and prophaning of hallowed things, the running forth of them that carrie away the spoiles, and the submission of them that entreat for their owne goods, euery captiue led chained before his taker, the mother wrastling to retaine her sucking babe, and wheresoeuer great wealth is, there is also great fighting and contention among the spoilers themselues: now albeit this word Destruction might well comprise all these thinges, yet is it lesse to declare the whole then to name the partes, he comprehendeth the whole, which faith, the Cittie was taken and destroyed, and no more, but he that rehearseth all thinges orderly doth much more largely expresse the same, for he doth not onely say, the cittie was taken, temples ouerthrowen, houses burned, euerie thing spoiled, but also how the cittie was taken, temples, houses and buildings destroied, what perished else, what lamentation, what weeping, how horrible the slaughter was, the rauishing of Uirgins, the shedding of bloud, and many other thinges which is more, then if hee rehearseth the whole in a total summe. 804 [illeg.]King Aeacus ( in 7\. book of Metamorphosis ) maketh a pittifull description of a great and cruell pestilence. Virgils Aeneiados: Cicero describeth the murdering of Roscius, the luxuritie and riots of Antony with many other more. 805 To this figure belong the descriptions of warres, tempestes, shipwrackes, conquestes tryumphes, destructions of citties, and countries, murders, open shewes, dearthes and deathes. declare things plainly, and none more forcible to moue pittie. The chiefest regard in this discription ought to be, that the principall 807 effects and circumstances be not omitted. Secondly, that they be not preposterously placed, as to rehearse that last, which was first done: which fault is called Hysteron proteron.  808 Cicero describeth Syracus ae a Citie in Cicilia, and that cxcellently. In Plinie are the descriptios of Acara, Aegypt, mount Aetna, Africa, Alexandria, a famous Citie in Aegyt, Arabia, Armenia, Asia, Athens, Bithinia, Cipres, Creta, Dalmatia, Gallatia, Hispania, Italia, the Riuer Nilus, Pamphilia, the Ile of Rhodes, the Citie Rome, Sardinia, Cicilia, Thessalia, and many others. cities, townes, temples, pallaces, castles, walles, gates, mountaines, vallies, fields, orchards, gardens, fountaines, dens, and all other maner of places: vnder the type of this description, the Euangelist Iohn describeth the holy Ierusalem to the vnspeakable comfort of the faithfull. In the vse of this figure diligence ought to be vsed, that no necessarie circumstance be omitted, the want whereof may appeare a maime in the description. describeth a place, and yet no such place: As is the house of enuy, in the 6\. booke of Metamorphosis, the house of sleepe in the eleuenth booke, or else whe the place is not such a one as is fained to be, as is heauen and hell. In the fourth Orators: and because the vse hereof is rare and of small vtilitie in Rhetorike, I do omit both the obseruation of the vse, and Caution. sake, as the morning, ye euening, midnight, the dawning and breake of the day, the Sunne rising, the Sun setting, the spring of the yeare, Sommer, Autumne, the Winter, the time of war, the time of peace, the old time. 810 Examples, the morning: When the bright beames of the Cast haue driuen away the darke shadow of the night, and the cheerful birds do welcome the first dawning light with their glad songs, and when men shake off their soft slumbers, and euerie liuing creature receiue a new light to seeke their new foode, when the birds forsake their boughes, beasts their night lare, and when blacke cloudes be changed into a golden glorie. 811 The euening: The time when darknesse ariseth in the East, and starres begin to appeare, when labourers forsake the fields, birds betake themselues to their night boughs, and beasts to their harbour, and when the silence of all creatures is encreased through desire of rest. 812 tooke their sweet slumber, both woods and raging seas had lest their sounds, and starres now sliding in the midst of the night, when euery field is husht, both beasts and painted birdes, and water fowle of broad lakes, and such as keepe the wide and wilde country are fast in sleep, when cares were slaked, and harts had forget their labours. Here the Poet describeth the dead time of the night, to amplifie the dolorous sorrow of Dido, who could by no meanes finde rest at that time, when euerie creature enioyed rest. 813 In the same maner is described the spring time, as to say that season which bringeth comfort to euerie liuing creature, when the Sunne vislteth the face of the earth with his warme shine, the aire became temperate, fountaines and streames war cleare, pastures greene, when the floures of euery field, & the blossomes of euery tree do present their beautie to the eyes of the beholder, and the new and tender breed of breastes and birds are, brought forth & presented to man by the liberall hand of nature, at which time the birds sing lambes plaie, musicke is heard, youth reioyce, and the hearts of men become more glad: this is that time which bringeth calmenesse to the sea, temperature to the aire, beautie to the earth, clearnesse to the firmament, and a comfort to euerie creature. By the like obseruation of circumstances, are all other descriptions of time, whether it be the time of peace, or time of warre, of plentie or scarcitie, winter or sommer, or whatsoeuer else. There is another kinde of describing things and times, which is by making Images of them, which forme of description is called Icon, whereof shall be spoken hereafter. and great delectation to the mind of the hearer, wherevnto it hath the most especiall respect. 815 of all, or at the least, of the most effectuall circumstances belonging to the time described, for otherwise the description will be both vnperfect and vnpleasant. his hearers to some vehemecy of affectio, as of indignatio feare enuy, hatred, hope, gladnesse, mirth laughter, sadnesse or sorrow: of this there be two kindes. The first is when the Orator being moued himselfe with anie of these affections (sorrow excepted) doth bend & apply his speech to stir his hearers to the same: and this kinde is called Imagination, to which diuerse vehement figures do belong, as Exclamatio, Obtestatio, Imprecatio, Optatio, Exuscitatio, Interrogatio, and such like. And to moue mirth, formes of speech seruing to that purpose, as Asteismus, and others of that kinde. Now as I sayd before, matters that fall into this figure ought to be great, cruell, horrible, odious, pleasant, or maruellous, for the greater ye cause is, the sooner the affections of the hearers are moued. Examples hereof are common in Tragedies, but of mirth and laughter in Comodies. 2\. The other kind of Pathopeia, is when the Orator by declaring some lamentable cause, moueth his hearers to pitie and compassion, to shew mercy, and to pardon offences. To moue compassion, lamentable histories are oftentimes vsed, and likewise the liuely descriptions of wofull sufferings, and pitiful miseries, and how they may be artificially expressed. Poets complaints may giue apt examples. serious and deepe affection in the Orator is a mightie furtherance and helpe to this figure, as when he is zealous, and deeply touched himselfe with any of those vehement affections, but specially if he be inwardly moued with a pitifull affection, he moueth his hearers to the same compassion and pitie, by his passionate pronuntiation. For true it is, that the apt bending of ye voice to the qualitie and nture of the cause, is not only a necessary dutie in an Orator, but also an excellent ornament. This figure pertaineth properly to moue affections, which is a principall and singular vertue of eloquution. In the vse of this figure there are many and necessary points to be obserued. First that the causes themselues may be sufficient to moue the mindes of the hearers to affections and passions, for it must be effectuall matter, and not bare words that may worke so great effects in prudent hearers. Secondly, that there be a discreet obseruation of necessarie circumstances, as in what causes, what affections are to be moued, for in diuine Orations, and Sermons, to moue laughter doth much diminish and oppose the modestie of so graue an action, and so serious a cause. Secondly when and where, (that is) the time and place had need to be diligently obserued, lest through want of discretion such affections be moued as are most vnfit for the time, or vnmeete for the place, as mourning at marriages and ioyfull meetings: and contrariwise mirth at funerals & houses of mourning, are both repugnant to nature and contrary to custome. Thirdly, it is verie needfull to shunne the vntimely, and too hastie chaunge of affections, for first to moue pittie or weeping, and then presently to turne weeping, into laughter or contrariwise, sheweth the follie to be great, and maketh the action absurd. Fourthly it is the part of a prudent Orator to obserue a measure in mouing affections, lest he kindle that which he is not able to quench. Fiftly, fained matter, fond gesture, and counterfait pronuntiation ought to be hated and auoyded. thing, by comparing forme with forme, qualitie with qualitie, and one likenesse with another. I may by this figure paint out a rauenous and venomous person in this forme and manner: Euen as a cressed Dragon which with burning eyes, sharpe teeth, crooked clawes, gaping mouth, runneth hither and thither, and looketh euerie where whom he may finde to spit his poyson vppon, whom he may catch in his mouth, crash in sunder with his teeth, venome with his tongue and rent in peeces with his pawes. The cart of couetousnesse (saith he) is borne vpon foure wheels, Pustillanimitie, Uncurtesie, Contempt of God and Forgetfulnesse of death; it is drawne with two cattle in one yoke: Greedie catching, and Fast holding: to these there is one driuer: Uehement desire of encreasing. This driuer to moue speedelie forward, vseth two sharpe whippes: Greedinesse of getting, and Feare of loosing. This vice as you see, hath but one seruant because he is loth to hire many. 818 figure and image of things, there is required a sharpe wit, great reading, and a good memory that the workmanship and cunning may cause the beholder to view it with pleasure, to admire the proportion, to commend the colours, and praise the arte and wit of the workeman. 821 Vnapt proportion and vnlikenesse, are faultes which may much deforme this ornament, & like as this forme of speech 822 very rare. Is a figure or forme of speech, which ioyneth Adiectiues to those Substantiues, to whom they do properly belong, and that either to praise or dispraise, to amplifie or extenuate. 824 To praise thus: O wonderfull clemencie, O most holy discipline. Hence it is, that we say: Gracious Princes, honorable Iudges, reuerend Fathers, prudent Counsellors, valiant Captaines, deare parents, vigilant Pastors, godly Ministers, faithfull friendes, iust Stewardes, painfull labourers, &c. Another: A Prince of singular prudence, of valiant courage, of incomparable magnanimitie, of inuincible fortitude, of famous actiuitie, of most happy successe, & most fortunate dexteritie. Sometime the Epithet is put after his substantiue, & that most elegantly, as in this example of Tertullian: We pray (saith he) for all Princes, that their life may be long, their kingdome secure, their court safe, their armies strong, their counsellers trustie, their people good, the whole world quiet, and whatsoeuer else that subiect or Prince do desire to enioy. Many Epithets are often ioyned to one Substantiue, as for example: The iudgements of almightie God are great, iust, vnsearchable, maruellous and mightie. So contrariwise, one Epithet may be applied to diuerse Substantiues, as may appeare in this sentence conuerted: O happie Prince of such worthie Counsellers: O happie Counsellers of so worthie a Prince. slaughter. To dispraise persons thus: Euil counsellers, vnnatural parents, disobedient children, ignorant teachers, blinde guides, hipocriticall professors, &c. wonderfull art, glorious fame. In dispraise, insatiable auarice, wicked presumption, bloodie crueltie, diuellish subtiltie, mad drunkennesse, horrible feare. To extenuate thus: A small fault, a wicked cause, a feeble excuse, a momentany time. Lot vseths this figure where he saith to the Angels: See now this citie hereby, to flie vnto, which is a litle one: he calleth it a litle one, that by extenuating the thing he desired, he might the sooner obtaine it. either more generall or more excellent then this: for it carrieth alwaies with it, wheresoeuer it be applied a singular grace 828 and maiestie of matter, beside the beautie wherewith it garnisheth the sentence. A Speciall regard ought to be had in the frame & coniunction of this figure, that ye Epithets be not vnproperly or peruersly 829 applied, as to say: A valiant Phisitian, a reuerend labourer, a coragious Counseller, which is a forme of speech very vnproper and also very absurd. one word, or at the least with verie few, is declared and expounded with many, and that sundrie waies. As when for this word Philosopher, we say a man studious of wisedome, for Parasite a flatter for gaines sake: for Christian a worshipper of Christ. Secondly by Annotation: that is, when by certaine markes or tokens we describe any thing, as vnderstanding what anger is, we say it is a vehement heat of the mind, which bringeth palenesse to the countenance, burning to the eyes, & trembling to the parts of the bodie. Thirly by definition: For man, a liuing creature endued with reason, for a tyrant, an oppressor of the lawes and liberties of the common wealth. 830 There be three causes to vse this figure. The first necessitie, as when we cannot otherwise declare the thing, for want of a 831 proper word. The second is desire of copie and facilitie, by which the thing, word, or sentence is made more euident and lightsom, 832 desire to shunne obscenitie and naked telling of bashful matters, which is a part of modestie, much to be commended. Thus we see that there be three speciall causes of vsing this exornation, and whereunto the vse hath the chiefe respect, that is to say, necessitie, perspicuitie, and chastitie. 833 The first prouiso in vsing this figure is, to haue regard that the circumlocution be not too long, wherby it may make the speech both tedious and barren, for this exornation serueth only to garnish the Oration with varietie of wordes, and neuer encreaseth matter. The third is to regard that the annotations and definitions be not false or vnperfect, whereby the matter is rather obscured 835 then manifested. signification, we iterat one thing diuerse times. as a thing despised, reiected, oppressed, buried,. and vtterly extinct. Another: Is it not a true taken of intollerable arrogancie and venemous enuie, wher the tongue is stil exercised in depraving, slandering, defacing, deriding and condemning of other mens wordes and workes? honoured then noble Caesar? who was his equall in knowledge, vnderstanding, pollicie and wisedome? what was he that might be copared to him, either in courage of heart, in fortitude of mind or magnanimitie of nature? 838 doth he eate the etheral foode? and lieth he not yet vnder the cruell shades? Here through affection he expresseth one thing thrise: for all that he demaundeth is no more but this, is Ascanius aliue. of the wicked, and God hath no delight in the offrings of the vngodly: here the first sentence is repeated by the latter, but yet with other words of the same signification, for in the former is the highest, in the latter God, in the former doth not allow, in the latter hath no delight, in the one gifts, in the other offrings, in the first wicked, in the last vngodly. 840 and varietie of sentences, but most of all for that it signifieth the worthinesse of a word or sentence, deseruing repetition in a changed 841 habite, whether it be in affection of praise or dispraise: this figure adorneth and garnisheth speech, as a rich and plentiful wardrop, wherein are many and sundry changes of garmentes, to bewtifie one and the same person, Dauid, Salomon, and Esay, are much delighted in this exornation. 842 words considering the encrease no matter, for by too great a multitude, long time is spent, little matter exprest, and although the eares of simple hearers satisfied, yet their minds are smally instructed. 843 Secondly it is requisite to regard that the words or sentences be not vnlike or repugnant among themselues. extenuat yt which he expresseth: 844 not seene any man perish for want of clothing, or any poore for lacke of couering. Here if Iob had said that he had feasted many, that he had clothed euery poore body that should otherwise haue perished, he had not spoken so modestly, albeit that he had 845 sayd as truly. Also by denying the superlatiue, it taketh the positiue, thus. He is not wisest men in the world, or, he is none of the wisest, that is, he is not wise at all: this and such like formes of speaking are vsed for modesties sake, for it were not so seemly to say that he lacketh wit or that he is a foole: or thus, it is no smal account that he maketh of his owne wit, he setteth not a little by himself: here by the negation of small and little, great or much, is both signified and also properly amplified. Now if a man had 846 some good occasion or cause to commend himselfe, he cannot by any means do it in more modest manner then by this figure, as if he should say: I was not the last in the field to fight against the enemies of my countrey, neither haue I been least esteemed or worst accounted of in the loue & fauour of noble men, here if he should haue said, I was first or one of the formost in the field, I haue been best esteemed or equal with the best, it would haue sauoured of arrogancie and boasting, although he had said neuer so truely, yet is there enough said to get praise. This form of speech tendeth most vsually to praise or dispraise, and that in a modest forme and manner. forme of speaking, lest a man should either praise himselfe with out desart, or dispraise another without cause, the one is a token of arrogancie, the other of malice, be the forme of speech neuer so modest. whole oratio are gathered together into one place, whereby the oration is made more pithie and sharpe, or thus: when many arguments being scattered here and there one from another are gathered together, as it were into one bundle, and layed before the eies of the hearer. Thus when all is done what vice is he free from, what is the cause Iudges why you would deliuer him? he is a betrayer of his owne chastity, he lieth in waite to doo mischiefe, he is couetous, intemperate, vicious, proud, wicked to his parentes, vnkind to his frendes, troublesome to his kin, stubburne to his betters, disdainfull to his equals, cruell to his inferiours, finally intollerable to all men. Romane people seemed to me both hard and cruell, which had seene & suffered these men so many yeares to vaunt against ye commonwelth: they had wt idolatrie & adulterie profaned & polluted the most holy religios, the broke in peeces the most substantiall decrees of the Senate, they raunsomed themselues with bribes before the iudges, in the office of the tribune, they molested the Senate, they cut in sunder the records of all orders made for the safety of the commonwealth. They expelled me out of my countrey: they tooke away my goods, they fired my house, they tost tormoild my wife and children, they denounced wicked and vnlawfull warre to Pompey, they caused the slaughter both of magistrates and priuate persons, they burned my brothers house, they spoiled Hotruria, they cast out many from their houses and substance, they vrged their purposes most earnestly, and pursued them most greedily, the cittie, Italy, prouinces, kingdomes might not mitigate their madnesse, they burned the domesticall lawes, whatsoeuer any had which liked them this yeare they thought should haue been theirs, no man staid their purposes, but Milo himselfe. 848 This figure is an excellent ornament of eloquence, and is of mightie force to amplifie either praises or dispraises, accusations or defences. The principall point of this Caution is to regard that the arguments be not false nor fraudulet to the supporting of iniquitie, and oppressing of innocency and truth. whole waight of his cause doth depend, maketh often recourse thither, and repeateth it many times by variation, whereof there be two kindes, the one which expresseth one thing with many words of the same signification which is called Sinonimia, spoken of before as in this example of Cicero: And shall so great a vertue be expelled, thrust out, banished and cast away from the citie? Another: What diddest thou couet? what diddest thou wish? what diddest thou desire? The other which declareth one thing with diuerse members, diuers causes, diuerse effectes and diuerse reasons. Cicero when Erutius father, he doth first amplifie the wicked fact of Parricide, declaring how great it is, & argueth that without many and great causes, such a wickednesse cannot bee committed, and contendeth that it cannot fall but vpon a mischieuous and most lewd men: after this he demaundeth of Erutius the cause why Roscius defence, he tarieth long in it, and very often maketh his returne thither, he often demaundeth the causes of so great and horrible wickednesse, of so shameful a deed, he often amplifieth the greatnesse of the fact, and that which is great indeede, he maketh by his eloquence and vehemencie of his speech wonderfull great. The most vsuall practice of this figure is to accuse or defend, and that after a strong and forcible manner. VVhere vertue vseth this figure, it neither accuseth falsly nor defendeth fraudulently, but where craft and ill conscience beare the sway it doth both. it is when the Orator bringeth in many definitions of one thing, yet not such definitions as do declare the substance of a thing by the general kind, and the difference, which the are of reasoning doth prescribe, but others of another kind all heaped together: such as these definitions of Cicero be in the second booke of an Orator, where he amplifieth the dignitie of an hystory thus: An historie saith he, is the testimony of times, the light of veritie, the maintenance of memorie, the schoolemistrisse of life, and messenger of antiquitie. Another: Man is the example of imbecillitie, the image of vnconstancie, the spoile of time, the bondman of miserie, the vessell of insatiable desire, and the confident castell of sudden ruine. Pleasures are the enimies of chastitie, guides to pouertie, daughters of dishonestie, and sweete baites of extreame miserie. 850 vices. 851 852 oft, nor in vsing it to make too many definitions of one thing. for profit of some pertinent cause, we may digresse for the cause of praising, dispraising, delighting or preparing. Digressios are taken either fro the declaration of deeds, the descriptions of persons, places and times, the reporting of Appollogies and similltudes, & likewise fro common places. There be diuerse obseruations concerning digressio necessary to be remebred. 1\. The first is to see som cause why we should digresse, that is, that the same digression may some maner of way profit, commend, & garnish the cause that we haue in hand, for the digression ought in some respect to pertaine & agree to those matters which we handle, and not to be strange or far distant from ye purpose. 2\. The second is to prouide a forehand a perfect & readie way to goe forth aptly, and making no long stay out, likewise to foresee a fit entrance for our returne. 3\. The third is, to take good heede that we do not darken our main cause and principall matter: we darken it if we goe forth abruptly, tarie too long abroad, tell thinges strange, distant, or disagreeing to the purpose, or returne into the cause ouerthwartly. 854 whereby the oration is amplified, garnished and wel commended: otherwise it is a vice which doth violate both order and art, and doth greatly deforme the Oration by patching it, as it were with shreds and broken peeces. his hearers, some person or thing in respect of their worthy deserts & vertues. Cicero: For if Cn. Pompey had bene 500\. yeares ago, such a man he was of whom being a yoong man and a Romane knight, ye Senat might oftentimes haue required aid & defence, whose noble actes with a most renowned victory both by land & sea had spred ouer all nations whose three honourable triumphs are witnesses, that all the world was in our gouernment and dominion, whom the people of Rome had commended with singular honors, now if you should say that he hath done something against ye league of peace, who wil beleeue you? truly noman, for when death had queched enuy, his noble acts should haue flourished in glory of an eternall renowne: whose vertues being bruted, should haue giue no place to doubts: and shall the friendly, approued, and perfect vertue of this man be hurt by the false report of backbiters? mercy, clemency, prouidence, blessed gouernment, liberality and such like. Iudges for their wisedome feare of God, learning, 857 care of equitie, for regarding the cause without respecting the person for their vigilancy, constancie, and grauitie. The diuine Pastor, for his learning, grauitie, good life, apt gifts of teaching, care of his flocke, constancie in the truth, and charitie towards al men. Captaines for their experience, prouidence, fidelitie for their courage and fortitude in fight, and for their modestie and mercie in victorie. This forme of speech serueth to support and encrease vertue by giuing due praise and commendation to it. For by this exornation, good deserts, and worthie vertues, are rewarded with the sweete frutes of their owne seede, and crowned with the garlandes of their owne flowers, that is to saie, with large fame, high honour, and immortall renowne and glorie. vertuous man doth liue, and also liueth when the vertuous man is dead. What shall I say? it is his plausus, his garland, his coate, his colour, and his ingrauen Epitaph. In praising and commending there are three most necessarie pointes to be diligently obserued: The first is, that the praises be not too small for great and worthie vertues. The second yt they be not too great for meane desertes, and too high for base persons. The third that they be not peruersly applied, that is to say, where rebuke and shame is rather due. may stand as a generall head and principall of many figures, but namely of those which do tend most especially to amplifie or diminish by forme of comparision, as either from the greater to the lesse, from the lesse to the greater, from equall to equall, or by opposition of contraries, I will first begin with Comparison, as it is vsually and specially taken. example brought in, is either like, vnlike or contrarie: like things are compared among themselues, vnlike from the lesse to the greater in amplifying, and from the greater to the lesse in diminishing, and contraries by opposing one against another. 1\. Comparison of like thinges, as Camillus by his vertue did driue away the Barbarians and set vp againe the Romane Empire, being sore opprest, and almost brought to vtter destruction: euen so Laurentius Valla restored the Latine tongue to the former puritie, which through the ignorance of the men of corrupt mindes reprobate concerning the faith. 2 Comparison of vnlike things: Brutus put his sons to death, for that they conspired treason: Manlius punished his sonne for his vertue. Contrarie thus: Marcellus restored to the Syracusans his enemies their ornaments: Verres tooke away the same from his friends and companions. The whole is not only compared with the whole but also the parts be compared one with another. Cicero for Milo. Did that most noble man Scipio ( common wealth? and shal we being Consuls suffer Catiline, that would willingly destroy all the world with sword and fire? wealth to the whole world: a mean corrupting to slaughter, fire, and destruction, and a priuate person to the Consuls. 859 3 From the lesse to the greater: Wherefore if God so clothe the grasse of the field which is to day, and to morrow is cast into the Ouen: shall he not do much more for you, O ye of little faith? 860 them of his houshold? 861 For if the blood of Bulles and of Goates, and the ashes of an Heifer sprinkling them that are vncleane, sanctifieth as touching the purifying of the flesh: how much more shal the blood of Christ which through the eternal spirit offered vp himselfe without spot to God, purge your conscience from dead workes to serue the liuing God? 862 4 From the greater to the lesse: If God spared not the Angels that had sinned but cast them downe into hell, and deliuered them into chaines of darknesse to be kept vnto damnation, neither spared the old world, &c. much lesse will he spare the wicked which walke after the flesh in the lusts of vncleannesse? &c. If the righteous scarcely be saued, where shall the vngodlie and sinner appeare? If the law of God doth not iustifie, much lesse mans traditions. the sheepe able: If the mightie mountaines be not able to stand against the wrath of God, much lesse man, which is the image of weaknesse. This forme of speech, of mightie force and power both to moue by example, & to persuade by reason, for the parts of the comparison being brought together, their likenesse or vnlikenesse, their equalitie or inequalitie is as plainly discerned, as things which are tired and iudged by the ballance. The vse hereof is verie 863 great and mightie in whatsoeuer cause it handleth, whether it be in praising or dispraising accusing, reprehending cefirming, confuting, mouing affection, perswading, or in anie other like: and no one forme of speech more apt and excellent to amplifie. making comparison from the greater to the lesse, we had need to forsee, that we put not a lesse for a greater: and so likewise in comparing from the lesse to the greater, which sometime falleth so out through ignorance and want of knowledge in the things compared. Lastly, it is behouefull to take heed that our comparisons be not so applied as they may moue offence in the hearers, for there is an old saying and a true, that comparisons be odious, which is still verified either by the folly of the speaker, or pride of the hearer. with the other by a similitude 866 with the brightnesse of the Sunne, so the estimation of corporall things must needs be darkened, drowned, and destroyed by the 867 glorie and greatnesse of vertue. As in daungerous sayling the helme is not committed to him that is richest or noblest of birth, but to him that hath the best knowledge in guiding the ship: euen so is it requisite and behouefull not to giue the principalitie of gouernment to him that is of more wealth then others, or of nobler blood, but to him that excelleth other men in wisedome and loyaltie. litle childe, or to a feeble olde man, who by his owne strength can hurt no mans person, but yet if he come to a naked mans bodie, he may by the sharpnesse of the point and waight of the weapon wound it: euen so was the consulship as a sword giuen to weake and fearfull men, who could neuer by their own might, haue bene able to do so much as pricke a man, but being armed with the name of the honourable Empire, they haue cruelly murthered the common wealth. made of plaine wood, or in a bed gilt and garnished with gold, for whither soeuer you remoue him he carrieth his disease with him: euen so is it all one whether the mind which is sicke with insaciaable auarice, be placed in riches or in pouertie, for while the disease hang still vpon if, it findeth no rest. rust consumes thicke yron, so is there nothing so sure, which is not subiect to his inferiour. and pleasure, profit by their perspicuitie, and pleasure by 872 their proportion. They serue to many and sundry endes, as to praise, dispraise, teach, to exhort, moue perswade, and to many other such like effects: of all formes of speech, they are best conceiued, most praised, and longest remembred. that the things compared, be not vnlike in that part 874 wherein they be compared. Secondly that they be not straunge and vnknowne, by the one there is an absurditie, by the other obscuritie. 875 diuerse qualitie. exercise and all other means, that we may henceforeward be deliuered and free from it, but being sicke in soule, we dissemble and make delaie: we leaue the fountaine vncured, and count necessary things superfluous. 876 his maisters cribbe: but Israel hath not knowne, my people hath taken no heed. 877 the turtle doue, the swallow and the crane, consider the time of their trauell, but my people will not know the time of the Lords punishment. 878 Another of our Sauiour Christ: The foxes haue holes, and the fowles of the aire haue nestes, but the sonne of man hath not where to laie his head. 879 This forme of speech is of great vse and vtilitie in amplification, and it is verie conuenient for praise or dispraise, reprehension and confutation. 880 The grace of dissimilitude is much impaired, when the vnlikenesse is verie litle, or when the parts are straunge, or vnaptly compared. a proper coupling together of contraries, and that either in words that be contrarie, or in contrarie sentences. 1 In contrary words: He is gone but yet by a gainfull remoue, from painfull labour to quiet rest, from vnquiet desires to happie contentment, from sorrow to ioy, and from transitory time to immortalitie. 2 An example of Cicero: And may you then preferre the vnknowne before the knowne, the wicked before the iust, strangers before neighbours, the couetous before the contented, hirelings before free helpers, the prophane before the religious, the most malicious enemies to this Empire and honour, before vertuous companions, and faithfull Citizens? 3 So well sighted were the eyes of his minde, that by them he saw life in death, an exaltation in falling, glorie in shame, victory in destruction, a kingdome in bondage: and a glorious light in the midst of darknesse. 4 In contrary sentences: Art thou rich? then robbe not the poore: if thou beest strong, tread not the weake vnder thy feete: if wise, beguile not the simple: if publike by authoritie, oppresse not him that is priuate. Another: What is more odious then labour to the idle, fasting to the glutton, want to the couetous, shame to the proude, & good lawes to the wicked. aptly to amplification, it graceth and bewtifieth the Oration 882 with pleasant varietie, and giueth singular perspicuitie and light  883 by the opposition, it is so generall that it may serue to amplifie and garnish any graue and weightie cause. of comparisions, lest they growe to too great a multitude, which bewrayeth affectation, a fault which ought to bee shunned. strength of this figure by opposing things differing, in stead of contraries. sentence. 886 An example of the holy scripture: Behold my seruants shall eate, and you shall suffer hunger, behold my seruants shall drinke; and you shall abide thirst, behold my seruants shall rejoice; and you shall be put to shame, behold my seruants shal be glad through ioy of heart, & you shal cry through sorrow of heart, and waile through contrition of spirit. thus: We are indeed righteously here, for we receiue things worthie of that we haue done, but this man hath done nothing amisse. Here in this example the guiltie is opposed against the iust, and iniurie against equitie. Another: The suttle commit the fault, and the simple beare the blame. with this exornation: as these and many mo such like: Wise women vphold their house, but a foolish woman pulleth it downe. 889 A wise sonne maketh a glad father, but an vndiscreet sonne is a heauinesse to his mother. 890 The curse of ye Lord is in the house of the vngodly, but he blesseth the dwellings of the rightuous. The same vse and Caution may serue to this figure, which do pertaine to Antithesis, last obserued. commet, forasmuch as it may wel be called the whole action & sentence of the minde, & it is as Cicero saith when the sentence concluded consisteth of contraries thus: Our elders made warre, not onely that they might be free, but also that they might rule: but thou thinkest warre may be left off, that we might be made bondslaues to serue. Another: If great wealth bring cares, and pouertie wretched miserie, then the meane betweene these two entremities is the greatest happinesse. Another: They which may do me good, wil not, and they which are willing, cannot, therefore my distresse remaineth. This exornation may be applied to diuerse ends, but most specially to confirme, or confute. In the vse of this figure it behoueth to haue this care, that the premises be true, wherupon a right conclusion may be inferred. his aduersarie, or some other person of manifest vnconstancie, open hypocrisie, or insolent arrogancie. Cicero for Roscius: In which cause thou seemest to me, to be vnconstant and foolish, that wouldest both hurt a man and also commend him, and both call him an honest man, and also a varlet. thou that preachest a man should not steale, yet thou stealest: thou that saist that a man should not commit adultery, yet thou breakest wedlocke: thou abhorrest images, and yet robbest God of his honour. Thou makest boast of the law, and through breaking the law dishonourest God. blessing and cursing, my brethren these things ought not so to be: doth a fountaine send forth at one place sweet water and bitter? boldnesse in the rude, pride in the arrogant, securitie in the hipocrite, and vnconstancie in the vnwise. 894 The chiefe and principall regard in the Caution of this figure is, to looke that the partes opposed and repugnant be both true, otherwise the reprehender deserueth reprehension. contrary, thus: It behoueth thee to eate that thou maist liue, and not to liue that thou maist eate. 895 Another of the holy scripture: Neither was the man created for the womans sake, but the woman for the mans sake. 896 Another: The children ought not to laie vp for their parents, but the parents for their children. learned Lawyer, and of Lawyers, Sc aeuola most eloquent. 897 The vse hereof serueth properlie to praise, dispraise, to distinguish, but most commonly to confute by the inuersion of the sentence. 898 In vsing this forme of speech, it is requisite and behoueful that the sentence inuersed be not false, or that it be not peruersly put contrary to the truth & meaning of the speaker through the fault of memorie. circumstances, and circumstances are either of a person or a thing, a person hath these: Parentage, nation, Countrie, kinde, age, education, discipline, habite of bodie, fortune, condition, nature of the minde, studie, foredeeds, name, &c. thy selfe a companion of most lewd men. 2\. Nation art not thou worthie of blame being an Englishman borne to despise the practice of shooting, knowing that it hath been of long time the principall cause of English glory? praise worthy. To be borne in Asia among Turkes and to fauoure and imbrace Christian religion, amplifieth the vertue of that man. 4\. Kinde: Boldnesse, vnchast speech, manlike apparell and gesture are all vnseemely in women, and womankind. 5. Age : Lying, lightnesse and lust are three euils intollerable in youth, how much more in gray heads and old age? 6\. Education: To be well brought vp, and vertuously trained in youth, and after to digresse and become wicked as did Nero, amplifieth the fault and increaseth the shame. 7\. Discipline: A Iudge to corrupt lawes and wrest iudgement, a professor of diuinitie to teach errors and maintaine heresies, a Phisition to destroy life by the abuse of Phisicke, a Captaine to forsake his Prince, and take part with the enemie: all these are great offences in any sort of men, but yet far greater, when the profession and the transgression be compared together. 8\. Habite of bodie: God hath indued thee with a bewtifull fairnesse, and why dost thou liue in so foule manner, and blemish that which he hath bewtified? Thou hast a lustie and strong bodie, art thou not ashamed to beg thy bread? Thou art a tall and mightie man, why art thou then fearefull to fight for thy countrey? 9 Condition: Being a seruant and to strike his maister, is he not worthy to be punished? How dare you being a priuate person resist your magistrate? a rich man to steale, a poore man to be proud, are offences much encreased when their condition or estate is considered. 10\. The nature of the mind: God hath giuen you a valiant heart, and shall carefull thoughts ouercome you? you haue had alwaies a constant mind, and shall trifles quench your old frendship? 11\. Studie: You studie the law which is the maintenance of right, with what face or conscience can you offer this wrong? 12\. Foredeedes: When a man hath in his youth and former part of his time been vertuous, well geuen, liberall and pittifull, valiant and hardie, and now to fall from all vertue to all vice, to become hard, cruell, cowardly, slouthfull and carelesse, amplifieth greatly these crimes by which those excellent vertues are oppressed. 13\. You counselled them to take this vngracious enterprise in hand, and therefore your punishment is like to be thereafter. By his counsell the armie was directed, the Cittie besieged, won and conquered, the greater is therefore the fame of his wisedome. feare to be a souldier, and thy name Alexander? more sin. 2\. Place: They bought and sold in the temple the house of praier, and therefore they were reputed theeues, and the temple called their denne. 3\. Time: In the time of praier to be exercised in wicked works, lewd wordes, or wanton behauiour is offensiue to good men, and cursed before God. To abuse the time of peace with tumults and sedition, is an heinous offence. 4\. Occasion: To watch the oportunitie of darkenesse to do mischiefe, betokeneth a pretended purpose, to vse the helpe of solitudes as Cain did, when he slew Abel his brother, doth take away all excuse of ignorance and pretence of infirmitie. 5\. Instrument, to slay with a dag or priuie weapon, to murder by poisoning or by strangling doth argue a deepe and cursed malice of the murderer. 899 The vse of circumstances is verie profitable for amplifying, extenuating, for expressing plainely, for prouing & confirming. is to take heede of long and tedious stay in them, as about who, what, when, where, how, and such like, which by prolixitie is wont to make the oration barren. greatter word for a lesse, as to call a proude man  Lucifer, a dronkard a swine, an angrie man mad, a couetous man a cutthroate: In praising, as to call an honest man a Saint, a faire Virgin an Angell, good musicke heauenly harmonie. This figure is chiefly set forth by tropes of words, forasmuch as they paint out things by similitudes, and make them more euident 901 by setting images before the eies, as when we call a craftie fellow a Foxe, a rauenous person a cormorant, a patient man Iob, but chieflie by Hyperbole, which maketh a large and most ample comparison. The vse hereof helpeth mightily to expresse a matter which requireth either great praise, or dispraise, and it is oftentimes in great and grieuous complaints, signifying the greatnesse and excesse of suffering, examples whereof are found in the complaints of holy men, but chieflie in Iob, Dauid, and Ieremie. The true vse hereof is required in great causes, and not to amplifie euerie small matter and foolish trifle, which is a vanity 902 to be shunned, for that common custome to amplifie small things, is more fit for a common lier, then meete for a graue and modest Orator. to make the thing appeare lesse then it is, or verie litle, as to call a learned Doctor a prettie scholler, a great wound a scratch, a flat fall a foile, a raging railer a testie fellow: as Auxesis doth magnifie and lift vp, so doth this diminish and pul downe: the other of small thinges, maketh great matters, so this of great matters maketh but trifles. Phisition in comforting his despairing patient, by calling his  905 disease a matter of no danger, no cause of any feare, an obstruction easily remedied, an inflamation quickly quenched, whereby the Phisition doth much relieue and lighten the heauie spirits of his feeble Patient, by decreasing the causes and diminishing the danger. 906 He that regardeth his credite must take heede that aswell in augmenting as in decreasing he respecteth the truth, and diligently obserue the Poets warning, vt ne quid nimis: in diminishing regard ought to be had, that in coueting too great a decrease, the speaker fall not into that fault of speech, which is vsually called Tapinosis, that is when the dignitie or maiestie of a high matter is much defaced by the basenesse of a word, as to call the Ocean a streame, or the Thames a brooke, a foughten field a fray, great wisedome prettie witte, an Oration a tale, or as if one should say to a King: may it please your mastership: To this is opposed Bomphiologia, which giueth high titles to base persons, and great praises to small deserts. There is another faultie tearme of speech, called Paradiastole, which in this place may well be mentioned, for that it also opposeth the truth by false tearmes, and wrong names, as in calling dronkennesse good felloship, insatiable auarice good husbandrie, craft and deceit wisedome and pollicie. This vice of speech is a fit instrument of excuse seruing to selfeloue, partiall fauour, blinde affection, and a shamelesse person, which for the better maintenance of wickednesse vseth to couer vices with the mantles of vertues. of some thing or rather aboue the top, that is, when we make our saying grow, & increase by an orderly placing of wordes making the latter word alwaies exceede the former in the force of signification, contrarie to the naturall order of thinges, for that euer putteth the worthiest, and weightiest words first, but this placeth them alwaies last, as in this example: O my Parmeno accomplisher of all my pleasures. Another: Neither siluer, gold, nor precious stones might be compared to her vertues. There was neuer yet a noble Captaine, Prince, king or Emperour, whose honorable fame and renoune hath spred both far & wide, and also long continued, that may ouer match this worthie man in vertue or honour. This figure is both apt to bewtifie the speech and to amplifie the matter for in forme it is neere to Articulus, and in force to comparison, and is as it were the Orators scaling ladder, by which he climeth to the top of high comparison: nether is it vnlike to fire whose propertie is alwaies to ascend as high as matter can carie it. In this figure order must be diligently obserued, that the stronger may follow the weaker, & the more worthie the lesse worthie otherwise the signification shal not encrease, which this figure doth especially respect, but become a Congeries which respecteth not the increase of matter but multitude of wordes. which maketh the same obiection tollerable,  Cicero: I confesse I tooke that thing vpon me, peraduenture a matter of great importance, and also dangerous vnto me: yet notwithstanding a cause worthie, for which I was bound to straine the strength of my age & diligence. Another: I grant there is in it great labours, and many perils, yet by painfull trauel and valiant aduentures therein shal ensue immortall glorie. I cannot denie but the way to learning and wisedome is long and painful, the ascent steapie and slipperie, the season darke and mistie, false turnings many, beside stops, and many other kindes of discouragements: yet by labour and constancie once attained, it bringeth with it a plentiful haruest, I meane both of profit and pleasure. 908 arbitrate between comparatiue contentions. 910 A speciall regard ought to be had that the latter clause or part of the sentence be not weaker then the former, for if it be, then the former part remaineth single in it selfe, and the oration is made verie weake and feeble. 911 Syn aeceosis is a figure which teacheth to conioine diuerse things or contraries, and to repugne common opinion with reason, thus: The couetous & the prodigall are both alike in fault, for neither of them knoweth to vse their wealth aright, for they both abuse it, and both get shame by it. Gluttonous feasting, and staruing famine are all one, for both taken the bodie, procure sicknesse, and cause death. & to condemne them both by shewing a reason, which is taken from their vnitie in working and consent in some effect. In vsing this figure it is needfull to foresee and be sure wherein they cosent, that one the same reason may condemne them both. before it, and immediatly ioyne another after it that seemeth greater: Cicero in his oration in which he gaue the Romane people thankes for his returne: You haue (saith he) not onely taken away my calamitie, but also seeme to augment my dignitie. but also for conscience sake. them that seeke wisedome. that they both increase the signification by placing the meaner first, and the worthier last: but yet they haue their difference. Incrementu increaseth by degrees of words, this by senteces: that by wordes of like nature onely, this both by like wordes and by diuerse thinges. Heed ought to be taken that the latter sentence be not weaker 916 or lesse worthie then the former, which is a necessarie point to be regarded: for it were absurd to say, he is not onely a tirant, but also verie troublesome, or to make the latter the same that the former is, as to say he is not onely idle, but also 917 he loueth to sit still and do nothing, then to speake thus: it were better to sit still and say nothing. a more meet word in the place, whereof there be two kindes, the one is when a word is corrected before it is said. brought before you Iudges, to haue your iudgement, not a theefe, but a violent robber, not an adulterer, but a breaker of all chastitie, not a spoiler of church goods, but a ranke enemie to al godly religion, not a quarrelling ruffin, but a most cruell murderer. 918 An example of the holy Scripture: You declare that you are ye epistle of Christ ministred by vs, and written not with inke, but with the spirite of the liuing God, not in tables of stone, but in the fleshly tables of the heart. workes, nay, by what law of faith? 919 of God. For this thy shamfull and most cursed fact, what shall I call thee, a wretch, nay a beast, a beast, nay a poisonnous serpent, yet none of these are fit enough for thee, a deuil, thou art both in respect of thy malice which thou doest possesse, and of the sundry mischiefes which thou doest daily commit. 920 921 but chiefly, by casting by mightie wordes, and by putting mightier in their roomes, also it maintaineth attention, for while ye hearer vieweth the going out of one word, he straight expecteth the comming in of another. 923 Concerning both the first forme of Correction, and also the second, it behoueth that the latter words be mightier then the former, for to reiect ye mightier and place the weaker betokeneth want of discretion in the Orator, or to put needlesse & fond wordes to be corrected is a signe of follie. a description of things by reprehension, thus: He sheweth himselfe a man amongst his enemies, nay a lyon But of other Authours it is taken for a forme of speech by which the Orator repenting himselfe of some word or saying past, by fault of memorie, or want of due consideration, craueth leaue to resume it, and to recite it, and to place a fitter word in stead thereof. Hereupon it is called Poenitentia Dicti, which repentance is many waies signified, and the leaue to call words backe is diuersly expressed, according to the pleasure and deuise of the Orator. for Milo: We are fooles that do presume to compare Drusus Africanus, Pompeius, and our selues with Clodius. rashnesse of affection, weaknesse of memorie, or imperfection of speech, he hath said some thing amisse, to resume it, and amend 925 it, or vnder pretence of misliking, to take occasion to expresse his minde more largely. wicked, and slanderous words, with entent to correct them, for a word of offence is like a wilde bird which hath escaped thy hand and cannot be called againe. granteth many things to his aduersary worthie of commendation, and at the length bringeth in some notable crime, which oppresseth and quencheth all that was granted before. Cicero for Flaccus: Notwithstanding this I say concerning the whole nati- the whole nation of the Greekes, I grant vnto them learning, I grant vnto them the knowledge of many Artes, I take not from them the comely grace of speech, fine wittes, singular eloqence. And furthermore, if they challenge vnto themselues any other thing, I will not deny it them, yet religion and faith that nation neuer fauoured, what vertue, what authoritie, what waight there is of all this matter they know not, Also it is by this figure when the speaker in his coclusion bringeth in that which was not looked for, or that which is contrary, or at least farre distant from the premises. As for example? Salomon rehearseth the partes of his felicitie, he mentioneth his riches, possessions, sumptuous buildings & pleasures: but suddenly he concludeth that all this is but vanitie and vexation of spirit. This conclusion commeth vnlooked for, and verie vnlike to haue ensued such premises, the expectation tendeth rather to heare what felicitie followed all this wealth and great possession: and not what vanitie or vexation of spirit. he first describeth the prosperitie of the wicked, and then concludeth that suddenly they go downe to the graue. The vtilitie of this figure, consisteth chiefly in confuting and remouing the opinion of the hearer from some liking or error 927 deeply rooted in his minde and affection, which the Orator confuteth by a conclusion suddenly inferred, for which respect it may be compared to the practice of vndermining, which as it is hardly perceiued till it hath wrought sudden subuersion, so this figure maketh no shew of the purpose till it concludeth. 928 and infer the lesse, or being in but one euil thing, to subuert and ouerwhelme many good: or to inferre small faultes, to disgrace & drowne great vertues: for it were to kindle that which we cannot quench, or plant that we cannot pull vp, and briefly to confirme that which we desire to confute. sheweth what hath bene alreadie said, and also what shalbe said next, and that diuerse waies. 1 From the equall: The matters which you haue alreadie heard, were wonderfull, and those that you shall heare, are no lesse maruellous. 2 From the vnequall: I haue declared vnto you many of his commendable deserts, yet wil I tell you of many mo and farre more excellent. 3 From the like: I haue hitherto made mention of his noble enterprises in France, and now I will rehearse his worthie actes done neare to Rome. 4 From the contrary thus: As I haue spoken of his great aduersitie and miserie, so wil I now speake of his happy prosperitie, which at lenghth ensued, as the bright day doth the darke night, and warme sommer cold winter. 5 By preuention or occupation: Peraduenture you think me long in the threatenings of the law, I will now passe to the sweet promises of the Gospell. 6 By reprehention: I haue staied too long in lamentable matters, I will now make mention of some pleasant reports. 7 From consequents: You haue bene tolde how he promised, and now I will tell you how he performed: you haue heard how greeuously those cities offended, and it resteth now to heare how iustly they were punished. mind what hath bene said, & also prepareth the hearer to the rest following. 931 932 The greatest care and regard in the vse of this figure, ought to be in obseruing these pointes. First, to be brief in the rehearsal of the matter already said, and likewise of that which shall next follow. Secondly, to prouide that the matter which followeth 933 matter going before, for a long rehearsall becommeth tedious, and wearieth the hearers, and the promise of a matter of lesse importance or lesse pleasant quencheth attention and turneth away expectation. defend, to be so great that we cannot honestly defend them, or so manifest that we cannot well deny them, we seeke to heale them with plastures of good words and pleasing speech: Whe there was a greater luxuritie and ryot obiected against C aelius, then Cicero durst defend, and more euident then he could deny: notwithstanding he did extenuate, the fault with gentle words, and as much as he could pacified the iudges, who were vehemently kindeled against him, he said that those things were partly the vices of times rather then of the man, he contended that some thing ought to be yelded to age, he opposeth against the offence a hope of future regard and diligence. And also as a remedie against new sprung enuy, by the acts and enterprises which now C aelius tooke vpon him, he applieth his own expetation of C aelius for the time to come. Epistle to Philemon, where he vseth sundry reasons & diuerse meanes to salue and cure the fault of Onesimus, and to appease and pacifie the displeasure of Philemon: which example may be a very good president for the vse of this figure, both in respect of the forme, and also of the equitie & lawfulnesse of the effect, which are two points necessarie to be obserued in all formes of speech. 935 This figure or forme of speech pertaineth properly to extenuate offences, to excuse infirmities, to appease displeasure, and reconcile friends offended. It behoueth the vertuous Orator to regard these necessarie obseruations in Caution, that he neuer defend things vnlawfull, nor denieth matters euident, nor excuse offencese yt be wilful, nor extenuate transgressions shal be great otherwise he shal appeare both impudent and wicked: notwithstanding which of all these faults will not blind affection, selfeloue, euill conseience, and corrupted mindes take in hand, and either subtilly worke, or audaciously performe. affection in himselfe, doth shew it by the vtterance of his speech, and thereby moueth the mindes of his hearers, and it is vsed when persons or 936 matters do require either great praises, or dispraises. In praises thus: What man is he? be he neuer so enuious, neuer so malicious, neuer so ambitious of honour, but must needes commend this man, and acknowledge him to be most vertuous, most learned, most wise, who for the safegard of his country, the defence of his citie, and the riches of the common wealth, did most willingly put and yeeld himselfe to great and cruell dangers, whose learning was proued in defending, whose wisedome was wondered at, in accomplishing so dangerous an enterprise. In dispraising 937 thus: Who is of so carelesse a minde, that seeing these things can hold his peace and let them passe? you put my father to death before he was condemned, and being so put to death, you registred him among condemned men, you thrust me out of mine owne house by violence, you possessed my patrimony, what will you more? came you not of the seate of iudgement as you do now, to put to death or at least to condemne Sextus Roscius? sundrie purposes, but chieflie to praise or dispraise, it maie bee vsed to accuse, reprehend, to defende, and iustifie. 939 Forasmuch as this forme of speech is alwaies vehement, it is not meete to be vsed but in causes necessarily requiring vehemencie. For it is a cleare signe of folly to be hotte, vehement, and clamarous in a calme cause, or small matter. because of their forme may be called Collectiues. In respect that either they leaue the sense to be collected by the hearer, or do tend to the collection of proofes and conclusions, by their formes expressed: of which the one part do expresse the Antecedent, leauing the Consequent to be collected The other by shewing reasons do expresse both. expresse, the signification whereof, is vnderstood either by the maner of the pronuntiation, or by the nature of the words themselues. By the pronuntiation thus: Darest thou presume to praise him? That is, (Indoctus peritissimum) as much as to say: Is ignorance fit to commed learning, or folly meet to praise wisedome? man borne in Crete, but any other dissembler, after the nature and disposition of that nation. 940 to the worme thou art my mother and my sister. By which saying, Iob signifieth that his hope in father and mother, in sister, and in all worldly matters should cease, & that the wormes of the graue should be in their stead. 941 Tel him (saith he,) Let not him that putteth on his harnesse boast himselfe, as he that putteth it off: signifying hereby, how litle he feared Benadabs arrogant and rash presumption: and that there were as great cause why Benadab should feare to be vanquished, as hope to win the victorie. and their speares to make fithes. By this saying the Prophet signifieth the sweet peace that should come with Christ. Salomon vseth an excellent Emphasis, where he giueth vs warning 943 that we should not speake or thinke euill of the king in our priuie chamber. For saith he: A bird of the aire shall betraie thy voice, and with her feather shal she bewray thy words. This figure is very pleasant & apt to amplifie, for vnder an artificiall 944 of mans consideration: & it serueth to admonition, reprehension, comiseration, and commination. of wisdome to vse it to hearers of capacitie able to conceiue and vnderstand the sense and meaning thereof. For this figure speaketh as it were with a voice far distant: the sensible hearing and vnderstanding wherof, requireth a diligent listning and attention, which a carelesse mind doth not esteeme, nor a dul sense able to comprehend. Secondly, it is necessary to prouide that this forme of speech fall not into the fault of deep obscuritie, by too dark a shadow, as by the strangenesse of the word, or vnlikenesse of the thing, or vnaptnesse of the application. matter by coniecture, that is, by expressing some signes or circumstances of a matter, which circumstances be of three sorts, either going before it, annexed with it, or following after it. As the Lord God liueth before whom I stand, there shall be neither dew nor raine these yeares, but according to my word. Here by the great drought, Elias signifieth the great hunger and dearth following the drought. 947 Seuen daies hence will I cause it to raine vpon the earth fortie daies and fortie nights, wherby the Lord gaue to vnderstand what a mightie floud should follow. held a pine tree in his hand to stay himselfe, and walked through the sea: by this we coniecture what a great bodie he had. 948 weight of his brigandine & speare head, and by the monstrous bignesse of his speare staffe compared to a weauers beame. 949 Foelix trembled, which did plainly betoken his inward horror, at the hearing of Gods iudgements. 950 how effectually he was touched with repentance by the motion of Gods spirit. the death of his sonne Absolon, by which is collected how dearly he loued him, notwithstanding his euil inclination. This figure is a verie commendable ornament of eloquence, and is a meet forme of speech to amplifie any great or excellet matter. For by this figure the Orator speaketh to his hearer a far off, giuing some signe or token to the reason of the hearer, whereby his whole meaning may easily be gathered. In vsing this figure, it is requisite and necessary to signifie our meaning by such circumstances as may best amplifie the matter, and most clearly signifie our meaning: otherwise we shall speake in the clowdes without profit. priuily that the hearer must be faine to seeke out the meaning, either by sharpnesse of wit, or long consideration. Hortentius said, that he was neuer made friendes with his mother and his sister: meaning that there was neuer any debate or contention betweene them. Quintilian in his 8. booke and 5. chapter bringeth in an example of a certaine woman, who hauing a brother whom she dearly loued, and had verie oft by giftes and hire, withdrawen him from the dangerous exercise of sword play: and seeing that neither by the perswasion of her loue, nor by the allurement of her giftes her desire might take effect, while he was a sleepe she cut off his thombe: which iniurie whe with great furie he sought to reuenge, 951 she thus signified her minde. O brother (saith she) thou art well worthie of a perfect hand without maime, vnderstanding that it 952 were not amisse, that such a one should meete with his owne destruction, that did so oft seeke it with his owne will. The vse hereof serueth onely to conceale the sense from the comon capacitie of the hearers: and to make it priuate to the wiser sort, who by a deepe consideration of the saying, are best able to finde out the meaning. This figure ought to be vsed verie seldome, and then not without great cause, considering the deepe obscuritie of it, which is opposed to perspicuitie, the principall vertue of an Orator. that are obiected against vs, to them which laid them to vs: When Antony charged Cicero that he was the cause of ciuill war raised betweene Pompeius and C aesar, Cicero rebounded the same accusation againe to Antony, saing: Thou Marcus Antony, thou I say gauest to C aesar (willing to turne all vpside downe) cause to make war against thy countrey. Israel, nay saith Elia it is not I that trouble Israel, but thou and thy fathers house, in that you haue forsaken the commandements 953 954 also to reply by accusations, and all at one time. This figure by the violence of his rebound driueth the edge of his enemies sword vpon his enemies head, or as it were, taking vp his enemies arrowe sendeth it backe from whence it came. This figure is of little force without a reason annexed to the obiection returned, for to denie the one, and to affirme the other without shewing reason of that is said, is a verie feeble manner of confutation or accusation, and is more meete for children and fooles then for men of vnderstanding and wisedome. with no more words then those that be necessarie: or when the Orator by breuitie cutteth off the expectation of the hearers. and furnished it in sommer. Tharsus: after that he got a cittie in Bithinia, driuen from thence into Hespontus, stright way wan Abidus. Cicero for Manulius: How speedilie Pompeius being Captaine sailed with vehemencie of war, who entered into Cilicia, spied out Africa from thence came with his Nauie into Sardinia. The like breuitie Simo vseth in Terence: The corps (saith he) goeth before, we follow after, we come to the graue, it is put into the fire, a lamentation is made. Breuitie comprehended in few words maketh a quick dispatch of many thinges, wherefore it is to be vsed either when matters need no long speech, or when time requireth speed, or the hearers such as few wordes may instruct. In coueting breuitie, it is necessarie to auoide extremitie, for too much hast leaueth the Oration manie times obscure and vnperfect, as may be seene in their workes which did to much affect this forme whereby they fell into obscuritie. aforehand what might be obiected against him, and hurt him, both confute it before it be spoken, or thus: when the Orator putteth forth the same obiection against himselfe, which he doth thinke his aduersarie would, and then refelleth it by a reason, whereby he doth prouidently preuent him.  Cicero: as if some Iudge or commissioner might say vnto me, thou mightest haue contended with a lighter action, thou mightest haue come to thy right by a more easie and profitable way: wherefore either change thine action, or resist me not as Iudge: or if he do prescribe after what sort I ought to sue for my right, to which obiection he maketh this answere. Notwithstanding he seemeth either more fearfull the is reason a Iudge should be: or else he dareth not iudge that which is committed to him. Likewise against Verres, Cicero saith, that he knoweth some me will maruell, seeing so many yeares he defended many, and hurt none, he doth now come to accuse Verres, then he doth shew them that this accusation against. Verres is a defence of their fellowes. yet: for who hath been able to resist his wil? But O 956 man who art thou which disputest with God? shall the pot say to the potter, why madest thou me on this fashion? . bodies shall they come? thou foole, that which thou sowest is not quickned except it die. 958 also an ornament which greatly enricheth the oration with a new encrease of matter, & occupieth the mind of the hearer aswel with the consideration of the obiection going before, as with attention and expectation of the answere following. 959 The principall pointes and partes of warning in the vse of this figure are these: First to take heede of curious and vaine obiections. Secondly of weake and vnsufficient answeres: for it is an 960 easier matter to moue hard obiections, then to make sufficient solutions: and the Orator committeth a great absurditie when he maketh an obiection which after he is not able to answere: wherby he sheweth his aduersaries strength, and his owne weaknesse. 961 cause to a proposition vttered, Cicero: There be no wiles more priuie then these which be hid in dissimulation of dutie, and in custome of acquaintance, for thou maist easilie by taking heede shun an open enemie: but this hid, inward and familiar euill, doth not onely appeare, but also oppresse, before thou shalt be able to foresee and espie it. Cicero for Archia: Looke what wit or eloquence I haue, Iudges, Archia may iustly challenge it to himselfe: for he was the first and principall, that caused mee to follow these manner of studies. 962 An example of the Prophet Amos, thus saith the Lord: For three and foure wickednesses of Edom, I will not spare him, because he persecuted his brother with the sword, bare hatred very long, and so kept indignation alwaies by him. 963 Another: He brought me forth into a place of libertie, he brought me forth euen because he had a fauor vnto me. 964 Another: So that they are not without excuse, because that when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, neither were thankefull, &c. . the reason ioined vnto it as an authenticke seale to an euidence: and it serueth to confirmation and confutation. . reason or cause which he ioineth to the proposition be good & sufficient, lest he weaken that which he should confirme, and disgrace that which he should bewtifie. aduersaries as thinges needlesse, absurde, false, or impertinent to the purpose, as proceeding from follie, or framed by malice, or inuented by subtiltie. Cicero for Milo: What should Milo hate Clodius the flower of his glorie? Another: And would any wise man euer haue so said? were not ignorance the cause of this opinion, follie could not be the frute. To the Sadduces captiously enquiring of Christ, concerning the state of mariage in the resurrection, he answered: you do erre, not knowing the Scriptures, neither the power of God: by which answere he reiecteth their captious obiection, by noting their ignorance. of an aduersarie: namely such as are vnworthie of answere. veritie, and to reiect them with derision or scorningly opposeth modestie, both which ought for the loue of verity and charity euermore to be shunned. done or not done, one reason is left which the Orator standeth vnto & concludeth vpon, and the other are taken away, thus: Seeing this ground was mine, thou must needes shew, that either thou diddest possesse it being void, or made it thine by vse, or bought it, or else that it came to thee by heritage: Thou couldest not possesse it voide when I was in possession: also thou canst not make it thine by vse: Thou hast not to shew that thou diddest buy it, could not come to thee by inheritance, and I aliue: it followeth then that thou wouldest put me from mine owne ground, before I be dead. Another example: Knowing that almightie God hath in his hand all thinges that we neede, how shall we come by them? we can take nothing from him by force, for he is most strong and mightie: nor get any thing from him by fraud, for he is most wise and prouident: if we challenge any thing of him by law, he will proue that he oweth vs nothing, wherefore it followeth that either he must giue them, or else we must go without them. This figure serueth onely to proue some thing by a band of manie reasons. 970 It is the dutie of the speaker to regard the truth of his reasons, and the necessitie of the consequent, and that he omit no reason which may reproue his conclusion. English an example, and in Rhetoricke it is called the rehearsall of a deede or saying past and applying of it to our purpose, whereof there be two kindes, the one true which is taken from Chronicles & Histories of credit, and it is of great force to mooue, perswade, and enflame men with the loue of vertue, and also most mightie to deterre and disswade them from vice: It is also vsed not onely to confirme matters, but euen to augment, enrich, bewtifie, and garnish them with much comelinesse. Examples which are vsually applied in these respectes, be either like, vnlike, or contrarie, and therefore they are vsed commonly in a comparatiue forme, and being aptly compared, and fitly applied, they present to the view and contemplation of our minde, the true and liuely Image of time past, for by them it is that we know and see what was done long before our birth, not onely at home, but also in countries far distant from vs, for by histories and memorials of deedes done and sayings vttered, which are the fountaines from whence we take our examples: we behold ancient deedes and sayings of antiquitie, not as past but as present, Princes, Patriarchs, Prophets, tirants wise men and fooles, holie and wicked, not as dead, but as liuing, ruling, teaching, doing or speaking, euerie one following the inclination of his will, either directed by godly wisedome, or seduced by ignorance, and malice. These are they whom wee diligently looke vppon with the eies of our mindes, and also deepely considering both what they were, what they did, what they receiued, and what they suffered: if they were Kinges how they ruled and gouerned, if Patriarches how they liued, if wisemen what they said, if fooles, what they committed, if godly what they reaped, and also if wicked, how and in what manner they were punished, whereby wee do plainly finde that as there be actions in men, so it plainly appeareth, that there is a most iust iustice in GOD, by whose wisedome, loue, fauour and mercie good men are protected, aduaunced, and made happie: and contrariwise, the euill and wicked by his iudgement and power are iustly punished. of examples, and therefore their vse in doctrine is to be greatly commended, so be it, that they be aptly applyed and truely expressed, for they instruct plainly, moue mightily, & perswade effectually. Finallie, their vse is generall, for they are in their natures and seuerall properties apt to enrich, garnish, confirme and amplifie any matter or cause be it neuer so great, so graue, or so excellent. Thus much for the vse and commendation of examples. In the vse of examples there are diuerse and necessarie obseruations to be diligently regarded. First, that a good example be not ill applied, as to a false purpose and wrong end. Secondly, that we make not publicke examples of priuate actions. Thirdly, that we alledge not an ill example of a good man to confirme sin, as to alledge the bigamie of Iacob, the adulterie of Dauid, and the crimes of other holie men to confirme the like sinnes. Fourthly, that we confirme not holy Scriptures by prophane examples. Fiftly, that we vse not reuerend examples vnreuerently, nor such as be graue in light matters, nor contrariwise light and wanton examples in reuerend, and graue causes. Sixtly, the extraordinarie examples of extraordinarie persons are not to be commended to imitation. The other kind of example is fained by Poets and inuentors of fables for delectations sake, & those fained examples are taken from Poets inuentions, and from the deuises pf Apollogies, and fables attributed to brute creatures, as to beastes, birds, fishes, bees, antes, and creeping wormes, also to trees, hearbs, fountains, meadowes, mountaines and vallies, in like maner to the Sunne, Moone, and Starres. This kinde bringeth a maruellous delectation to the hearers, but especially to the simpler sort, yet being wittilie inuented, and aptly applied, they are not onely allowed of wise men, but also are much commended: the vse whereof ought to be verie rare, namely in great and graue causes. Fained examples and Apologies, ought to be vsed verie seldome, and then not without some fit occasion. Secondly, regard ought to be had, that they be not alledged in the forme and countenance of true histories, whereby the truth is violated, and the simple and silly hearer seduced. Thirdly, that they be not applied in the stead and place of true examples, to confirme graue and serious causes. Fourthly, it is necessarie that discretion be vsed in their choice, that they be not vnfit, foolish, vnchast, or any way vndecent, all which are in wisedome and vertue to be auoided. maners and common practises of men, which declareth by an apt breuitie, what in this our life ought to be done, or left vndone. First it is to be obserued, that euerie sentence is not a figure, but that only which is notable, worthie of memorie, and approued by the iudgement and consent of all men, which being such a one, maketh by the excellency therof the Oration not onely beautifull and comely, but also graue, puissant, and full of maiestie, whereof there be sundry kindes. The first a Sentence vniuersall, which conteineth no certaine person or thing: As euill gotten goods are euill spent: euill will neuer said well: enuy is a punishment in it selfe. The second is a single sentence, as, a Citie in sedition cannot be safe, the contented man is verie rich, necessitie hath no law. The third is a double sentence: Flattery getteth friendship, and truth hatred: An old sore is soone hurt, and a testie man soone angrie. long endureth. The beginning of euerie action is easilie seene, but the sequele is vncertaine. The fourth is a sentence without shewing a reason: Yoong men ought to reuerence their elders: Silence doth well beseeme 971 women kinde. The hastie man neuer wanteth wo. The fifth, a sentence rendering a reason: He that doth euill, hateth the light, lest his deeds should be reproued. It is good to liue so, that the rehearsall of our liues may not make vs ashamed. Cast not too much away with thy hands, lest thou be forced to seeke it with thy feete. The sixt, is a sentence consisting of contraries: By concord small thinges encrease, by discord great riches are soone consumed. A guiltie conscience is alwaies afraid but he that hath done no euil liueth in quiet. Better is a messe of pottage with loue, then a fat oxe with euill will. Salomon is much delighted with this kinde of sentence: for many of his prouerbes be compounded of contrary sentences. The seuenth, is a sentence of diuerse things, as: Death is not to be feared, but the way and passage to death. Error and repentance, are the companions of rashnesse. The eighth, a sentence shewing what doth happen in life, as: Pride goeth before, and shame commeth after. Prodigalitie is the mother of pouertie. To day a king, to morrow dead: Life and death are in the hands of the toong, mans nature is couetous of newes, we couet after things forbidden, and loath those which are commanded. The ninth is a pure sentence, not mixt with any figure, as: It is good to be merry and wise. He is happie which taketh warning by other mens harmes. The couetous man wanteth as well that which he hath, as that which he hath not. The tenth, is a sentence of equitie: Do as thou wouldest be done to. He that is mercilesse shall of mercy misse. kindes, as there be figures: If it be figured, it beareth the name of the figure wherewith it is ioyned. Now in a sentence heede must be taken, that it be not false, strange, too long, or without pith or importance. Secondly, that they be not too off vsed, and too thin sprinkeled in our speech, for that which is lawfull for Philosophers, is not granted to Orators, because Orators are the handlers of matters, and Philosophers the instructers of life. The vse of sentences is maruellous great in morall Philosophie, and also verie profitable, and pleasant in the Art of Rhetoricke: yet are sentences verie sparingly sprinckeled in he Orations of the most eloquent Orators, and that onely in consideration of their singular beautie and brightnesse: for execellent sentences ought to be esteemed as precious pearles and costly iewels in princely vestures, and as the most beautifull flowers in gardens and fieldes, and as the most glorious lightes in the firmament: all which as they are most excellent in beautie and glorie, so are they most rare by creation and nature. interprete a word or sentence going before by another word or sentence comming after in this manner: When shall be opened the rightuous 972 iudgement of God, which will reward euerie man according to his deeds. That is to say, praise, honour, and immortalitie to them which continue in well doing, and seeke immortalitie: but vnto them that are rebels, and do not obey the truth, but follow vnrighteousnesse, shall come indignation, wrath, tribulation, &c. I know that in me, that is to say, in my flesh dwelleth no good 973 thing. This figure is euermore vsed when the speaker is desirous to make his meaning most plaine & manifest, supposing it needful for the better explanation therof, to adde a lightsom enterpretation, whereby darke senses are well declared, and the hearer well instructed. There be two most needfull obseruations herein to be regarded, the one, that the interpretation be a true declaration of the sense, and in no part false, the other, that it may giue light, and manifest the word or sentence which it expoundeth, and not obscure it, as some enterpreters now and then do, who through ignorance and want of art, make their interpretations darker then the text, whereby it commeth to passe, that there is caused a most darke eclips of bright doctrine, through the interposition of ignorance, which is well resembled in a sore eye, which being tormented and darkened with a pin and a webbe, causeth the other also to become dimme and halfe blinde. whereof we presently entend to speake. Cicero: I haue now to speake of the excellent and singular vertues of Pompeius. There was no cause why Neuius should demand of the Pretor, that he might possesse the goods of Quintius by an iniunction. Cicero that you may haue what to follow in defending your accuser. Cicero written, I will shew you as much therof as I can call to remembrance. Also; before I begin to speake of the common wealth, I will complaine a litle of the iniuries yesterday done by Anthony. This figure doth much beautifie the Oration, so that it be apt and well applied. Now in a propositio there are three things to be considered. First that it absolutely containeth whatsoeuer pertaineth to the cause. Secondly that it be well diuided. Lastly, that it be disposed in an order, most meete for the same cause: for by this meanes the Oration shall not be confounded, with too great an heape of matters, while the hearer hath some certaine thing whereupon he may occupie his minde, both what to remember and what to expect. And likewise the speaker shall not need to doubt which way to go, when the matter is plaine before his face. The Caution of this figure is sufficiently exprest in the vse. diuerse things, many times repeating one sentence but yet with other words sentences, exornations, and figures: it differeth saith Melancton, from Smonunia forasmuch as that repeateth a sentence or thing onely with changed words; but this both with like wordes, like sentences, and like things, hauing also many exornations to the garnishing thereof. Cornificius teacheth that of this figure, there be two kindes, the one when we rehearse againe the verie same thing, but not after the same manner, for there is nothing more wearisome, and that may sooner bring satietie and irksomnesse to the hearer, then Tautologia, which is a wearisome repetition of all 974 . one word. But tarrying still in one place we do varie one thing or sentence diuerse maner of waies, and entreat of it with sundry fashions of speech. This first kind is three maner of waies varied. whereof hath bene said. Secondly by altering of pronunciation, that is to say, when the Orator doth occupie or repeat the same words and sentences with a certaine alteration and chaunge of his voice and gesture. Sextus Roscius is conuicted that he slew his father. Now this is said with a plaine pronunciation: Did Sextus Roscius slay his father? with an interrogation, which is full of maruelling: and likewise that which the Orator hath vttered in hot and vehement speech, he may repeat againe with coole and quiet words. Thirdly by alteration of the handling or entreating, as when the Orator conueyeth his speech either to Prosopopeia, Sermoematio, Exuscitatio, or to any other such like figure. Cicero when he had reckened vp many mischieuous deedes of Catiline, and many of his wicked doinges practised against the common wealth, and had accused him most greeuously in the Senate, he commanded him to get out of the Citie, he changeth the handling of his sentence, and translateth his speech to Prosopopeia: whereby he faineth the country chiding with Catiline, and rehearseth in order all his vngracious, mischeeuous, and vnluckie deeds, enterprised against it, accusing him sore, and willing him to depart out of it. There hath saith he, no abhominable or wicked deede bene heard or seene these many yeares but through thee: no naughtie factes without thee: thou onely hast slaine many Citizens, and neuer yet punished: thou hast vexed and robbed thy fellowes, and nothing said vnto thee: thou hast not only bene able to neglect lawes and statutes, but also to ouerthow them and breake them in peeces, with much more following. The second kinde of expolition. The second kinde of expolition is, when we speake one thing with many changes, which as some Authours do teach, consisteth of seuen parts: and what these parts be, this example now following doth shewe. Whereby the Authour to Herenius teacheth verie plainly the whole reason of publishing, thus: A wise man will shunne no perill for the common wealth. Therefore as oft times it commeth to passe, that when he which will not die for the common wealth, doth of necessitie die with it. And because all commodities receiued of the country, no discommoditie ought to be esteemed great or greeuous for the country, wherefore they do vnwisely which shun ye perill which must needs be hidden for the country: for neither can they auoyd the discommodities, and against their Cittie they are found vnthankfull. But they which with their own perill do willingly resist the perils of their country, are iudged wise men, for that they both render that honour to the common wealth which they owe vnto it, and had also rather die for many, than with many. For it is a verie vnreasonable thing to restore life receiued of nature, to nature when she compelleth, and not give it to thy country when she craueth it: forasmuch as thou hast by thy countrey preserued it, and when thou maist with great vertue and honour die for thy country, to choose rather to liue by dishonour and cowardnesse, and where as thou canst be content to put thy selfe in daunger for thy friends parents, and the rest of thy kinsfolk, to be vnwilling to enter into danger for the commo wealth, in which both this and that most reuerende name of countrey is contained. Therefore as he is worthie to be contemned, which in sailing had rather saue himselfe then the shippe, so is he worthie to be blamed which in ieopardie of the common wealth prouideth more for his priuate safetie then for the common preseruation. From a broke ship many haue escaped, from the shipwrack of the country no man can well escape: which me thinke Decius did well perceiue, who as it is reported, bending himselfe to die for the safetie of his souldiers, ranne into the middest of his enemies, whereby he let his life go, but lost it not: for with a thing of smal value, he redeemed a thing of great price: he gaue his life, he gained his country: he parted with his life, he obtained glory: which published with high praise, the elder it waxeth, the more & more it shall shine. Now forasmuch as it is shewed by reason, and proued by example, that we ought to venture our liues for the commo wealth, those men are to be iudged wise, which shun no perill for the safetie of their country. Now albeit the Author hath giuen this example, yet an Orator is not alwaies so straitly bound, as to obserue euerie point hereof: but hath a larger libertie to vse it, as it may seeme best vnto him. The vertue of this figure is great and well worthie to bee reckoned and esteemed among the most principall ornaments of eloquence, both in respect of the great copie of words, and matter, and also of the diuersitie of proofes and pleasant varietie: the vse of it is verie generall and fit for any great and weightie cause. which the vse of this exornation is much subiect which may be easily preuented by preparation, and the furniture of other figures. And also it behoueth him that shall vse this figure to prouide aforehand both the platforme and the matter, lest his reasons and proofes be to seeke or his examples vnreadie, or his similitudes vnprepared, or his conclusion in the wildernesse God knoweth where. speech, wherin he would haue yt vnderstoode by a certaine suspicion which he doth not speake, and that for 3\. special causes. 1\. For safetie sake: As when it is dangerous to speake directly and openly. 2\. For modestie and good manners sake: As when it is vndecent to be spoken plainly. 3\. For delectation sake and grace of the hearer, as when it may bring greater delight vnder the figuratiue shadow, then by the plaine report and open shew. 1\. If some good man for loue of iustice and pittie of his countrey should take vpon him to reprehend a tirant, and to remoue him from his crueltie, to an equitie and mildnesse of gouernmet, he should venture vpon a verie dangerous enterprise, more likelie to loose his life, the obatine his purpose, as often experiece hath prooued: Except the manner and forme of his handling the cause be with the greater wisedome premeditated, and the more circumspectly deliuered. For Kinges and tirants which are mightie, are not wont, or can hardly heare their faultes and wickednesses, which they commit with patient mindes, but rather kindled with displeasure goe not so soon in hand, to amend their errors, as to reuenge his aduertisement: And therfore he yt 975 should take this dangerous enterprise in hand must doo it with a cunning shadow of speech, and not in the sight of the Sunne, I meane not openly and plainlie: for the naked truth doth often 976 offend in a naked tale. The Orators speech may be shadowed two manner of waies, either by reprouing another person, in whom the same euils are, or were in, while he liued: or by commending such persons in whom the contraries are. If a man should in the respect of reprehension speake to Dionysius the King of Sicilia, hee might reproue the crueltie of Phalaris, and by an artificiall description and reprehension of that crueltie and tirannie in Phalaris, he may make a most bright and resplendent glasse wherein Dionysius must needes behold himselfe and his deformed tirannie. Or if a man shall commend and highly praise those Princes and Kinges which haue done the contrarie, I meane, which haue gouerned by wisedome, equitie, moderation and mercie. An euill man hearing the praises, and glorious fame of others, is moued in mind, and begins to couet commendation and praise, and seeing it cannot be obtained onely by desire, hee enclineth to the meanes by which he may deserue it. 2\. For modesties sake, thus: whose mother is delighted with daily mariages, signifying hereby her vnchast life. chast phrases, which ought to be presidents to vs as oft as we haue occasion to expresse or signifie matters which are bashfull & vndecent to be plainly told. Adam knew Eue his wife which conceiued and bare Cain. Thou shalt not be excellent because thou wentest vp to thy fathers bed. Salomon obserueth most samely the chastitie of speech, where he saith. Let her breastes alwaies satisfie thee, and hold euer content with her loue. And in the next verse: Why shouldest thou imbrace the bosome of a stranger? Herein nature it selfe also seemeth to prescribe this dutie, that those thinges, which she hideth, mans owne reuerence ought to keepe secret. 3\. To delight the hearer by the grace of shadowed speech is very vsuall among pleasant wittes and apt conceites: and therefore I iudge it needlesse to exemplifie this part. Concerning the vse and caution of this figure there is alreadie sufficiently said. interposition of another, or thus: When a sentence is cast betweene the speech before it be all ended, which although it giueth some strength, yet being taken away, it leaueth the same speech perfect enough. An example of Esay: At that time all vineyardes though there were a thousand vines in one, & sold for a thousand siluerlings) shalbe turned into briers and thornes. as a foole) I am more &c. A parenthesis is often put in, when the speaker supposing that the hearer may demaund a reason, or make an obiection to that which he saith, preuenteth him by an interposition expressed before the sentence be all ended, so that hereby it may appeare that a Parenthesis serueth to confirme the saying by the interposition of a reason, and to confute the obiection by the timely preuention of an answere: Also where the sentence may seeme darke or doubtfull, it putteth in a short annotation or exposition to giue light and to resolue the doubt. Parentheses if they be verie long they cause obscuritie of the sense, and sometime confusio of former and matter, in so much that the speaker forgetting the former part of ye sentence knoweth not what the latter should be Also a needlesse interposition is like vnprofitable houshold stuffe that filleth roome but doth no seruice: or like to the Missletoe, which albeit it standeth in the tree, and liueth by his iuice, yet is neither of the like nature, nor beareth the like frute. 
