 not mislike my youthfull aucthoritie, vvho desirous to paint, as vvel the pleasure as displeasure of Loue, thought good (mingling the svveete vvith the soure) not onely to discourse of the eleuation, but also of the declinatio of the Mount of Venus , for that they are dependant (as fellovv Fabians ) the one to the other. And though (my Lord) nothing ought to be penned svvaruing or not proceding fro graue aucthoritie, yet often times vnder a defuse garmet lieth a clodde of vvisdome. Likevvise, if vnskilfull heds shoulde frame theselues to the limitation of this Greeke prouerbe, Quam quisque uorit artem in bac se exerceat: then skill muste dye vvith the Auctor for vvant of youthfull exercise, yea, nothing should be practised, much lesse learned, fevve then do as Plato, Pithagoras , and Democritus did, vvho (as some say) sought all the partes of the vvorlde vvherein any thing vvas that might or coulde be learned. Yea Democritus , and Anaxagoras , loste bothe their goodes and patrimonies (as all men do knovv) onely for the desire of learning. Also Diodotus the Stoike , is not much incoparable to these, vvho thorovv his continuall vvatch and excessiue studie, being blinde of long time, knovving nothing but vvhat vvas red vnto him by a little childe, yet gaue himselfe vnto the studie of Geometrie, teaching vvith vvordes vvho vvere desirous to learne, hovv and in vvhat maner each line should be layed. VVherfore (O grafte of noble stocke) hauing the like desire (if so I might say) as these haue had to learning, my desire and not my skill, my good vvill and not my penne is to be accepted, as the simple Raddish roote vvrapped in a peece of greene Sarcenet vvas better accepted at the Prince his handes, than vvas a goodly fayre Horse gorgeously trapped giuen him of his marchaunt, for that in deede he knevv their vvilles vvere not alike: the poore man gaue his Radish roote for pure loue, but the other his sumptuous Horse in hope of a greater benefite. Thus preacing (more boldly than vvisely) vpo your Honours curtesie, I haue brought vnto your Lordshippe a handfull of fragrant floures (though not gathered in Adonis garden) the chiefe vvhereof are Primeroses and Violettes. Your choyce is not great, yet chuse vvhat likes you best, the vvorst turne backe againe. For if some may please, and none displease, I shall not onely thinke my time vvel spent, and my diligence better imployed, but also my labour and trauell best of al bestovved. And vvheras I seeme (as you shall hereafter perceyue) to ground my Paganicall Pamphlet vpon the song of Apollo , most melodiously song vnto me (as me thought) in a visio: I vvould not your Honour should thinke the painting of my pene to be Verbatim spoken of Apollo his mouth, but rather the grounde thereof, vvhiche in most ample manner follovving I haue delated, vvherby eche one may see (as it vvere in a gorgeous garish glasse before their eyes) a pretie poeticall Pamphlet, shevving paganically, as vvell the lavvful copulacion betvveene Vulcane and Venus , as the vnlavvfull combat betvveene hir and Mars . Also in this mery meane a playne mirrour of youthful vanities shall play his parte, and the shade thereof shall bereaue you of your senses. In the ensigne likevvise of this army, your Honour shall finde vvritte (as it vvere vvith letters of pure Gold) a chiefe poynte of vvomens vanities, videlicet , looke vvhat they may haue, coste it neuer so muche, they esteeme not: but by a toy of light valevve, and not easily commen by, they set great store, vvherof this Prouerbe came, Far fet and deere bought are good for Ladyes . Also diuers other pointes in this glasse your L. shall perceyue vvorthie of noting, but vvhy seeme I (vvho as yet neuer receyued one poynt of discourtesie of any veneriall Dame) to display vvith penne and inke vpo the imbecillitie of their natures? God graunt (say I) Euripides may vvell vvithstand their boysterous blasts, vvho in his Tragedie intituled Medea , affirmeth that vvomens vvittes are vnapte to goodnesse, but very vvell inclined to vnhappinesse, bicause (sayde he) vvomen are creatures vnperfect, and vvhere perfectio is not, there can nothing rest that is good. It seemeth the nebbe of my penne is long, and that I lesse do feare the stubbing therof. Such surmises (beleue me) assent to veritie, my yog yeres say, I speake not by experience, but rather by heare say: and vvhat of this? riper yeares  & mellovver vvittes knovv I fayne not herein, for many of them vnvvillingly haue the proofe thereof. Yet vvould I not, vvho haue no title hereunto, should seeme to chalege me as their vniust accuser, for I meane not generally, my surmise is not vnknovvne, Rubbe a gauld Horse on the backe and it is a chaunce if hee kicketh not . I vvill not say but that Dame Nature hath played hir part in deuiding and distributing hir gifts equally, as vvell to the one as to the other. For vve see, as vve haue Apollo and Mercurie for Goddes, so Pallas and Mi[illeg.]uerus for Goddesses of vvisdome as Mars so Bellona for vvar: as Cupide so Venus for loue: as Pan so Ceres for inuention of husbandrie: yea, as Morpheus so Murc aes for sleepe. Thus (to be shorte) God hath appointed the pleasure of vvomen to conteruayle the toyle of man. Neither are the deedes of men more valiant than the mindes of vvome, vvhose courage abateth no not vvith the fiercenesse of Tygres, as appeared by the vviues and matrones of Persia , vvho thorovv their valiant hartes, noble courage and impudencie, being ashamed of the flight of their husbandes, prouoked them to returne againe vnto battel, and not onely to ouercome them of vvhome sometimes not onely they, but Cyrus him selfe stood in dread, but also in the same battell to take king Astyages prisoner. Moreouer, vvho hath not redde of the valiantnesse of Queene Thomyris? vvho hearing of the death of hir onely sonne, began not to reuenge the same vvith teares, sobbes, sighes, and pensiuenesse, as vvomen vse to do ( Tullie testifying the same in his seconde boke of Tusculanes questions , vvho inferring vpon this proposition De tolerando dolore , afirmeth that Fleius muliebri ingenio additus ) but girded hir self vvith the svvorde, and armed hir body vvith the shielde of Mars , cutting off the heare of hir head, and attiring hir selfe in the manner of a man, vntill such time as shee had gotten the head of Cyrus , vvith the like vvyles that he vsed tovvard hir sonne. Also vvho knovveth not that the Amazones ruled their realme betvveene themselues of a long time vvithout the ayde of any man, cutting off their right dugges for hindring the casting of their dartes, vvherof they tooke this name Amazones (that is) vvanting their right dugges? But softe here I checke, least some sticke not to say behinde my backe, a blasing starre vvil shoote. But vvhat if they do? It is a greate winde that shaketh corne: neither do I thinke but that the standers by vvhiche heare this (hauing any iudgement at all) vvil easily descerne a difference betveene Orpheus and Pan . I knovv all men are not giuen to say vvell, neither to iudge alike. For (as Plato sayeth) Quot capita tot sunt sententi ae: some men vvill say, this poynt vvas penned to mystically: and an other vvill say behinde my backe, this shade vvas to grosse: here vvas to much learning shevved, and here vvas none at all: here Apollo and Pallas guided his penne: here Pan molested him vvith his oten pipe: here vvill the male kinde say, N aestor dreamed, here vvill the female say Achilles raigned. Thus in euery corner of the house I looke to finde a bayting dogge, and not vvithout a cause, for I knovv they can not speake so euill of me as my penne deserueth. But yet vvhat so euer they say, the blinde man may see in this glasse, vvhat apishe vvittes vvomen haue to inuestigate by interrogatiue similitudes the perfect meaning and the sure grounde of their louers harte: and those vvhiche haue their cleare sight to looke stedfastly herein, shall see perchaunce an Ape vvhipped, vvhich somvvhat may delight him. VVherevpon certen yong Gentlemen and those of my professed friendes (vvell vievving this vvorke) requested me earnestly to haue intituled it A nettle for an Ape , but yet (being somvvhat vvedded as most fooles are) to mine ovvne opinion, vvho vvould hardly forgoe their bable for the Tovver of London) I thought it good (somvvhat to stop a zoilous mouth) to sette a more cleanly name vpon it, that is, Golden Aphroditis . For if the other had stoode, vvho most had bene bitten herevvith peraduenture vvould haue sought all the meanes they could to haue turned this vvhippe for mine ovvne tale. But stay here a little, I loue not to be couted a ranger, least thorovv my appearing aboue the vvater, I seeme to prognosticate thereby (as doth the Dolphin) that some storme or tempest approcheth at hande. I trust though my penne dothe seeme to paint at large, yet not to lauishe. For vvhereas it seemeth to blase or painte the incineration of Veneriall dames and ruffling Nymphes, it proceedeth not of any spite, malice, hatred, melancholy, or euil vvill that I beare vnto the chaste Matrones, or vnto any one that may iustly chalenge vnto themselues one little sparke of the spice thereof. Therefore vvho are vvilling to vnderstande, I vvishe them to shunne the fountaine Chius , and rather to open the gates of their eares, vvherby they might the better vnderstand my meaning: iudge likevvise and knovve the difference of my voyces and soundes. If any one seemeth to be touched herevvith to the quicke, let them propounde their Quare , and I vvill alvvaies be at hande Reddere rationem therevnto. Yet on vvhome so euer it chaunceth to sounde forth this interrogation (vvhat outvvard countenaunce so euer she beare) yet can it not be sounded, but as it vvere Tragico boatu , therefore vvho listeth so to do, to ayde them in their enterprise, I thinke it best they cal vpo the dolefull Muse Melpomene , on vvhome Virgill in his Epigrams thus vvriteth:  Melpomene Tragico proclamat maesta boatu. For this I dare auouch, that oftentimes vyho seemeth most of al to blaze their chastitie vvith the Tergate of Medusa , they play more legerdemaynes vnder this cleane kind of conueyance, or at the least as many, as do those vvho neuer vvoore the necklace of Iasper, neither knevve so much as the cheyne of Diamantes and Topazes, vvhiche are counted the instrumentes of chastitie. And partly for a profe thereof, vvho marketh vvell each thing comprehended in this little volume, shal finde, that I haue somvvhat noted hereof by the conception of Diana , vvho alvvaies bore the name of Chastitie it self. Many other pointes (moste Honorable) might here be noted, but that I hate the checke of Ne quid nimis, and (as the Prouerbe goeth) Little sayde, soone amended . My good vvill I trust, shall suffice for this once, and though my vvell doing may not counteruaile the same, yet I trust your Honour vvill not sticke to defende me, in saying in my behalfe, Et voluisse sat est . Thus ceasing to trouble your Lordship any farther at this time. I commit you to the tuicion of the highest, to direct your pathes in true Honour and dignitie: desiring also the Ladies of the destenie, so to prolong the fatall threde of this thy terestriall life: that thou mayst runne the race of hoarie N aestor , to the pleasure of the almightie, and the great comfort of those vvhiche vvishe thee vvell. Your Honors poore Oratour IOHN GRANGE. sendeth greeting . VVith painefull pen of ranging fiste, bedewde with Ganges dew, So iocundare leades my will, that wanton needlesse toyle Of Courtlike Dames, my pestred wittes declaro seekes to foyle. Draw neare therfore ye weried Nimphes, with such Mineruas toyles, And vewe this lading scope, which yeeldes for the Veneriall foyles. As none so well as C aesars penne, could C aesars deedes indight, So none but of Morychus secte could dolor put to flight, Now I who wantes Apollos skill, and eke Dame Pallas witte, Herein to play Morychus parte, haue thought my selfe most fitte. Yet shall you finde an Ape, an Ape, in purple be she clothde, I come not from Trophonius care, for then I should be lothde: Nor from S. Patrickes purgatorie, but play Nepenthos parte, The iuyce whereof perforce will keepe such sadnesse fro your harte. Thus labour I with tooth and nayle of Lethe force to be: Then with obliuion might I force your carping cares to flee. VVhiche once exilde, the better might the Muses then take place, And barefote might the tripping Nimphs the better shew their grace I ofte haue longde with penne to painte the trade of louers loue, Yet neare cold find what pen deserude, which was not known before. Thus dayly musing, where to finde whereon to wreake my spight, Me thought I harde Apollo sing full sweetely in the night, And play vpo his twinkling harp, whose warbling notes (me thought) Perforce costraynde my penne to write, what he in songs had tought. VVhich fed full wel my restles reume with Stories somwhat strage; Marke now therfore, who liste to know whereon I list to range. It chaunste N. C. a valiant knight, possessed riches store, Yet wated whom his goodes shold rule when Clotho yeldes no more. For chaste, and solemne vowe once made, Dianas Nymphe to be, Dame Nature helde hir as content to heare, and not to see. VVherefore as one deuoyde of ioy, and hauing issue none, He oft reparde before the Goddes, with great complaynt, and mone, For that Cibile had transformde into a Lions shape Hyppomenes his cosin deare: for taking yeelded rape, VVithout a reuerence of the place: when beautie prickte his harte, His lust to serue (alas to soone) his hony waxed tarte. A Nymphe likewise of Scyros Ile, adornde with beautie rare, Before the Goddes with earnest sute, full oft she did repare: As for to haue Atlanta fayre to be restorde againe Vnto hir former shape, which once Cibele (to hir payne) Togither with Hyppomenes transformde to Lions route, And set them both at once to drawe hir chariot wheles aboute. Thus fortune frayle doth turne hir whele, to giue ech ma his chauce: And fraught their laucing ships with wiles, Dan Cupids roud to dauce For meeting both (as fortune would) before the Goddes with plaints, Loue gaue assault, the sparkes whereof, his tender harte attayntes. Such beautie (as Apollo sayde) consisted in hir face, That all the Heauens gan cleare to shine, not Phoebus yet in place, VVho, fearing lest the Gods theselues with loue should be inflamde, Sat all on thorne till she was gone, and was he to be blamde? No, no. Thus I at length haue founde a texte to stubbe a ganders quill: VVhiche if it proue Elleborus , according to my will, A heauy harte needes must it purge, from care, and pensiue plight, And like vnto Argivus harte inforce it to be light: To laugh indeede where cause is none, as this Argivus did, Yet Aiax rises to frequent, my story doth forbid. And I forbid a carping knight to catche where catche he can, For harde it is one dishe to please the mouth of euery man. VVho spies my fault (as easie) may by suyte I him forbid, To see and turne it to the worst, as Argus whilome did, That simple skill (whiche earst I had) I giue it you to vewe, Not doing as this Argus did, who kepte his vvife in mevv. For, quicquid in buccam venit , the same with haste I pende, No maruell then (deare Dames) if ought herein ye may amende. Thus standing to your curtesie (madames) loade starres of light, The sequele shal my meaning shew here offred to your sight.  Tam Mineruae quam Veneri.  thrust forth the Elderne pith: Spare not to cut a hasell wande to make a winding with. Seeke forth the grounde of evry thing, esteeme not filed phrase, The pythe, but not the paynting penne doth yeelde the Aucthours prayse. VVhat though I seeke by wantons witte each man for to delight? Shall sense therefore inforced be by myrth to see no lighte? Then is the Readers care but small, what fruyte he reape thereby: And eke the Aucthours prayse, by this, shall seeme in duste to lie. Then who that knovves, so foolish is his penne to take in hande? Sith that the vewers care is more, to reade, than vnderstande.  Legere & non intelligere negligere est.  In wisedomes schoole Apollo , and dame Pallas thought it fit Of al, therin your Aucthour here, in highest rome to sit. Holde there (quoth shee) the Muses all haue lulde thee in their lappe, Not I alone haue giuen thee sucke, but they haue giue thee pappe. Ganges , thy streames bedewed his penne thy sandes haue polisht eke, Rare blossomes blowne to mortal men, yet not in him to seeke. Arethusa , thy influence in him it is not skant, Not Polymneia eke hir rules of Rhetoricke doth he want, God guyde thy steps therefore my Grange , and eke what is begunne, Echidmas sting thou onely soughtes by secrete meanes to shunne. Ioue would it so, thou knowest well Pernassus Mounte to clyme Of Momus mates, thou needst not care, nor muttring Mucius slyme Holde here therefore thy iust rewarde, a crowne of Laurell bayes, Not sounding trumpe, but due desertes, thy flickering fame shall rayse. Graut him ye fatall sisters three, old N aestors race to run Renoumedly without default, & cracke of fame to shun, A Grange in deede he may be termde, a Grange for eache delight, Not Grange , nor groue, nor fertile fielde that is in eache mans sight, Grange would I so accouted be, but such a Grange I meane, For outwarde mirth and secrete sense as earst hath not bene seene. FINIS. Thy Eloquence and loftie style all other doth excell: Thy wisedome great and secrete sense diffusedly disguysde, Doth shew how Pallas rules thy minde, and Phoebus hath deuisde Those Golden lines, which polisht are with Tagus glittring sandes. A pallace playne of pleasures great vnto the vewers handes. Thy learning doth bewray it selfe and worthie prayse dothe craue, VVho so thee knew, did little thinke suche learning thee to haue. Here Vertue seemes to checke at Vice , and wisedome folly tauntes: Here Venus she is set at naught, and Dame Diane she vauntes: Here Pallas Cupid doth detest, and all his carpet knightes: Here doth she shew, that youthfull impes in folly most delightes. And how when age comes creeping on, with shewe of hoary heares, Then they the losse of time repent, with sobbes and brynish teares. Thou Ambodexter playste herein, to take the first rebounde, And for to shew thy minde at large, in earth doth the same copound. So that Apollo claddes his corps all with Morychus clothes, And shewes himself still friendliest there, where most of al he lothes.
