 excuse, wherin if I should alledge for my selfe ye matters of lesse worthynesse by as aged years haue bene taken in hand, & that dayly new deuises are published, in songs, sonets, enterludes, & other discourses, and yet are borne out without reproch, only to please the humour of some men: I think I should make no good plea therein, for besides yt I should finde therby so many known enimies as known men haue ben authors of such idle conceits, yet would my other aduersaries be neuer the rather quieted: For they would say yt aswel the one as the other were al naught, & though peraduenture I might passe vnknown amongst a multitude, & not be ye onely gaze or ye od party in my il doing, yet bicause there is lesse merit of pardon if the fault be excused as comon, I wil not make yt my defence which cannot help mee, & doth hinder other men. But my defece is by example of the best, amongst which many haue dedicated their labours, some stories, some of warre, some phisick, some lawe, some as concerning gouernment, some diuine matters, vnto diuers ladies & gentlewomen. And if men may & do bestow such of their trauailes vpon gentlewomen, then may we wome read such of their works as they dedicate vnto vs, and if we may read them, why not farther wade in the to ye serch of a truth. And then much more why not deale by translatio in such argumets, especially this kinde of exercise being a matter of more heede then of deep inuention or exquisite learning, & they must needs leaue this as confessed, yt in their dedications they minde not only to borrow names of worthy personages, but ye testimonies also for their further credit, which neither the one may demaund without ambition, nor ye other graunt without ouerlightnes: if women be excluded from the view of such workes as appeare in their name, or if glory onely be sought in our common inscriptions, it mattereth not whether ye parties be men or women, whether aliue or dead. But to retourn whatsomeuer the truth is, whether that women may not at al discourse in learning, for men lay in their claim to be sole possessioners of knowledge, or whether they may in some maner yt is by limitation or appointment of some kinde of learning, my perswasion hath bene thus, that it is all one for a woman to pen a story, as for a man to addresse his story to a woman. But amongst al my il willers, some I hope are not so straight yt they would enforce me necessarily either not to write 4 or to write of diuinitie. Whereas neither durst I trust mine own iudgement sufficiently, if matter of controuersy were handled, nor yet could I finde any booke in the tongue which would not breed offence to some, but I perceiue 5 English pastime, they could wel alow the story in Spanish, but they may not afford it so chepe, or they would haue it proper to themselues. What Natures such men be off, I list not greatly dispute, but my meaning hath ben to make other parteners of my liking, as I doubt not gentle reader, but if it shal plese thee after 6 finde in him the iust reward of mallice & cowardise, with the good speed of honesty & courage, beeing able to furnish thee with sufficient store of forren example to both purposes. And as in such matters which haue bene rather deuised to beguile time, then to breede matter of sad learning, he hath euer borne away the price which could season such delights with some profitable reading, so shalt thou haue this straunger an honest man when neede serueth, & at other times, either a good companio to driue out a wery night, or a merry iest at thy boord. And thus much as concerning this present story that it is neither 7 vnseemly for a woman to deale in, neither greatly requiring a lesse staied age then mine is. But of these two points gentle reader I thought to giue thee warning, least perhaps vnderstanding of my name & yeares, thou mightest be carried into a wrong suspect of my boldnesse and rashnesse, fro which I would gladly free my selfe by this plaine excuse, & if I may deserue thy good fauour by lyke labour, when the choice is mine owne I will haue a speciall regard of thy liking.     So I wish thee well. Thine to vse, M. T. 
