 they be hotte, they may be coolde; I am not so childishe to take euery bushe for a monster; euery shadow for a bugge; euery man for a deuill, that daunceth in his coate. The wynde blustereth about the hilles, yet can not remoue them from their place; The Sea beates vpon the rockes, yet euery billowe tugges in vayne; With thicke shotte the ayre is darkened, yet neuer a bullet stickes in the Sunne. They may wrastle with me and rore, and rayle, yet truth is steady & cannot be stirde, harde, and cannot bee brooke with washe; highe, and cleere, and cannot be hurt. If I giue them a Pil to purge their humor, they neuer leaue belking till it bee vp, wherein you may perceiue what vnruly patientes I deale withall, howe vnwilling they are to receiue remedy, when their disease hath gotten the vpper hande, howe ill good cookerie agrees with their queasie stomackes, and how they had rather suffer destruction to ouertake them, then seeke any meane to saue their soules. It is the propertie of hony though it be sweete, to torment those partes of the bodie that are infected, & such as are troubled with ye Kings euil, neuer taste it, but they iudge it to be gall. Therefore I wishe them al that feele me sharpe, to consider whether it be to those that are sound, or to such as I finde do norish filthe. My Schoole of Abuse, hath met with some enemies, bicause it correcteth vnthrifty Schollers; Demosthenes orations smelt of lampe oyle, because his candle burnt brightest, when theeues were busiest. They that are greeued, are Poets, Pipers, and Players: the first thinke that I banishe Poetrie, wherein they dreame; the second iudge, that I condemne Musique, wherein they dote; the last proclaime, that I forbid recreation to man, wherein you may see, they are starke blinde. He that readeth with aduise the booke which I wrote, shal perceiue that I touche but the abuses of all these. When we accuse the Phisition for killing his patient, we finde no faulte with the Arte it selfe, but with him that hath abused the same. Therefore let me holde the same proposition still, which I sette downe before, & drewe out of are the fathers of lies, Pipes of vanitie, and Schooles of Abuse. greedinesse of the crowne, droue his owne father  Saturne, out of his kingdome, though hee were a cruell tyrant, an vnnaturall childe, an vsurping Prince, an abhominable leacher, as wicked a wretche as euer liued, by Poets is made the king of gods. Venus a notorious strumpet, that lay with Mars, Adones, that taught the women in Cyprus to set vp a Stewes, too hyre out them selues as hackneies, for gaine, and that made her self as common as a Barbars chayre, by Poets is placed for a goddesse in heauen. Al these whome the Poetes haue called gods and goddesses, for the most part, were bastardes begotten in adulterie, or very lewde liuers, which had no soner defiled their beddes, but they were snatchte vp to the skyes and made starres, in so much that Iuno crieth out in Seneca, I ellus colenda est, pollices coelum tenent ; Lets dwel in earth, for heauen is full of whores. what stuffe is this? wantons in heauen? & a double diuinitie of he gods, & she gods? If it be so, I hope they will graunt me, that in that place nothing ought to bee vayne; if nothing be vaine, they must liue together by couples like man and wise, or holde the publique weale of Plato, and make euery thing common. If they liue together in lawfull marriage, giue them houses to theselues for lawfull encrease, that all which they do be not seene in the market; if they haue houses, let them haue landes, it is no reason they should be poorer then wee, & if they haue lande, either lette it bee fruitfull of it selfe, or giue them whippes in their handes, and sende them like swaynes to plough and carte. Bicause they are gods, they neuer die; bicause they are married, they dayly multiplie, for none can be so fruitfull as they; thus neuer dying, and euer encreasing, some of them in time shall be driuen to dwell in the ayre, some in the water, some in the earth, some in hell when house rome is scant, for heaue will not hold so great a company. If they bee fruitfull, what is the reason that Iupiter is he afeard to gleane any longer of other mes corne, least he be robbed of his own haruest: Considereth he now that one good turne requireth another? that hee which strikes with the sworde, shalbe beaten with the scabbarde? If they make all common, what are they better then brute beastes? So grosse are the errours, so great the abuses, so horrible the blasphemies we finde in Poetes, that wee may rather iudge them monsters of nature, then men of learning. Whilest they make Cupide triumphe in heauen, and all the gods to marche bounde like miserable captiues, before his charriot, they belie God, and bewitch the reader with bawdie charmes. Whilest they enclose the power of their Gods in what compasse they please, giuing Heauen to Iupiter, Hel too Pluto, the Sea too Neptune, they forget the earth, and leaue it too the rule of none at al. Whilest they make many gods, they ouerthrow euery God. For if their gods bee of equal power, no one of them ca doo anything without his fellow, and so none of them al may be called a god, because God is perfect and almighty. Being perfect, he can neither be encreased nor diminished; being almightie, he hath no neede of the helpe of other. What a confusion haue Poets brought, whe thinking little, ye whatsoeuer is deuided may be destroyed, they set all the gods togither by the rares, some fighting for Troy, some for the Greeks, some for Aen aeas, & som for Turnus? Saturne who they affirmed to be god of time, was a varlet that gelded his own Father, afterwarde thrust out of his seate by his sonne Iupiter, he was constrained to saue himselfe by flighte, and a greate whyle liued obscurely in Itlay. Apollo was a buggerer, and Schoolemaister of periurie; Mars a murderer, Mercury a theefe, Castor & Pollux, whome they reporte to be twinnes growen in one body, when they were rauishers of other mens wiues, neuer mette within one payre of sheets. Flora a curtezan that got infinite summes of money by sinne, and gaue all to the Romans when she died, by Poets is honoured for a goddesse of flowers. Thus making gods of them that were brute beastes, in the likenes of men, diuine goddesses of common harlots; they robbe God of his honour, diminishe his authoritie, weaken his might, & turne his seate to a stewes. By writing of vntruthes they are open liers, but if they do faine these frantike conceates to resemble somewhat els that they imagine, by speaking of one thing and thinking another, they are dissemblers: It is not enough for their freendes to say, Lascina est nobis pagina, vita proba , Our verse is wato, but our life is good: or , Iur aui lingua, metem iniuratam gero. My togue hath sworne, my hart is free. For players action, doeth answere to their partes; and Poets discourses to their maners: yet are many of their Schollers so enchaunted, that like the superstitious and foolishe Ægyptians, they had rather lose their lyues, then the Idols of their byrdes, their beastes, their Ibes, their Adders, their Dogges, their Cattes, their Serpents, their Crocodilles. Pypers are very sore displeased bicause I allow not their new streines, and shew them how farre their instrumentes differ from those that were vsed in olde times; they say, their musique is perfecter nowe than it was before, but who shalbe iudge? Let Ismenias the grasid fidler that was take prisoner by the Scythians in a battayle, vtter all his cunning when Ant aeas the king is at supper, he will laugh him to scorne, and sweare that his Horse hath brayed sweeter. When Philippe of Macedon tooke vpon him to reason with a newe Msition of his new chordes, and was not able to go thorowe stitche, bicause they haue euer a crotchet aboue commons, & adde where they liste, when they see their time, God forbidde, quoth the piper, that your maiestie should be so miserable, as to knowe these fantasticall toyes any better, their effeminate stops are not worth a straw. Dionysius made such accompt of their cunning, when they iudged it to be at the beste that hearing the notablest Harper which was in those dayes, hee promised him a talent for his labour, next day whe already: For, said hee, thou diddest but tickle mine eares with an emptie sounde, and I did the like againe to thee, promising that which I meane not to giue, delighting thee as much with hope of my coyne, as my selfe was pleased with the sounde of thy instrument. Bicause I would haue Dionysius folowed, let the not think I abhorre Musique: if they put on their spectacles, or take their eyes in their hands, & looke better in the Schoole of abuse, they shal finde that with Plutarch I accuse the for bringing their cuning into Theaters: that I say, they haue wilfully left, or with ignorance loste, those warlike tunes which were vsed in auncient times, to stirre vp in vs a manly motio, and founde out new descant with the daimcers of Sybaris, to rocke vs a sleepe in all vngodlinesse. If they had any witte, and learning, or experience, they might knowe that Excellent sensibile l aedit sensum , for his memorie with all posterities, had a brasen Idoll erected not done for sesiding Les guato spagniola , or inuenting sweete measures, or coyning newe daunces, but for kindling his souldiers courage, and hartening them all to take armour. Such a Musition was Antigenides, beene then in battaile, & bent his fiste at all them that were in presence: whiche of oure Musitions that are so perfect, is able with his instrument to make a freshe water souldier runne to his weapons, or enforce the Dolphin in the Sea to saue his life, if he suffer wracke? Which of all their instrumentes that are so absolute, can performe that which other haue doone before? If ancient Musitions haue gone beyonde vs, where is our cunning? If their instrumentes haue passed ours, where is the perfectnesse that our Pipers imagine? Why, say they, you play with antiquities, wee builde vpon scripture: Iubal was father of their harpe, but how many stringes hee put to it, or and the Harpe, and vsed instrumentes of many stringes, but to prooue those instrumentes were better, then such as had been practised many hundred yeeres before he was borne, Hic labor hoc opus est , there goeth the Hare away. And though I be of Plutarches opinion, that when we haue done or sayde all that wee can, the oldest fashion is euer best; that newe cuttes are the paternes of running heads, strange blockes, the very badges of fonde conceites; yet do I not forbidde our new founde instrumentes, so that we handle them as Dauid did, to prayse God; nor bring them any more into publique Theaters, to please wantons. London is so full of vnprofitable Pipers and Fidlers, that a man can no soner enter a tauerne, but two or three caste of them hang at his heeles, to giue him a daunce before he departe, therefore let me of grauitie examine the case, & iudge vprightly, whether the sufferance of such idle beggers be not a greeuous abuse in a common wealth. For my parte though I haue sayde more then they will like off, yet set down lesse, then they deserue) I meane not too trouble my wittes about them: it shal be enough for me which haue no authoritie to giue them a plaister, to launce the sore frendly & let it runne, that in processe of time, it may heale of it selfe. any maner of exception, thinking them, the better they are penned, or cunninglier hadled, ye more to be fled; bicause that by their pleasant action of body, & sweete numbers flowing in verse, we are moste inchanted. And Tully a Heathen, crying out against Poetrie, for placing baudy Cupide ae si haec flagitia non probaremus, nulla esset omnino ; I speake of playes, which if our selues did not loue this filthinesse, should neuer be suffered. If plaiers take a little more counsell of their pillowe, they shall finde them selues to be the worste, and the daungerousest people the world. A theefe is a shrewde member in a common wealth, he empties our bagges by force, these ransacke our purses by permission; he spoileth vs secretly, these rifle vs openly; hee gettes the vpperhad by blowes, these by merry iestes; he suckes our bloud, these our manners; he woundes our bodie, these our soule; O God, O men, O heauen, O earth, O tymes, O manners, O miserable dayesl he suffreth for his offence, these stroute without punishment vnder our noses; & lyke vnto a consuming fier, are nourished stil with our decay. Lacon thought it impossible for him to be good, that was not bitter to the wicked, then how shal we be perswaded of Players, which are most pleasant to abhominable liuers? Diogenes said, that it was better to be a ma of M aegaraes Ramme, then his sunne, because he prouideth a sheepherde to looke to his folde; but seeketh no instructer to teach his chylde; hee hath a care that his sheepe be wel tended and washt, but neuer regardeth his sonnes discipline; hee forbiddeth the one too runne in daunger of the wolfe, but keepes not the other from the Diuels clawes; and if Diogenes were nowe aliue, to see the abuses that growe by playes, I beleeue hee would wyshe rather to bee a Londoners hounde then his apprentice, bicause hee rateth his dogge, for wallowing in carrion; but rebukes not his seruaunt for reforcing to playes, that are ranke poyson. So corrupt is our iudgemet in these matters, that wee accompt him a murderer, whome we see delight in sheading of bloode; and make him a iester, that wostdeth our conscience, we cal that a slaughter house where brute beastes are killed; and holde that a pastime, which is the very buchery of Christian soules. We perceiue not that trouble and toyle draw vs to life, ease & idelnesses bring destruction; that sorrowe and anguishe are vertuous bookes, pleasure, and sporte the deuils baites; that honest recreation quickneth the spirites, & playes are venemous arrowes to the minde; that hunters deceiue most, whe seeming to walke for their delight, they craftely fetche the deare about; that players counterfaiting a shewe to make vs merry, shoote their nettes to worke our misery; that when Comedie comes vpon the stage, Cupide sets vpp a Springe for VVoodcockes, which are entangled ere they discrie the line, and caught before they mistruste the snare. They muste not thinke that I banishe recreation, because I barre them; the Souldier hath aswel a time to sleepe, as to keepe Sentinel; to rest his bones, as to labour his body. Iron with muche occupiyng, is worne too naught, with little handeling gathereth rust. Moderate sleepe refresheth man, too much killeth him in time. Therefore we must neither be laboured too muche, for ouerloading; nor loyter too long, for making our selues vnapt to any thing. Socrates left his study too play with children, but not continually; Cato of his armour and daunced to the Instrument, but not wantonly; Pollio Asinius the great Orator, neuer carried in his Studie after tenne of the clocke, nor redd any letters that were sent hym after that houre, what haste soeuer they required, but hee did not this too geue himselfe leaue too goe to Playes. There are other good pastimes to bee founde, if we be wylling too seeke them out. quiet, and too restore it by exercise if it be idle, or by recreation if it bee weary; hee giueth him this Caueat in the ende for a parting blowe, that all which hee hath set downe already, or is able too write if neede require, is not of force & strength enough, too keepe so slender and weake a Houlde, except wee enuiron the same ourselues, with a diligent forecast; a dayly care. Hee that thinkes wanton playes a meete recreation for the minde of man, is as farre from the trueth as the foolishe Gentiles, which beleeue that theyr gods delight in toyes; and wee whiche carrie our money too Players too feeds theyr pride, may be wel compared to the Bath keepers Asse which bringeth him wodde too make his fire, and contenteth himself with the smell of the smoke. It is a great folly in vs too seeke too liue in those places that are healthie too the body, not flie from those that are hurtfull too the soule; and as hard a matter for him too be cured, that knoweth not the griefe wherwith he is troubled. Senecaes wife had a she foole called Harpastes, which though she was sodenly stricken blinde, coulde not bee perswaded that shee had lost her sight, but iudged the house too bee somewhat darke. In my opinion our Players are as bad as shee, though they do not perceiue their owne abuses, yet will they not say they haue lost theyr eyes, but that theyr lippes hang in theyr light, or else they are ouerspread with a Cloude; And worse then those that confesse themselues blinde, for they, wyl yeelde themselues too bee led; these, had rather lye in the Chanell, then Ieane too a guide. I neuer yet read of that abuse which founde not some too excuse the same, so wicked and euill disposed are wee, that wee defende, our vices because wee loue them, and had rather excuse them, than shake them of. Ocritia caught a uritiy clap, & was deliuered of Seruius Tullius yet some of her, friendes dyd cloke the faulte, saying that the childe was got with a sparke of fier, which per aduenture bredde such winges in time, that it flewe out of the Bastardes heade in a flame. of mine acquaintance of both Uniuersities, with fayre profers; and greater promises of rewardes, yf they woulde take so much paine as too write agaynst mee; at laste like to Penelopees suters, which seeing themselues disdained of her, were glad to encroche with some of her maides, when neither of both Uniuersities, would heare their plea, they were driuen too flie to a weake hedge, and fight for themselues with a rotten stake. Beggars, you know, muste bee no chosers, hunger fauceth euery meate, when fishers lay theyr hookes in haste, Frogges will make a sauory dishe. It is tolde mee that they haue get one in London to write certaine Honest excuses, for so they tearme it, to these dist honest abuses which I reuealed. It is good for him that will falsifie pictures, not to let them see the liuely creatures, that are desirous to view his works, neither is it conuenient for him too present his excuse to any of those that haue read my schoole, and behelde those abuses in playing places, least their eyes reprooue him for a lyar. How he frames his excuses, I know not yet, because it is doone in hudder mudder. Trueth can neuer be Falsehods Visarde, which maketh him maske without a torch, & keepe his papers very secret. I will not deny but somthing may bee probably disputed in their cause by sharper wittes, whiche is such foode as slaketh your hunger, for a season, yet will it not breede good bloode, nor fleshe, nor liuely spirites, but bloweth you vp, and makes you swell, and turnes to corruption in the ende. Patroclus may iette in Achilles this Excuser weares, maugre his teeth, he must leaue the trueth, and strike with a Strawe, when hee comes to the fielde. Let him speake what hee liste in Players cause, he shall find them shaken with a woondrous Feuer, throwe fetherbeds on them, they are neuer the warmer, and all his excuses shall stande for perfumes, which faintly set them vpon their feete, that grouell in the dust with the falling sicknesse, but cannot deliuer them of their disease. If the Excuser be the man that is named to me, hee is as famous a Clarke as Clauitius Sabinus, which was so troubled with a grosse concette, and as short a memory, that euery minute he forgote the names of Vlisses, Achilles, Priamus, and such as he knew as well as the Begger his dishe, beeing very familiar with them, and dayly conuersant in their copany, yet many times he saluted the one by the others name: And because his mashippe would seeme learned, he heyred him seruauntes with great stipendes, of which, one had Homer without Booke, another Hesiod, and nine fidlers heads to make him an Index, of euery one of them taking some seuerall names of his acquaintance, too bee remembred. When this Gentleman had got so profounded Familee, hes began very friendly to feaste his acquaintaunce: in the middest of themselues, out flewe his Poetrie, for his Pypers were ready too rounde him in the eare, what hee should speake, but his luck was so ill, or his hearing so thicke, that he stuck fast continually in the midst of his verse, and could goe no farther. Crassus had such a roring throte, that he was costrained whe soeuer he declaimed to haue a piper at his elbow to giue him his tune, and keepe him in compasse. If it bee my fortune too meete with the learned woorkes of this London Sabinus, that can not playe the Poet without a Prompter; nor vtter a wise worde, without a Piper; you shall see we will make him to blush like a blacke Dogge when he is graueled; or to dance you a Galiarde when he takes his keye. In the meane time my aduantage is the greater, that Players haue chosen such a Champion, as whe I giue the Allarm, winnowes his weapon; when I run with a staffe, chargeth a Bulrushe; when I spare not to greete them with poulder & shot, answeares mee againe with a false fire, I was determined to send you greater matters, touching the saleable toung of Curio, but I stay my hande till I see his booke, when I haue perusd it I will tel you more. Meane while, I beseech
