 this put them in some comfort. But as soon as they came to St. John's Street, Willis demanded their money. Say what you will have, quoth she. Ten shillings a piece, said be. But we have not so much about us, said she.---Nay, then I will have it out of your bones.---Marry, content replied Meg; and taking a so belaboured him and his man, that he desired her for God's sake, to hold her hand.---Not I, said she, unless you bestow an angel on us for good luck, and swear e'er we depart to get us good mistresses. The carrier having felt the strength of her arm, thought it best to give her the money, and promised not to go till he had got them good places. Of her being placed in Westminster, and what she did at her Place. Westminster, and told the landlady he had brought her three fine Lancashire lasses, and seeing she often asked him to get her a maid, she might now take her choice. Marry, said she, I want one at present, and here are three gentlemen who shall give their opinions.---As soon as Meg came in, they blessed themselves crying, "Domine; Domine. viee Originem." So her mistress demanded what was her name; Margaret, forsooth, said she, briskly. ---And what work can you do? She answered she had not been bred unto her needle, hut to hard labour, as washing, brewing, and baking, and could make a house clean.---Thou art, quoth the hostess, a lusty wench, and I like thee well, for I have often persons that will not pay Mistress, said she, if any such come, let me know, and I'll make them pay, I'll engage.---Nay, this is true, said the carrier, for my carcase felt it; and then he told them how she served him.---On this Sir John de Castile, in a bravado, would needs make an experiment of her vast strength; and asked her, If she durst exchange a box o'the ear with him. Yes, quoth she, if my mistress will give me leave. This granted, she stood to receive Sir John's blow, who gave her a box with all his might, but it stirred her not at all; but Meg gave him such a memorandum on his ear that Sir John fell down at her feet.---By my faith, said another, she strikes a blow like an ox, for she hath knocked down an ass.---So Meg was taken into service. The Method Meg took to make one of the Vicars pay his Score. was called Long Meg of Westminster.--- One of the lubbers of the Abbey had a mind to try her strength so coming with six of his associates one frosty morning, calls for a pot of ale, which being drank; he asked what he owed? to which Meg answers, Five Shillings and three-pence. O thou foul scullion, I owe thee but three shillings and one penny, and no more will I pay thee. And turning to, his landlady, complained how Meg had charged her too much. The foul-ill take me, quoth Meg, if I misreckon him one penny; and therefore Vicar, before thou goest out of these doors, I shall make thee pay every penny; and then she immediately lent him such a box on the ear, as made him to reel again. The Vicar then steps up to her, and together both of them by the ears.---The Vicar's head was broke, and Meg's cloath torn off her back. So the Vicar laid hold of her hair, but he being shaved, she could not have that advantage; so laying hold of his ears, and keeping his pate to the post, asked hiw how much he owed her? As much as you please, said he.---So bald pate my reckoning. And with that she began to beat a plain song between the post and his pate. But when he felt such pain, he roared out he would pay the whole.---But she would not let him go, until he laid it down, which he did, being jeered by his friends. Of her fighting and conquering Sir James of Castile, a Spanish Knight. purpose. So coming in one day, and seeing her melancholy asked what ailed her? for if any one has wronged you I will requite you.---Marry, quoth she, a base knave in a white sattin doublet has abused me, and if you revenge my quarrel, I shall think you love me.---Where is he, quoth Sir James?---Marry, says she, he said he would be in St. George's Fields---Well, quoth he, do you and the Doctor go along with me, and you shall see how I'll pumel the knave. Unto this they agreed, and sent Meg into St. George's Fields beforehand. Yonder, said she, walks the fellow by the wind-mill. Follow me hostess, said Sir James, I will go to him. But Meg passed as if she would have gone by. Nay, stay, said Sir James, you and I part not so; I am that gentlewoman's champion, and fairly for her sake, will have you by the ears.---With that Meg drew her sword, and to it they went. At the first blow she hit him on the head, and often endangered him.---At last she struck his weapon out of his hands, and stepping up to him swore, all the world should not save him.---O save me, Sir, said he, I am a Knight, and it is but a woman's matter; do not spill my blood.---Wer't thou twenty Knights, said Meg, and was the King himself here, I would not spare thy life, unless you grant me one thing.---Let it be what it will, you shall be obeyed.---Marry, said she, that this night you wait on my place at this woman's house, and confess me to be your master This being yielded to, and a supper provided, Thomas Usher and others was invited to make up the feast; and unto whom Sir James told what had happened. ---Pho! said Usher, jeeringly, It is no such great dishonour for to be foiled by an English gentleman, since Caesar the Great was himself driven back by their extraordinary courage. At this juncture Meg came in, having got on her man's valiant gentleman whose courage I shall ever esteem. Hereupon she pulling off her hat, her hair fell about her ears, and she said, I am no other than Long Meg of Westminster; and so you are heartily welcome. At this they all fell a laughing, nevertheless at supper-time, according to agreement, Sir James was a proper page; and she having leave of her mistress, sat in state like her Majesty.---Thus Sir James was disgraced for his love, and Meg was counted a proper woman. Her Usage to the Bailiff of Westminster, who came into her Mistress's and arrested her Friend. gentleman in Meg's mistress's house, and desired the company to keep peace. She coming in asked what was the matter? O said he I'm arrested.--- Arrested! and in our house! why this is an unkind act to arrest one in our house; but however take an Angel, and let him go. No said the Bailiff I cannot, for the creditor is at the door. Bid him come in says she, and I'll make up the matter. So the creditor came in; but being found obstinate, she rapped him on the head with a quart pot, and bid him go out of doors like a knave; he can but go to prison, quoth she, where he shall not stay long, if all the friends I have can fetch him out. The creditor went away with a good knock, and the Bailiff was going with his prisoner. Nay, said she, I'll bring a fresh pot to drink with him. She came into the parlour with a rope, and knitting her brows, Sir Knave, said she, I'll learn thee to arrest a man in our house, I'll make thee a spectacle for all catch-poles; and tossing the rope round his middle, said to the gentleman, Sir, away, shift for yourself, I'll pay the bailiff his fees before he and I part. Then she dragged the bailiff unto the back side of the house, making him go up to the chin in a pond, and then paid him his fees with a cudgel; after which he went away with the amends in his hands; for she was so well beloved that no person would meddle with her. Of her meeting with a Nobleman, and her Usage to him and the Watch. fell out, a young nobleman being disposed for mirth, would go abroad to see the fashions, and coming down the Strand, espies her, and seeing such a tall fellow, asked him whither he was going? ---Marry, said she, to St. Nicholas's to buy a calve's head. How much money hast thou? In faith said she, little enough, will you lend me any?---Aye, said he, and putting his thumb into her mouth, said, There's a tester. She gave him a good box on the ear, and said, There's a groat, now I owe you two-pence. Whereupon the Nobleman drew, and his man too; and she was as active as they, so together they go; but she drove them before her to a little chandler's shop, insomuch, the Constable came in to part the fray? and having asked what they were? the nobleman told his name, at which they all pulled off their caps.---And what is your name, said the Constable? Mine, said she, is Cuthbert Curry, knave.--- Upon this the constable commanded some to lay hold on her, and carry her to the Compter.---She out with her sword and set upon the watch, and behaved very resolutely; but the Constable calling for clubs, Meg was forced to cry out, Masters, hold your hands, I am your friend; hurt not Long Meg of Westminster.---So they all staid their hands, and the nobleman took them all to the tavern; and thus ended the fray. Meg goes a shroving, fights the Thieves of St. James's Corner, and makes them restore Father Willis the Carrier his hundred Marks. of Meg's fame: so they desired old Willis the carrier to call upon her, which he did, taking with him the other lasses. Meg was joyful to see them, and it being Shrove-Tuesday, Meg went with them to Knightsbridge, and there spent most of the day, with repeating tales of their friends in Lancashire, and so tarried the Carrier, who again and again enquired how all did there; and made the time seem shorter than it was. The night growing on, the carrier and the two other lasses were importunate to be gone but Meg was loath to set out, and so stayed behind to discharge, the reckoning and promised to overtake them. It was their misfortune at St. James's Corner to meet with two thieves, who waiting there for their prey, set on them, and took an hundred marks from Willis the Carrier, and from the wenches their gowns and purses. Meg came up immediately after, and then the thieves, seeing her in a a female habit, thought to take her purse also; but she behaved herself so well, they began to give ground. Then said Meg, Our gowns and purses against your hundred marks; win all and wear all.---Content, quoth they.---Now lasses pray for me, said Meg.---With that she buckled with these two knaves, beat one, and so hurt the other, that they entreated her to spare their Lives.---I will said she, upon conditions.---Upon any condition, said they.---Then said she, it shall be thus: 1\. That you never hurt a woman, nor any company she is in. 2\. That you never hurt lame or impotent men. 3\. That you never hurt any children or innocents. 4\. That you rob no carrier of his money or goods. 5\. That you rob no manner of poor or distressed. Are you content with these conditions? We are, said they, I have no book about me, said she, but will you swear on my smock tail? which they accordingly did, and then she returned the wenches their gowns and purses, and old Father, Willis the Carrier an hundred marks. The men desiring to know who it was had so lustily beswinged them, said, to alleviate our sorrow, pray tell us your name?---She smiling, replied, If any one asks you who banged your bones, say, Long Meg of Westminster once met with you. Meg's Fellow Servant pressed; her Usage of the Constable; and of her taking Press-Money to go to Bologne. London. The Constables of Westminster pressed Meg's fellow-servant and she told them if they took him her mistress was undone. All this could not perswade the Constable, but Harry must go, on which she lent the Constable a knock. Notice being given to the Captain, he asked who struck him? Marry, quoth Meg, I did and if I did not love soldiers, I'd serve you so too. So taking a cavalier from man's hand, she performed the exercise with such dexterity, that they wondered whereupon she said, Press no man, but give me press-money, and I will go myself. At this they all laughed, and the Captain gave her an Angel. Whereupon she went with him to Bologne. of her beating the Frenchmen off the Walls of Bologne; for which gallant Behaviour she is rewarded by the King with eight-pence per Day for Life. great number of men. surprised, and retook it. Meg being a Laundress in the town, raised the best of the women and with a halberd in her hand, came to the walls, on which some of the French had entered, and threw scalding water and stones at them, that she often obliged them to quit the town before the soldiers were up in arms. And at the sally she came out the foremost with her halberd in her hand to pursue the chace. The report of this deed being come to ears of the King, he allowed her for eight-pence a day. Of her fighting and beating a Frenchman before Bologne. his pride, desired a drum, to signify that a young soldier would have a push at pike with him. It was agreed on, and a place appointed life against life. On the day the Frenchmen came, and Meg met him, and without any salute fell to blows; and after a long, combat she overcame him, and cut off his head. Then pulling off her hat her hair fell about her ears. By this the Frenchmen knew it was a woman, and the English giving a shout she by a Drummer sent the Dauphin his soldiers head, and said, An English woman sent it. The Dauphin much commended her, sending her an hundred crowns for her valour. Of her coming to England, and being Married. soldier, who hearing of her exploits, took her into a room, and making her strip to her petticoat, took one staff and gave her another, saying, As he had heard of her manhood, he was determined to try her.---But Meg held down her head, whereupon he gave her three or four blows, and she in submission fell down on her knees, desiring him to pardon her, For, said she, whatever I do to others, it behoves me to be obedient you; and it shall never be said, If I cudgel a knave that injures me, Long Meg is her husband's master; and therefore use me as you please.---So they grew friends, and never quarrelled after. Long Meg's Usage to an angry Miller looking out, the boy they had with them about fourteen years old, said Put out Miller, put out.---What must put out, said he? A thief's head and ears said the other. At this the Miller came down and well licked him, which Meg endeavoured to prevent, whereupon he beat her; but she wrung the stick from him, and then cudgelled him severely; and having done sent the boy to the mill for an empty sack, and put the miller in all but his head; and then fastening him to a rope she hawled him up half way, and there left him hanging. The poor miller cried out for help, and if his wife had not come, he had surely been killed, and the mill for want of corn set on fire. Of her keeping House at Islington, and her Laws. night, he would needs search Meg's house, whereupon she came down in her shift, with a cudgel, and said Mr. Constable, take care you go not beyond your commission, for if you do, I'll so cudgel you as you never was since Islington has been.---The Constable seeing her frown, told her he would take her word, and so departed. Meg, because in her house there should be a good decorum, hung up a table, containing these principles: First, If a Gentleman or Yeoman had charge about him, and told her of it, she would repay him if he lost it, but if he did not reveal it, and said he was robbed, he should have ten bastinadoes, and afterwards be turned out of doors. Secondly, Whoever called for meat, and had no money to pay, should have
