 wood or stones, than altogether to contribute nothing. Not doubting, but that the chief Maister and Builder of this howse, Christ Iesus, will not dislike, but accept of my poore contribution, no lesse than he did of the poore wydowes Mite, to whom was imputed that she had cast more, in Gazophilatium Templi, into the treasury of the Temple, than all the rest: for what she wanted in effect, that she supplyed in affect, And for that also the Lord our GOD committing his talets to euery one, whether more or lesse, not onely requireth of vs the same againe simply, but also, as a straight computist, demaundeth interest and gaine of euery one of vs: & for that not only, he is a murtherer & a Homicide before God, who slayeth or killeth, a Man with materiall sword, but he also who may preuent the same, and will not. And not onely, he is guiltie of haynous transgression that committeth any euill really, but also he who consenteth to it as he doth, who holdeth his peace, or he who by any means might auoid it, and either for negligence wil not, or for feare of the world dare not. Therefore, albe it, that I haue receiued, but one poore talet, or ather the shadow of one, yet least I might be reproued (with that vnprofitable Seruaunt) for hyding my small talent in the Earth not profiting therwith at all, either my self, or others, I haue aduetured the making of this litle treatise, intituled, (The Anatomy of Abuses,) hoping that the same (by diuyne assistance) shall somewhat conduce to the building of this spirituall howse of the Lord. And although I be one (most honorable Lord) that can do least in this Godly course of life (palpable barbarisme forbidding mee so much as once to enter into Wysdomes school) yet for that somewil not, for feare of losing worldly promotion (though in the meane tyme they lose the Kingdome of Heauen,) Other some dare not for displeasing the world: I say, for these, & semblable causes together, with the zeale and goodwill I beare vnto my Country, and feruent desire of their conuersion and amendement, I haue taken vpon me the contryuing of this book: Which GOD, graunt may be with like plausible alacritie receiued, as with paines and good will, I haue published it, for the benefit of my Cuntrey, the pleasure of the Godly, and amendement of the wicked. And I doubt not, that as none, but the wicked, and peruerse whose gawld backes are tutched, will repyne against mee, so the Godly and vertuous, will accept of this my labour, and trauaile herein, whose gentle fauour and goodwill, shall counterpoyse, (and farre surmount with mee) the maligne stomacks, and stearn countenances of the other. After that I had (right honorable) fully perfected this booke, I was minded, notwithstanding, both in regard of the straungenes of the matter it intreateth of, and also in respect of the rudenesse of my penne, to haue suppressed it for euer, for diuerse and sundrie causes, and neuer to haue offred it to the viewe of the world. But, notwithstanding, being ouercome by the importunat request, and infagitable desire of my freinds, I grauted to publish the same, as now you see, is extant. But, when I had once graunted to imprinte the same, I was in greatter doubt than before, fearinge, to whome I might dedicate the same so rude and impolished a worke. And withall I was not ignorant, how hard a thing it is in these daies to finde a Patrone of such books as this, which sheweth to euery one his sin, and discouereth euery Mans wicked waies, which indeed, the vngodly ca not at any had abyde, but as ir were mad-me disgorging their stomacks (Cum in Authore tum in codicem plenis buccis, & dentibus plusquam caninis rabide feruntur:) they rage, they fume and rayle both against the fro, and resting, as it weare in extasie of despaire, at last I called to mind your honorable Lordship, whose praises haue pearced the Skyes, and whose laudable vertues are blowen, not ouer the realme of England onely, but euen to the furthest costs and parts of the world. All whose vertues, and condigne prayses, if I should take vppon mee to recounte, I might as well number the starres in the Sky, or grasse of the Earth. For, for Godly Wysdome, and zeale to the truth, is not your good Lordship (without offence be it spoken) comparable with the best? For sobrietie, affabilite, and gentle curtesie to euerie one, farre excelling many. For your great deuotion and compassion to the poore oppressed, in all places famous: For Godly, fidelitie, to your Soueraigne, loue to the CVNTREY, and vertues in generall, euerie where most renowmed. But least I might obscure, your Worthie commendations with my vnlearned penne, (lytle, or no thing at all emphaticall) I will rather surcease, than further to proceed, contenting my selfe rather to haue giuen a shadowe of them, than to haue ciphered them foorth, which indeed are both infinit, and inexplicable. In consideration (whereof) not withstanding that my Booke be simpler, baser, and meaner, than that it may (without blushing) present it self to your good Lordship (being farre vnworthie of such an honorable Personage) yet accordinge to your accustomed elemency I most humbly beseache your good Lordship to receiue the same into your honors Patrocinv and protection, accepting it as an infallible token of my faithfull heart, seruice, and good will towardes your honorable Lordship: For proofe whereof, would GOD it might once come to passe, that if not otherwyse, yet with my humble seruice, I might shewe foorth the faithfull and euer willing heart I beare in brest to your good Lordeship, protesting before Heauen and Earth, that though power want yet shall fidelitie, and faithfulnes faile neuer. And because, this my Booke is subiect (my verie good Lord (to as many reproches, tauntes and reproofes is euer was any litle book (for that few ca abyde to haue their sins detected) therfore I haue had the greatter care to commit the same to the guardance and defence of your honour, rather than to manie others, not onely for that GOD hath made your honour a Lamp of light vnto the world, of true nobilitie and of al integritie and perfection, but also hath made you his substitute, or vicegerent, to reforme vices, punish abuses, and correcte sinne. And as in mercie he hath giuen you this power and autoritie, so hath he giuen you a hungrie desire to accomplish the same according to his will: Which zeal in your sacred brest, the LORD increase for euer. And as your Lordship knoweth, reformation of maners and amendement of lyfe, was neuer more needfull, for, was pride (the chiefest argument of this Booke) euer so rype? Do not, both Men and Women (for the most part) euery one in generall go attyred in silks, veluers, damasks, satans, and what not? which are attyre onely for the nobilitie and gentrie, and not for the other at anie hand? Are not vnlawfull games, Playes and Enterluds, and the like euery where vsed? Is not whordome, couetousnes, vsune & the like daylie practised without all punishment or lawe? But hereof I say no more, referring the consideration, both of these and the rest, to your Godly wysdome. Beseaseaching your good Lordship, to perdon my presumption in speaking thus much, for (Zelus domini huc adegit me:) the zeal of my God hath dryuen me heather. Knowinge, that the LORD hath ordeined you, to himselfe a chosen vessell of honour, to purge his Church of these Abuses, and corruptions, which as in a table are depainted and set foorth in this litle booke. Thus I cease to molest your sacred eares any further with my rude speaches, most hubly beseaching your good Lordship not onely to admit this my Book into your honours patronage and defence, but also to persist the iust Defender therof, against the swynish crew of rayling Zoilvs and flowting Momvs , with their complices, to whome it is easier to depraue all things, than to amend anything themselues. Which, if I shall perceiue to be accepted of your honour, besides that I shall not care for a thousand others, disliking the same, I shall not only think my self to haue receiued a sufficiet guerdon for my paines  & shalbe therby greatly incoraged (if GOD permit) hereafter, to take in hand some memorable thing to your immortall prayse, honour and renowne, but also shall daylie pay to GOD, for your good Lordship long to continue, to his good pleasure and your harts desire, with increase of Godly honour, reward of laudable vertue, and eternall felicitie in the Heavens , by Iesus Christ. Columna gloriae virtus. PHILLIP Stubbes. I thought it conuenient (good Reader, who soeuer thou art, ye shalt read these my poore laboures) to admonish thee (least haply ye mightest take my woords otherwise than I meant them) of this one thing: That wheras in the processe of this my booke, I haue intreated of certen examples, usually practised amongest vs, as namely of Playes and Enterludes, of dauncing, gaming, and such other like: I would not haue thee so, to take me, as though my speaches tended, to the ouerthrowe and vtter disliking of all kynd of exercyses in generall: that is nothing my simple meaning. But the particulare Abuses, which are crept into euery one of these seuerall exercyses, is the onely thing, which I think worthie of reprehension. For, otherwise (all Abuses cut away) who se not, ye some kind of playes, tragedies and enterluds in their own nature, are not onely of great ancietie, but also very honest and very commendable exercyses, being vsed and practised in most Christian common weales, as which containe matter (such they may be) both of doctrine, erudition, good example and wholsome instruction? And may be vsed in tyme and place conuenient, as conducible to example of life and reformation of maners. For such is our grosse & dull nature, that what thing we see opposite before our eyes, do pearce further, and printe deeper in our harts and minds, than that thing, which is hard onely with the eares, as Horace, the hethen Po et hominum occulis obiecta. So, that when honest & chast playes, tragedies, & enterluds are vsed to these ends, for the Godly recretio of the mind, for the good example of life, for the auoyding of that, which is euill, and learning of that which is good, tha are they very tollerable exercyses. But being vsed (as now commonly they be) to the prophanation of the Lord his sabaoth, to the alluring and inuegling of the People from the blessed word of God preached, to Theaters and vnclean assemblies, to ydlenes, unthriftynes, whordome, wantones, drunkenes, and what not? and which is more, when they are vsed to this end, to maintaine a great sort of ydle Persons, doing nothing, but playing and loytring, hauing their lyuings of the sweat of other Mens browes, much like vnto dronets deuouring ye sweet honie of ye poore labouring bees, than are they exercyses (at no hand) sufferable. But being vsed to the ends that I haue said, they are not to be disliked of any sober, and wise Christian. that I condemne the exercyse it self altogether, for I know the wisest Sages and the Godlyest Fathers and Patriarches that euer liued, haue now and than vsed the same, as  Dauid, Salomon, and many others: but my woords doo touch & cocerne the Abuses thereof onely. As being vsed vppon the Sabaoth day, from morning vntill night, in publique assemblies and frequencies of People, Men & women together, which pyping, fluting, dromming, and such like inticements to wantonnesse & sin, together with their leapinges, skippings, & other vnchast gestures, not a few. Being vsed, or rather abused in this sort, I vtterly discommend it. But vppon the otherside, being vsed in a mans priuat-chamber, or howse for his Godly solace, and recreation in the feare of GOD, or otherwise abroade with respect had to the time, place and persons, it is in no respect to be disalowed. And wheras I speake of gaming, my meaning is not, that it is an exercise altogether vnlawful. For, I know that one Christian may play with another, at any kind of Godly, honest, ciuile game, or exercise, for the mutuall recreation one of the other, so that they be not inflamed with coueitousnes, or desire of vnlawfull gaine: for the comaundemet saith, thou shalt not couet: wherfore, if any be voide of these affections, playing rather for his Godly recreation, than for desire of filthie lucre, he may vse the same in the feare of God: yet so as the vse therof be not a let, or hinderance vnto him, to any other Godly exploit. But, if a man make (as it weare) an occupation of it, spending both his tyme and goods therein, frequenting, gaming howses, bowling allyes, and such other places, for greedinesse of lucre, to him it is an exercise altogether discommendable and vnlawfull. Wherefore, as these be exercyses lawfull, to them that know how to vse them in the feare of GOD, so are they practises at no hand sufferable to them that abuse the, as I haue shewed. But take away the abuses, the thinges in themselues are not euill, being vsed as instruments to Godlynes, not made as spurres vnto vice. There is nothing so good, but it may be abused, yet because of ye abuses, I am not so strict, that I wold haue the things, themselues remooued, no more than I wold meat and drinke, be it is abused, vtterly to be taken away. And wheras also I haue spoken of the excesse in Apparell, and of the Abuse of the same, as wel in men, as in women generally, I wold not be so vnderstood, as though my speaches exteded, to any, either noble, honorable, or worshipful: for, I am so farre from once thinking that any kind of sumptuous, or gorgeous attire is not to be worn of any of them, as I suppose them rather Ornaments in them, than otherwise. And that they both may, and for some respects, ought to were such attire (their birthes callings, functions and estats requiring the same) for causes in this my Booke laid downe, as maye appeare, and for the distinction of them from the inferiour sorte, it is prouable both by the Woord of GOD, Ancient Writers, and common practise of all ages, People and Nations, from the beginning of the World, to this day. And therefore, when I speake generally of the excesse of Apparell, my meaning is of the inferiour sorte onely, who for the most parte do farre surpasse, either noble, honorable, or worshipfull, ruffling in Silks, Ueluets, Satens, Damasks, Taffeties, Gold, Siluer, and what not? with their swoords, daggers, and rapiers guilte, and reguilte, burnished, and costly ingrauen, with all things els, that any noble, honorable, or worshipfull Man doth or may weare, so as the one cannot easily be discerned from the other. These be the Abuses, that I speake of, these be the euills, that I lament, and these be the persons that my words doo concerne as the tenure of my Booke consideratly wayed, to any indifferent READER doth purport. thy better instruction, as well in these few points, as in all other the like, wher foeuer they shall chaunce to occurre in my Booke. Beseaching thee, to construe al things to the best, to beare with the rudenes therof, and to giue the same thy good-woord, and gentle acceptaunce. And thus in the LORD, I bid thee, farewell. Thyne to vse in the Lord, PHILLIP Stubbes. Offendit nimia te garrulitate libellus fortemeus, Lector miror id ipse nihil. Obsitus est etenim verboru colluuione plusquam vandalica, rebus & insipidis. Quare si sapias operam ne perdito post hac nostra legendo, legas vtiliora, vale. ZOILE cum tanta rabie exardescis in omnes, no aliter rabidus, quam solet ipse canis: Dente Theonino rodens alios, calamoque, incessens hos, qui nil, nocuere tibi: Vipeream in cunctos vibrans O Zoile linguam, linguam qua inficiunt toxica dira tuam: Cum Debacchandi sinis sit Zoile nullus, hora quieta tibi nullaque praetereat: Cum tumeas veluti ventrosus ZOILE bufo, demiror medius good minus ipse crepes. Daemones ad tetrum descendat Zoilus antrum, hunc lacerent furiae, Cerborus ore voret. Imprecor at misero quid paenas, cui satis intus? daemona circumfert, pectore namque suo. Si tibi prolixus nimium liber iste videtur pauça legas, poterit sic liber este breuis. For any thing done in this lyfe: Inioy the same withouten stryfe. And Christian life accordinglie: Heare present, now before thine eye: As in a glasse thou mayest behold: And giue him thankes an hundred fold. Shall men prophane, who toyes haue writ, And wanton pamphlets store, Which onely tend to noorish vice: And wickednes the more, Deserue their praise, and for the fame, Accepted be of all, And shall not this our AVTHOR than Receiue the Lawrell pall? Who for good will in sacred brest He beares to natiue soyle, Hath published this Godly Booke, With mickle paine and toyle. Wherein, as in a Mirrour pure Thou mayest behold and see, The vices of the World displayed Apparent to thy eye. He flattereth none, as most men do, In Hope to gaine a price: But shewes to all their wickednesse, And Gods diuyne Iustice, A Godlyer booke was neuer made, Nor meeter for these dayes: Oh read it than thank GOD for it, Let T'HAVTOR haue his praise. and brought thee to this frame: lest thou impaire my name. why you so loth should be, my fortune for to trye? the wicked thou wilt moue, is such, as none can loue. will loue and like mee well, in pride although they swell. and subiect euery way: who'le dayly at thee bay. A feare them not at all, shall soone cause them to fall. I can thee not withoold: And blesse thee a hundred fold. GOD blesse you with his grace: In Heauen a dwelling place. Philo. prophane matter: If they be of diuyne matter, than are they most intollerable, or rather Sacrilegious, for that the blessed word of GOD, is to be handled, reuerently, grauely, and sagely, with veneration to the glorious Maiestie of God, which shineth therin, and not scoffingly, flowtingly,  & iybingly, as it is vpon stages in Playes & Enterluds, without any reuerence, worship, or veneration to & same: the word of our Saluation, the price of Christ his bloud, & the merits of his passion, were not giuen, to filthie playes and enterluds on stages & scaffolds, or to be mixt and interlaced with bewdry wanton shewes & vncomely gestures as is vsed (euery Man knoweth) in these playes and enterludes. In the first of Ihon we are taught, that the word is GOD, and God is the word. Wherfore, who so euer abuseth this word of our God on stages in playes and enterluds, abuseth the Maiesty of GOD in the same, maketh a mocking stock of him, & purchaseth to himselfe, eternal danation. And no marueil, for the sacred word of GOD, and 2 God himselfe, is neuer to be thought of, or once named, but with great feare, reuerence and obedience to the same. All the holy companie of Heauen, Angels, Archangels, Cherubins, Seraphins, and all other powers whatsoeuer, yea the Deuills themselues (as Iames saith) doo tremble & quake, at the naming of God, and at the presence of his wrath, and doo these Mockers and Flowters of his Maiesty, these dissembling Hipocrites, and flattering Gnatoes, think to escape vnpunished? beware therfore you masking Players, you painted sepulchres, you doble dealing ambodexters, 3 be warned betymes, and lik good computistes cast your accompts before what wil be the reward therof in the end, least God destroy you in his wrath: abuse God no more corrupt his people no longer with your dregges, and intermingle not his blessed word with such prophane vanities For, at no hand, it is not lawfull, to mixt scurrilitie with diuinitie, nor diuinitie 4 with scurrilitie. Theopompus, mingled Moyses law with his writinges, and therfore the LORD stroke him madd. Theodictes began the same practise, but the Lorde stroke him blind for it. With many others who attemptting the like deuyses, were al overthrowne, and died miserably: besids, what is their iudgemet in the other World the Lord onely knoweth. Vpon the other side, if their playes be of prophane matters, tha tend they to ye dishonor of God and norishing of vice, both which are danable. 5 So that whither they be the one or the other, they are quite contrarie to the Word of grace, and sucked out of the Deuills teates, to nourish vs in ydolatrie hethenrie, and sinne. And therfore, they cariyng the note, or brand of GOD his curse vppon their backs, which way soeuer they goe, are to be hissed out of all Christian Kingdomes, if they wil haue Christ to dwell amongst them. haue resisted Playes and Enterluds? the maintainers of them, to Hell, but also all holie cousels, and sinodes, both generall, nationall and 6 prouinciall, together, with all Writers both diuyne and prophane, euer since ye beginning haue disalowed them, and writ (almost) whole volumes against them. playes, were consecrat to that false ydoll Bacchus, for that he is said to haue found out, and inuented strog drinke. Augustinus de ciuit. Dei, saith, that plaies 7 were ordeined by the Deuill, and consecrat to heathen Gods, to draw vs from Christianitie to ydolatrie, and gentilisme. And in an other place: Pecunias Histrionibus dare, vitium est innane, non virtus. To giue money to Players, is a greeuous sin. Chrisostome, calleth those playes, festa Sathani, feasts of the Deuill. Lactantius, an ancient learned Father, saith, Histrionum, impudissimi gestus, nihil aliud nisi Libidinem mouent: The shamelesse gestures of Plaiers, serue to nothing so much, as to moue 8 of Carthage, & Synode of Laodicea, it was decreed, that no Christen Man, or Woman, should resorte to playes and enterludes, where is nothing but blasphemie, scurrilitie and whordome maintained. Scipio, to erect Theaters, & places for plaies, dehorted them from it, with most prudent reasons and 9 vp, sine regni rubore, without shame to the Cuntrey. to quench the thirst of Venus, doo quench it with a potle of fire. Augustus, banished Ouid, for making Bookes of loue, Enterluds and such other amorous trumperie. Constantius, ordeined that no Player shold be admitted to the table of the Lord. Than seeing, that Playes were first innented by the Deuil, practised by the heathen gentiles, and 10 dedicat to their false ydols, Goddes and Goddesses: as the howse, stage and apparell, to Venus: the musicke, to Appollo: the penning, to Minerua, and the Muses: the action and pronuntiation to Mercurie and ye rest, it is more than manifest, that they are no fit exercyses for a Christen Man to follow. But if there were no euill in them, saue this, namely, that the arguments of tragedies, is anger, wrath, 11 immunitie, crueltie, iniurie, incest, murther & such like: the Persons or Actors, are Goddes, Goddesses, Furies, Fyends, Hagges, Kings, Queenes, or Potentates. Of commedies, 12 the matter and ground is loue, bawdrie, cosenage, flattery, whordome, adulterie: the Persons, sons or agets, whores, queanes, bawdes, scullions, Knaues, Curtezans, lecherous old men, amorous yong men, with such like of infinit varietie: If I say there were nothing els, but this, it were sufficiet to withdraw a good christian from the vsing of them. For so often, as they goe to those howses where Players frequet, thei go to Venus pallace & sathas synagogue to worship deuils, & betray Christ Iesus. 13 good as sermons, and that many a good Example may be learned out of them? playes & bawdy enterluds comparable to the word of God, ye foode of life, and life it selfe; It is all one, as if they had said, bawdrie, hethenrie, pagarie, scurrilitie, and diuelrie it self, is equall with the word of God. Or that the Deuill, is equivolent with the Lord. The Lord our God hath ordeined his blessed word, and made it the ordenarie mean of our Saluation, the Deuill hath inferred the other, as, the ordenarie meane of our destruction, and will they yet compare the one with 15 ye other; If he be accursed, ye calleth light darknes, &darknes light, truth, falsehood, & falshood truth, sweet, sowre, and sowre sweete, than a fortiori is he accused that saith that playes & enterluds be equiualent with Sermons, Besides this, there is no mischief which these plaies, maintain not. For, do they not norish ydlenes; and otia dant vitia, ydlenes is the Mother of vice. Doo they not draw the people fro bering the word of God, from godly Lectures, and sermons; for you shall haue them flocke thither thick & threefould, whe ye church of God shalbe bare & emptie. And those ye will neuer come at sermons wil flow thither apace. The reason is, for that the nuber of Christ his elect 16 is but few, and the number of the reprobat is many, the way ye leadeth to life is narow, and few tread ye path, ye way that leadeth to death, is brod, & many find it. This sheweth, they are not of God, who refuse to here his word (for he that is of God, hereth God his word saith our Sauiour Christ) but of the deuill, whose exercyses they go to visite. Do they not maintaine bawdrie, insinuat folery, & renue ye remebrance 17 of hethen ydolatrie? Do they not induce whordome & vnclennes; nay, are they not rather plaine deuourers of maydenly virginitie and chastitie; For proofe wherof, but marke the flocking and running to Theaters & curtens, daylie and hourely, night and daye, tyme and tyde to see Playes and Enterludes, where 18 such wanton gestures, such bawdie speaches: such laughing and fleering: such kissing and bussing: such clipping and culling: Suche winckinge and glancinge of wanton eyes, and the like is vsed, as is wonderfull to be hold. Than these goodly pageants being done, euery mate sorts to his mate, euery one bringes another homeward of their way verye freendly, and in their secret conclaues (couertly) they play ye Sodomits, or worse. And these be the fruits of Playes and Enterluds, for the most part. And wheras, you say, there are good Examples to be learned in them: 19 Trulie, so there are: if you will learne falshood, if you will learn cosenage: if you will learn to deceiue: if you will learn to play the Hipocrit: to cogge, lye and falsifie: if you will learn to iest, laugh and fleer, to grin, to nodd, and mow: if you will learn to playe the vice, to swear, teare, and blaspleme, both Heauen 20 and Earth: If you will learn to become a bwde, vncleane, and to deuerginat Mayds, to deflour honest Wyues: if you will learne to murther, slaie, kill, picke, steal, robbe and roue: If you will learn to rebel against Princes, to comit tresons, to comsume treasurs, to practise ydlenes, to sing and talke of bawdie loue and venery: if you will lerne to deride, scoffe, mock & flowt, to flatter & smooth: If you will learn to play the whore-maister, the glutton, Drunkard, or incestuous person: if you will learn to become proude, hawtie & arrogant: and finally, if you will learne to comtemne GOD and al his lawes, to care neither for heauen nor hel, and to commit al kinde of sinne and mischeef you need to goe to no other schoole, for all these good Examples, 21 may you see painted before your eyes in enterludes and playes: Wherfore, that man who giueth money for the maintenance of them, must needs incurre the damage of premunire, that is, eternall damnation except they repet. For the Apostle biddeth vs beware, least wee 22 communicat with other mens sinnes, & this their dooing, is not only to communicat with other mens sinnes, & maintain euil, to the distruction of the selues & many others, but also a maintaining of a great sorte of idle lubbers and buzzing dronets to suck vp and deuoure 23 the good honie, wherupon the poor bees should liue. Therfore I beseech all players & Founders of plaies and enterludes, in the bowels of Iesus Christe, as they tender the saluation of their soules, and others, to leaue of that cursed kind of life, and giue them selues to such honest exercises, 24 and godly misteries, as God hath comaunded them in his woord to get their liuings wall: for who wil call him a wiseman that plaieth the part of a foole and a vice? who can call him a Christian, who playeth ye part of a deuil, the sworne enemie of Christe: who 25 can call him a iust man, that playeth the part of a dissembling hipocrite? And to be breef, who can call him a straight deling man, who playeth a Cosoners trick; And so of all ye rest. Away therfore with this so infamous an art, 26 for goe they neuer so braue, yet are they couted and taken but for beggers. And is it not true? liue they not vpon begging of euery one that comes; Are they not taken by the lawes of the Realm, for roagues and vacabounds; I 27 speak of such as trauaile the Cuntries, with playes &enterludes, making an occupation of it, and ought so to be punished, if they had their deserts. But hoping that they will be warned now at the last, I wil say no more of them, beseeching them to consider what a fearful thing it is to fall into the hands of God, & to prouoke his wrath and heauie displeasure against them selues and others, which the Lord of his mercie turn from vs. of Mis-rule; for mee thinke, the very name it self caryeth a taste of some notorious euil. Philo. it, that it is very il for young heds, for a certaine kinde of nice, smoothe sweetnes in alluring the auditorie to nicenes, effeminacie, pusillanimitie, & lothsones of life, so as it may not 28 improperly be compared to a sweet electuarie of honie, or rather to honie it self, for as honie and such like sweet things receiued into ye stomack, dooth delight at the first, but afterward they make the stomack so quasie, nice and weake, that it is not able to admit meat of hard digesture. So sweet Musick, at the first delighteth the eares, but afterward corrupteth and depraueth the minde, making it weake, and quasie, and inclined to all licenciousnes of lyfe whatsoeuer. 29 (but obtused) by beeing whetted vpon softe stones, so good wits by hearing of soft musick are rather dulled then sharpned, and made apt to all wantonnes and sinne. And therfore Writers affirme Sappho to haue been expert in musick, and therfore whorish. 30 Tyrus Maximius saith, the bringing in of musick, was a cup of poyson to all the world. Clytomachus, if hee euer heard any talking of looue, or playing vpon musicall Instruments, would run his way and bidde them farwel. Plutarchus, complaineth of Musick, and saith, that it dooth rather femenine the minde as pricks vnto vice, then conduce to godlines as spurres vnto Uertue. that measure Musick by sound and eare. Thus you heare the iudgement of the wise, concerning Musick, now iudge therof as you list your self. dooth delight bothe man and beast, reuiueth the spirits, comforseth the hart, and maketh it apter to the seruice of GOD. and beast, reuiueth the spirits, comforteth ye hart, and maketh it redyer to serue GOD, and therfore did Dauid bothe vse musick him self, & also commend the vse of it to his posteritie (and beeing vsed to that end, for mans priuat recreation musick is very laudable.) 32 But beeing vsed in publique assemblies and priuate conuenticles as directories to filthie dauncing, thorow the sweet harmonie & smoothe melodie therof, it estraungeth ye mind stireth vp filthie lust, womannisheth ye minde rauisheth the hart, enflameth concupisence, and bringeth in vncleannes. But if musick openly were vsed (as I haue said) to ye prasie and glory of God as our Fathers vsed it, and 33 as was intended by it at the first, or priuatly in a mans secret Chamber or house for his owne solace or comfort to driue away the fantasies of idle thoughts, solicitude, care, sorrowe and such other perturbations and molestations of the minde, the only ends wherto, true Musick tends, it were very commendable and tollerable. If Musick were thus vsed it would comfort man wunderfully, and mooue his hart to serue God the better, but beeing vsed as it is, it corrupteth good minds, maketh them womannish and inclined to all kinde of whordome and mischeef. same art? (speking of suche 34 drunken sockets, and bawdye parasits as rage the Cuntreyes, ryming and singing of vncleane, corrupt, and filthie songs in Tauernes, Ale-houses, Innes, and other publique assemblies) may dauce ye wild Moris thorow a needles eye. For how should thei bere chaste minds, seeing that their exercyse is the pathway to all vncleanes. Their is no ship, so 35 balanced with massie matter, as their heads are fraught with all kind of bawdie songs, filthie ballads, and scuruie rymes, seruing for euery purpose, and for euery Cumpanie. Who be more bawdie than they? who vncleaner than they, who more licentious, and loose minded? who more incontinent tha they? and briefely, who more inclyned to all kind of insolencie and lewdnes than they; wherfore, 36 if you wold haue your sonne, softe, womannish, vncleane, smoth mouthed, affected to bawdrie, scurrilitie, filthie rimes, and vnsemely talking: brifly if you wold haue him, as it weare transnatured into a woma, so worse, and inclyned to all kind of whordome and abhomination, set him to dauncing school, and to learn musicke, and than shall you not faile of your purpose. And if you would haue your 37 daughter whoorish, bawdie, and vncleane, and a filthie speaker, and such like, bring her vp in musick and dauncing, and my life for youres, you haue wun the goale. (in respecte of acceptation) to be a Pyper, or bawdye minstrell, than a deuyne, for the one is looued for his ribauldrie, the other hated for his grauitie, wisdome, and sobrietie. Euery towne, Citie and Countrey is full of these minstrelles to pype vp a dance to the Deuill, but of dyuines, so few there be as they maye hardly be seene. But some of them will reply and say, what Sir; we haue lycenses from iustices of peace to pype, & vse our minstralsie to our best commoditie? Cursed be those licences, which lycense any man to get his lyuing, with the destruction of many thousands. But haue you a lycence from the Arch-iustice of peace Christe Iesus? If you haue so, you may be glad, if you haue not (for the 39 Worde of GOD is against your vngodly exercyses, and condemneth them to Hell) than may you as rogues, extrauagantes, and straglers from the Heauenlye Country be arrested of the high iustice of peace Christ Iesus, and be punished with eternall death, notwithstanding your presented liceces of earthly men. Who shall stand betwixt you, and the Iustice of GOD at the daye of, Iudgement? Who shall excuse you, for drawing so many thousandes to Hell; shall the Iustices of peace; shall their licenses; Oh no: For neither ought they to graunt anye licencens to anie to doo hurt withall, neither (if they would) ought any to take them. 40 Giue ouer therfore your Occupations, you Pypers, you Fidlers, you minstrelles, and you musitions, you Drummers, you Tabretters, you Fluters, and all other of that wicked broode, for the blood of all those, whome you drawe to destruction thorow your prouocations, and intysing allurementes shalbe 41 powred vppon your heads, at the day of Iudgement, but hereof enough, and perchaunce more than will like their humour. Tables, Bowles, Tennisse, and suche other pleasaunt exercises, wherein Man taketh pleasure and delight? being assembled at their Theaters, to see their bawdie enterluds, and other trumperies practised. For, he caused ye earth mightely to shak and quauer, as though all would haue fallen down, wherat the People sore amazed, some  42 leapt down (fro the top of þe turrets, pinacles, and towres, wher they stood) to the ground, wherof some had their legs broke, some their arms, some their backs, some hurt one where, some another, & many sore crusht and brused: but not any, but they wet away store affraid, & wounded in coscience. And yet ca neither ye one, nor ye other, fray them fro these diuelish exercyses, vntill the Lorde consume them all in his wrath: which God forbid. The Lord of his mercie, ope the eyes of the maiestrats, to pluck down these places of abuse, that god may be honored, and their conscieces disburthened. 43 Besids these execises, thei flock thick & three fold to ye cockfeights an exercyse nothing inferiour to ye rest, wher nothing is vsed, but swering, forswering, deceit fraude, collusion, cosenage, scoulding, railing, conuitious talking, feighting, brawling, quarreling, drinking, whooring, & which is worst of all, robbing of one an other of their goods, & ye not by direct, but indirect means & attepts: & yet to blauch & set out these mischiefs wt all (as though they were vertues) thei haue their appointed daies 44 & set howrs, when these deuelries must be exercised. They haue houses erected to ye purpose, flags  & ensignes hanged out. to giue notice of it to others, and proclamation goes out to proclaim ye same, to th' end ye many may come to the dedication of this solemne feast of mischief: the Lord supplant them. And as for hawking & hunting vpo the sabaoth day, it is 45 an exercyse vpon ye day, no lesse vnlawful tha the other. For, no ma ought to spend any day of his life, much lesse euery day in his life, as many do, in such vaine & ydle pastimes: wher fore, let Gentlemen take heed, for be sure accounts must be giuen at the day of iudgemet for euery minut of time, both how they haue spent it & in what exercyses. And let them be sure no more libertie is giuen the, to mispend 46 an howre, for one iote of the Lord his goods, than is giuen to the poorest, and meanest person ye liueth vpo the face of the earth. I neuer read of any in ye volume of ye sacred scripture that was a good man, and a Hunter. Esau, was a great hunter, but a reprobat: Ismaell reprobat, and a 47 vessell of wrath. Thus I speake not to condemne hawking and hunting altogether, being vsed for recreation, now and than, but against the continuall vse therof daylie, hourly, weekly, yeerly, yea all the time of their life, without intermissio. And such a felicitie haue some in it, as they make it all their ioye, bestowing more vpo hawkes and hounds, and a sort of idle lubbers to followe them in one yeer, than they will impart to the poore members 48 of Christ Iesus in vij yeers, peraduenture in all the dayes of their life. So long as ma in Paradice persisted in innocency, all beasts what so euer, weare obediet to him, and came and prostrated themselues before him. But euer since his fall, they haue fled from him, & 49 disobeyd him, because of his sin: that seeing he disobeyed the Lord, they again disobeied him. For, so long as man obeied God, so long they obeied him: but so soone as ma disobeyed God, they disobeyed him, & becam enemies to him, as it were seeking to reuege ye iniurie which ma had don vnto GOD, in disobeying his lawes. Wherfore, the cause why all beasts do fly from vs, and are become Enemies to vs, is our disobedience to the LORD, which we are rather to sorow for, than to hunt after their deaths by the sheading of their blood. If necessitie or want of other meats inforceth vs to seek after their liues, it is lawfull to vse them in the feare of God, wt thanks to his name: but for our pastimes and vain pleasures sake, w ae are not in any wise to spoyle or hurt them. Is he a christian man or rather a pseudo-christian, that delighteth 50 in blood? Is he a Christian that spendeth all his life in wanton pleasures and pleasaunt delights; Is hee a Christian that buieth vp the corne of ye poor, turning it into bread (as many doo) to feed dogs for his pleasure? Is hee a christian that liueth to the hurt of his Neighbour in treading and breaking down his hedges, in casting open his gates in trampling of his corne & other wise, in preivdicing him as hunters doo? wherfore God giue them grace to soe 51 periculum, delay bringeth danger. Let vs not deferre to leaue the euil and to doo good, least the wrath of the Lord be kindled against vs, and consume vs 52 from the vpper face of the Earth? vpon ye Sabaoth day? Think you it is not lawful to vse the same vpon any day? carrie to God and ferrie to the deuil, can we serue two Maisters and neither offend the one nor the other? can wee serue God and Mammon? can wee please God and the world bothe at one time? The Lord wil not be serued by p aecemeale, for either he wil haue the wholeman, or els none. For saith he, Thou shalt looue the Lord thy God with all thy soule, withall thy minde, withall thy power, withall thy strength, and so foorth, ozels with none at all. Then seeing that we are to giue ouer our selues so wholely and totally to the seruice of God, al ye daies of our life, but especially vppon the Sabaoth day, being consecrate to that end, we may not 53 intermedle with these prophane exercises vppon that day. For it is more then manifest & these faires, markets, courtes and leetes vppon the Sabaoth day, are not only a hinderace vnto vs in the true seruice of God, and an abuse of ye Sabaoth, but also lead vs the path way to hel. For what cosonage is not there 54 practised? what falshod, deceit & fraude is not there exercised? what dissimulation in bargaining? what setting foorth of fucate & deceiuable wares, is not there frequeted? what lying 55 sooering, forswering, darkennes, whordom, theft, & soetimes murther, either there or by ye way thither, is not euery where vsed? In courses & leets what enuie malice & hatred is noorished? what expostulation, railing, scoulding, periuring & reperiuring is maintained? what opression of ye poore, what fauouring the rich, what iniustice & indirect dealing? what bribing, deceiuing, what poling & pilling is there practised? it would make a christia hart to bleed in beholding it. And yet notwithstanding we must haue these goodly pageats played vpon ye sabaoth day (in a wanion) because there are no mo daies in ye week. And heerby ye sabaoth is contaminat, Gods woord contemned, his camandemets disanulled, his sacramets coculcate, his ordinaces neglected, & in suma, his blood trod vnder feet and all mischeef maintained. The Lord cut of these with all other sin, both from their soules and thy Sabaoth, that thy name may be glorified, & c thy Church truely edified. delectations, a violation or prophanation of the Sabaoth day? sabaoth, or any other 56 day els, is wicked & to be forbiden. Now who is so grosly blinde, ye seeth not, ye these aforesaid exercises not only wt draw vs from godlines & vertue, but also haile & allure vs to wickednes and sin: for as cocerning football playing: 57 I protest vnto you, it may rather be called a freendly kinde of fight, then a play or recreation. Abloody and murthering practise, then a felowly sporte or pastime. For dooth not euery one lye in waight for his Aduersarie, seeking to ouerthrowe him & to picke him on his nose, though it be vppon hard stones, in ditch or dale, in valley or hil, or what place soeuer it be, hee careth not so he haue him down. And he that can serue ye most of this fashion, he is counted the only felow, and who but he? so that by this meanes, somtimes their necks are broken, soetimes their 58 backs, sometime their legs, sometime their armes, sometime one part thurst out of ioynt, sometime an other, sometime the noses gush out with blood, sometime their eyes start out: and sometimes hurt in one place, sometimes in another. But whosoeuer scapeth away the best goeth not scotfree, but is either sore wounded, craised and bruseed, so as he dyeth of it, or els scapeth very hardly: and no meruaile, for they haue the fleights to meet one betwixt two, to dashe him against the hart with their elbowes, to hit him vnder the short ribbes with their griped fists, and with their knees to catch him vpon the hop, and to pick him on his neck, with a hundered such murdering deuices: 59 and hereof, groweth enuie, malice, racour, cholor, hatred, displeasure, enimitie and what not els? and sometimes fighting, brawling, contention, quarrel picking murther, homicide and great effusion of blood, as experience dayly teacheth. Is this murthering play now an exercise for the Sabaoth doy? is this a christian dealing for one brother to mayme and hurt another, and that vpon prepensed malice, or set purpose? is this to do to another, as we would wish another to doo to vs , God make vs more careful ouer the bodyes of our Breatheren. And as for the reading of wicked Bookes, they are vtterly vnlawfull, not onely to bee read, but once to be named, & that not (onely) vpon the Sabaoth day, but also vppon any other day: as which tende to the dishonour of 60 God, deprauation of good manners and corruption of christian soules. For as corrupt meates doo annoy the stomack, and infect the body, so the reading of wicked and vngodly Bookes (which are to the minde, as meat is to the body) infect the soule & corrupt ye minde ,  61 hailing it to destruction: if the great mercy of God be not present. And yet notwithstanding, whosoeuer will set pen to paper now a dayes, how vnhonest soeuer, or vnseemly of christian eares his argument be, is permitted to goe forward, and his woork plausibly admitted and freendly licensed, and gladly imprinted without any prohibition or contradiction at all: wherby it is growen to this issue, that bookes & pamplets of scurrilitie and baudrie, are better esteemed and more vendible then the godlyest and sagest bookes that be: for if it be a godly treatise, reproouing vice, and teaching vertue, away with it, for no man (almost) though they make a floorish of vertue, and godlynes, will buy it, nor (which is lesse) so much as once touch it. This maketh the Bible, the blessed Book of God, to be so little esteemed. That woorthie Booke of Martyrs made by that famous Father & excellent Instrument in God his Church, Maister Iohn Fox, so little to be accepted and all other good books little or no thing to be reuerenced: whilst other toyes, fantasies and bableries wherof the world is ful, are suffered to be printed. These proph &e schedules, sacraligious libels, and hethnical pamphlets of toyes & bableries (the Authors wherof may vendicate to them selues no smal commendations, at the hands of the deuil for inuenting the same) corrupt mens mindes, peruert good wits, allure to baudrie, induce to whordome, suppresse vertue & erect vice: which thing how should it be otherwise; for are they not inuented & excogitat by Belzebub writte by Lucifer, licesed by Pluto, printed by Cerberus & set a broche to sale by the internal furies themselues to ye poysning of the whole world: But let the Inuetors, the licesors, the printers  & the sellers of these vaine toyes and more then Hethnicall impietres take heed for the blood of all those which perish or take hurt thorow these wicked bookes, shalbe powred vpon their heads at the day of iudgement, and be required at their hands. For, it is to small purpose to shew ye abuses, except you shewe withall how they might be reformed. sanctions, and Goldy statutes, which haue beene heretofore, and daily are set foorth and established, as GOD be thanked, they are manie. The want of the due execution wherof, is ye cause of all these mischiefs, which both rage and raigne amongst vs. be? contempt of the inferiour Magistrates. Or els, perhaps (which thing happeneth now and than) for money they are bought out, disfranchised and dispensed withall, for as the saying is , quid non pecunia potest; what is it, but money will bring to passe? And yet notwithstanding shall it be don inuisibly in a clowde (vnder benedicite I speake it) the Prince being borne in hand, that the same are dalie executed. This fault is the corruption of those that are put in trust to see the executed, as I haue tould you, and (notwithstanding) do not. punishment. GOD, the publique weale of the Cuntrey, and correctio of vices, it is great pytie that money should buy them out. For what is that els, but to sell vertue, for lucre: Godlynes, for drosse, yea mens souls for corruptible money? Therfore those that sell them, are not onely Traitors to GOD, to their Prince and Countrey: but are also the Deuils Marchants, and ferrie the bodies, and soules of Christians, as it were in Charons boate to the Stigian flood of Hell, burning with fire and brimstone for euer. And those that buy them are Traitors to GOD, their Prince and Countrey also. For if the lawes were at the first good (as GOD be praised al the lawes in Ailgna be) why shuld they be suppressed for money, and if they were euill, why were they diuulged, but had rather beene buried in the wombe of their Mother before thy had euer seene ye light. And why were lawes instituted, but to be executed? Els it were as good to haue no lawes at all (the People lyuing orderly) as to haue good lawes and the not executed. The Prince ordeining a law, may lawfully repeale & adnull the same againe, vpo speciall causes & considerations, but no inferiour maiestrat or subiecte what so euer, may stop the course of any lawe made by the Prince with out daunger of damnation to his owne soule, as the Word of GOD beareth witnesse. And therfore, wo be to those men, that will not execut the sentence of the lawe (being so Godly, and so Christian as thei be in Ailgna) vppon Malefactors and Offenders. of the death of Christe Iesus. face of God, and that there is such abhomination amongest them, I am perswaded the daye of Iudgement is not farre of. For when iniquity shall haue filled vp his measure, than shall the end of all appeare, as Christ witnesseth in his Euangelie. what wonderfull portents, strang miracles, fearful signes, and dreadfull Iudgements hath he sente of late daies, as Preachers & fortellers of his wrath due vnto vs, for our impenitece & wickednes of life. Hath he not caused the earth to treble and quake? the same Earth to remooue from place to place; the seas and waters to roare, swell & brust out, and ouerflow their bankes to the destruction of many thousands? hath he not caused the Elements and Skyes, to send foorth flashing fire? to raine downe wheat, a wonderfull thing as euer was heard, and the like? hath he not caused wonderfull Eclypses in the Sunne and Moon, with most dreadfull coniunctions of Starres and Planets, as the like this thousand yeeres, haue not been heard of? haue not the clowdes distilled downe aboundance of rayne and showres, with all kinde of vnseasonable wether, to the destroying (almost) of al thinges vppon the Earth & haue we not seene Commets, blasing starres, firie Drakes, men, feighting in the ayre, most fearfully to hehold? Hath not dame Nature her selfe denied vnto vs her operation, in sending foorth abortiues, vntimely births, vgglesome monsters and fearfull mishapen Creatures both in man & beast. So, that it seemeth all the Creatures of God are angrie with vs and threaten vs with destruction, and yet we are nothing at all ameded (alas) that shal become of vs? Remeber we not there is a God that shal iudge vs righteously? that there is a Deuill, who shall torment vs after this lyfe vnspeakably, if we repent not? At that day, the wicked shall find that there is a Material Hell, a place of all kinds of tortures, wherein they shal be punished in fire and brimstone amongest the terrible Company of vgglesome Deuils world without end, how light so euer they make account of it in this World. For some such there be, that when thei heare mention of Hell, or of the paines therof in the other World, they make a mocke at it, thinking they be but metaphoricall speaches, onely spoke to terrifie vs withall, not other wyse. But certen it is, as there is a God, that will reward his Children, so there is a Deuill that will remunerat his Seruaunts: And as there is a Heauen, a Materiall place of perfect ioye prepared for the Godly, so there is a Hell, a Materiall place of punishmet for the wicked and reprobat, prepared for the Deuil & his Angels, or els the word of God is in no wyse to be credited, which blasphemie, once to think, God keep all his Children from. time so euer a sinner doth repent him of his sinne, I wil put all his sin out of my remembrance saith ye Lord. So that, if they maye haue three words at the last, they will wish no more, What think you of these felowes? Tartarians, and more to be auoided than ye poison of a serpent: for the one slayeth but the body, but the other, both body & soul for euer. Wherfore, let euery good Christen Man take heed of them, and peruersis, peruerseris: with the good, thou shall learne good, but with the wicked, thou shall be peruerted. deferred to the last gaspe. with an inward lothing, hating and detesting of sinns. But this deferred repentace springeth not of faith, but rather of the feare of death which he seeth imminent before his eyes, of the grief and tediousnes of paine, of the Horror of Hell, and feare of God his ineuitable iudgement, which he knoweth now he must needs abyde: And therfore, this can be no true repentance. For there is two maner of repetaces, ye one a true repentace to life, the other a false repentance to death: As we maye see by Iudas, who is said, to haue repented, and which is more, to haue confessed his faulte, and which is most of all, to haue made restitution, and yet was it a false repentance. And why? because it sprang not out of true faith, but as before. Peter repented, and weept bitterly, and was saued therby, though he neither made cofession, nor satisfaction: and why? Because it sprang of a true and lyuely faith. So these felowes may say they repent, but except it be a true repetance springing of faith, it can serue the no more to life than the pretensed repentance of Iudas did serue him to saluation. Let them beware, for Cain repented, yet is he condemned. Esau, did repent, yet is he condemned. Antiochus, did repent, yet is he condemned: Iudas did repent, yet is he condemned, with infinite moe: And why so? Because their prolonged repentaunce sprange not of faith, & c. Thus they may see, that euerye light affection, is no true repentance: And that it is not ynough to say at the last, I repent, I repent. For, vnles it be a true repentace indeed, it is worth nothing. But indeed, if it weare so, that man had, liberu arbitrium, free wil of himself, to repent truely when he wold, and that God promised in his word to accept of that repentance, it weare another matter. But repentance is, donum Dei, the gifte of God , de sursum veniens a patre luminum, comming from aboue fro the Father of light, & therfore it is not in our powers to repent when we will. It is the Lord ye giueth the gift, when, where & to whom it pleaseth him: & of him are we to craue it incessantly by faithfull prayer, & not otherwise to presume of our owne repentace, when indeed we haue nothing lesse, than a true repentance. (which is a certen inward grief, and sorrow of the heart, coceiued for our sinnes, with a hatred and lothing of the same) erueth to saluation thorow the mercie of GOD in Christ, so fained repentance saueth not from perdition. And therfore, we must repent dayly and howrely, and not to deferre our repentaunce to the last gaspe as many doo, than which, nothing is more perilous. deferring and prolonging of repentance to the last cast (as they say) will hazard his body and soule to eternall damnation for euer? Wheras by daily repentaunce he maye assure him selfe both of the fauour of GOD, and of life euerlasting (by faith) in the mercy of GOD, thorow the most precious blood of his deare Sonne, Iesus Christ, our alone Sauiour and Redemer, to whome be praise for euer. are vaine and 62 transitorie, and nothing is permanent vnder the Sonne, the workes of men are vnperfect and lead to destruction, their exercyses are vain, and wicked altogether. Wherfore, I setting apart all the vanities of this lyfe, will from hencefoorth consecrate my selfe to the seruice of my GOD, and to follow him in his Woord, which onely is permanent and leadeth vnto life. And I most hartelie thanke the Lord God for your good Company this day, and for your graue instructions, promising by the assistance of God his grace, to followe and obey them to my possible power all the daies of my life. auoid all the vanities ,  63 and deceiuable pleasures of this life: for certenly they tread the path to eternal destruction, both of body and soule for euer, to as many as obey them. For, it is vnpossible to wallowe in the delights and pleasures of this World, and to lyue in ioy for euer in ye Kingdom of Heauen, And thus we hauing spent the daye, and also cosummate our iorney, we must now depart, beseaching GOD that we may both meete againe in the Kingdome of Heauen, there to raigne and lyue with him for euer, through Iesus Christe our Lorde, to whome with the Father, and the holy Spirit be all honour & glorie for euer more Amen. FINIS. 
