 and lesse artificial . At which none neede greatly to maruell seeing that reason which by arte appeareth the greater force of an other reason to the weaker force it hath in it selfe, and so reasoneth more forcibly as doeth a testimonye, whose force the saide dependeth vpon other argumentes, it must be both artificiall, and arise in part of another: but because it hath neither his force in it selfe, nor arise perfectly as a definition or diuision, but in part onely from other argumentes: It may for both causes be well iudged to be an Argument, arising imperfectly of the first, and so be called a lesse artificial arising of the first. The generall beyng touched, the difference in the causes aske the nexte place, where the referring of the end vnto the efficient cause, will be odious: but if it be weighted that by this meanes, the truth is preferred  & the doctrine of the ende which is not commonly discerned from the effect and adioynt, is more cleered, the gayne wil easily recompence the alteration of the place. For seeyng it is a cause onely as it bringeth some force to the verye beeyng of the thing, and all the force it bringeth is to moue the efficient or making cause to worke, it followeth that in that respect onely it is a cause. If it be sayd, the end doeth not moue euery efficient as the ende of naturall and artificiall thinges, as of the eye to see, the plumet in a clock to force the next causes of the orderly motion: the aunsweare is, they are deceyued, for as it regardeth these artifycial thinges, it is an effect of the doing of it, and an adioynt in regarde of the force wherewith it is done: and to these things it giueth or bryngeth nothing, but receyueth and taketh all from them: but it is a cause only as it was set before the Author of nature, or the artificer to moue him to make this thing apt to this effect, or to haue these properties: so that my sentence remayneth necessarily true. Neyther doe I see what other respect of a cause it can haue, for that which some speak of the perfection it bringeth to the thing, is altogether vntrue, for all the perfection of the thing commeth from the efficient, and lyeth in the matter and forme as the causes of the thing and the adioynts, as the ornamentes of it: In which respecte this perfection is caused, and doeth not cause. The next to this is that the diuision of conceiuing and be getting cause is lefte out, and iustly. For when as there ought to be no diuision, but that which ariseth of some difference of the partes betweene themselues, and of agreement with the whole, there beyng here no difference in the partes, because the begetting cause is reffered to procreation , as to his next effect, and the conseruing or preseruing cause , as to his next effect to preseruation : In which respects they remayne onely simple as all others efficientes or making causes : it is to bee inferred that they can make no distribution of the efficient cause. The like is to be said, of working by it selfe and by chaunce, which make no difference of working or causing : for although in such the principall instrument had no such end or purpose, yet the chiefe worker G O D in his prouydence hath: besides this putteth no differece in that force which bringeth forth effect, but only betweene the purpose of the chiefe worker of the action, god: who worketh all thinges according to the counsell of his owne will , and the principall instrument  1 who did it to another purpose. Next to these follow the difference in the disagreeing arguments, where this is one and the chiefe, that the diuisions of Contraries are lefte out: First into affirming and denying , which are no sortes of contraries, but of the manner of vttering contraries , which as it falleth not into Logike to handle, so it is nothing to this purpose, because the dyfference ariseth not from any distinction of the contrarietye it selfe, whiche it should doo, if they were diuerse sortes of contraries , but from the difference of expressing one and the same kinde. And this is yet more cleare in the diuers sortes of these: for relatiues are no contraries, because the contrarietie lyeth in the deniall of the relation, not in the relation: neither can it in that respect be a newe sorte of contrarietie, for when all the repugnancie lyeth in these two regards, the one that being set as agreeing in the consideration of reason to one, it must be disagreeing  & opposite in the same consideration one to another, as if it agree with Iacob to be Isaaks father, it must disagree with Isaak to be so, this it hath from the general nature of opposites, the other respect being that one is set against one, that it hath from the generall rule of contrarietie, and further it repugneth not. If saye one it hath this proper that relatiues are here contrary, the aunswere is that bringeth no new kind of contrariety, and if this be a iust cause of a diuision of contraries, you may diuide contraries againe, some of causes, some of effectes, some of subiectes, and some of adioints: seeing it may be said, these are causes which are contrary, as is sayde, these are relatiues which are contrary. The like almost may be sayde of the Priuatiues , which are contraries, whereof one is naturally in the subiect as the habite , and the other driueth out or depriueth it of the habite : for what new sort of contrariety is here? Surely no other but that one is set against one, for the being naturally or not naturally in the subiect belongeth not to the Logicion to consider, but the seueral Maister in his art, as to the Phisition that health is naturally in the body and how, that sicknes driueth that away, and how: otherwise, why may we not make hurtful contraries, whereof one is hurtfull to the subiect; or profitable contraries, whereof one is profitable to the subiect, as peace and warre to a common wealth, Vice and vertue to the minder? Nowe let vs consider of those others which they call contradictories , when one affirmeth, and the other denieth, as a man, not a man: iust, not iust. Concerning these, when all the contrarietie (whiche they saye) is proper to them, Iyeth eyther in the contradiction , it is, it is not: which is proper to iudgement, not to inuention, to sette foorth, or that one thinge is opponed to all other thinges which it is not: which is no contrariety, but the opposition of disperates, seeing one is not opponed to one kinde, but one to many kindes, and that equally, as a man opponed to not a man, is equally opponed to spirites, to fowles, fishes, beastes, vnsensible creatures,  &c. in the same not a man, wherefore it followeth, that eyther they must allowe my dooing, or else in the first bring in confusion whylest they speake of that parte in one parte of the arte, which is proper to the other, and in the second confusion and folly both: whilest they make that a contrary which is none, and without al gaine repeat that which they haue sufficiently handled before. Neither let any say they are contrarie, because there is no middle between ma and not a man, for so there is not betweene man and other things, & yet they are not contrary but disperates only. And thus much for the first arguments. The leauing out of Notation and Coniugation remayneth onely to bee spoken of in Inuention, the reason wherof is manifest, because it is graunted of al that they haue no new force, besides the first, no newe reason or argument arising from the first: For he is iust, he doth iustly, these are coniugates , referre the one vnto another, and what is their besides the cause and the effect? VVhat force or reason more? For that iust and iustlie are formed one of an other, appertaineth to Gramer, that they allude fitly to the figure of Rethorike, called Poliptoton , which chaungeth finely the end or case of words. The like is to be saide of Notation, which is the interpretation of a name, which appertaineth not to Logike but to Dictionaries: as in this: An argument is so called, beacause it argueth, a faithfull man, because he hath faith: what force of reason is there in the first example? of the cause and the effect. VVhat in the other? Of the effect and the cause. But is there nothing els? yes. A fitte and elegant vttering of diuers things by words, not much, but somewhat differing in sounde, as argument, arguing, fayth, faithfull : but this is neyther reason, nor new force of reason; but only an elegacie of the Trope called Paranomasia , or chaunge of the name. VVherefore let vs keepe them no longer, nowe the owner claymeth them, but according to the law turne them home againe. Thus muche for inuention: As for the chaunge in a testimonie, I am content to leaue it vnto the iudgement of the reader, when hee shall examine it according to the rules of Logike: as also those small differences which are in the seconde parte of Logike, for in that sometimes the firste sorte of a Sillogisme is founde in all his partes, there is nowe no longer any reason to trase him vppe onely in an Enthimeme . And thus muche for the satisfying of both these sortes. Nowe, if they be not fully contended; my desire is of the former to beare with that, for the commoditie of others, which themselues like not. The other sort also I pray, to satisfie themselues in mending and bettering that which cannot yet sufficiently please them. And so I commit thee to the direction of God his Spirite, whom I pray so to increase thy knowledge by all good and lawfull meanes, as thou mayest discerne thinges that differ, and walke without offence, vntill the day of the Lorde. AMEN. both to be vnderstoode and practised. both to be understoode and practised. Of the Definition and Diuision of Logike, and of an Argument Logike hath 2. partes,  The spring of reasons called Inuention. ------ Iudgement. The spring of reasons is the first part of Logike, whiche giueth rules of the sortes of reasons, which because it doth helpe muche to the finding out of reasons, is commonly called Inuention. A reason is that, whiche is apte to reason withall, whiche is commonly called an Argument: of which sorte are all thinges, when they are referred in consideration of reason one vnto another. For there is such an agreement of the diuers sortes of reasons, as the nature of one hangeth vpon another, so that hee that perfectly knoweth one, may also know the other, as in this example: God is the Sauiour of all men : where God being referred to saluation, is a reason to set forth saluation by the cause, and saluation being referred to God, setteth him foorth by a thing caused, commonly called the effect: In which also we see, he that knoweth God to bee the cause of saluation, knoweth also saluation to be the thing caused of God. shall after appeare: which if they be wanting, they must bee knowen by the rules, which doe set foorth euery sort of Arguments. Of reasons there are two sortes,  First. ------ Those which arise of the first. The first are those which haue beginning in them selues, as in this example: Loue suffereth long. Loue is bountifull. Loue doth not frowardly . VVhere the Apostle sheweth the excellencie of Loue, by a reason of description which ariseth of other reasons, as of that which Loue doth cause, long suffering : Of the contraries to Loue, as enuie, frowards dealing, &c . First argumenets are of 2. sorts,  Simple or vncompared. ------ Compared. Simple, is a reason which hath force in it selfe, without regarde of any manner of comparison: as, Thy will bee done in earth, as it is in heauen : VVhere wee see, the dooing of the will of God is set foorth first by a reason whiche is vncompared, namely by those whiche shoulde doe it, Men in earth : then by a comparison of the like, as the angels in heauen do it. Vncompared argumentes,  Agreeable. ------ Disagreeable. Agreeable is that whiche doeth agree with that to whiche in reason it is referred, as, Loue suffereth long. Loue enuieth not , where suffering long, is a reason agreeyng with Loue, as a thing caused with the cause: and Enuie is a reason disagreeing with Loue, as one contrary with another. Agreeable are of 2. sortes,  More agreeable. ------ Lesse agreeable. More agreeable are those in whose agreement more is giuen and receiued to and from one an other, as, VVhen, GOD sawe all that hee hadde doone, beholde it was verie good , where all his workes, beeing the thinges caused of God, in theyr agreemente wyth God as wyth their cause, haue more from God, then verie good , whiche is the adioynt, hath from all whiche hee hath made , which is the subiect of goodnesse, or that whereunto it is adioined. So Christe, iustification, and good woorkes doe agree, but Christe beeing the cause, giueth more to iustification, then, workes beeing the signes adioyned. More agreeable arguments are of 2. sortes,  The cause. ------ The thing caused comonly, but more vnproperly, called the effect. Of a cause. the thing caused. A cause is of two sortes,  The one which is without the thing caused as the making of efficient cause. ------ The other within the thing caused. The making cause is a cause which by setting the matter, and the forme togither, maketh the thing caused. As, The Lorde God also made manne of the dust of the ground, and breathed in his face the breath of life, and the man was a liuing soule . Heere we see that God whiche is of himselfe without man, is the making cause of man, and did make him, by breathing the breath of life which was the forme, into that of te duste, whiche was the matter. Nowe where more then one doe the proper worke of the making cause, all working together, are the making cause. The partes whereof are the chiefe workers called the principall, and the helpes called the instruments, and the ende which mouethe the making cause to set the matter and forme together, is no other cause then this, seeing it bringeth no other force for the being of the thing, then to moue the making cause to worke, As, Of his owne will begat he vs with the worde of truth, that wee shoulde bee the first fruites of his creatures , where the ende, that we should be the first fruites of hys creatures, moued Gods owne will, Gods, owne will being the principall worker, too beget vs with the worde of truth being the instrumentall. And thus much for the efficient or making cause. The causes that are within the thing, are those causes whiche are alwayes inseparablie remaining together for the being of the thing. They are two,  The matter. ------ The forme. The matter is a cause of the which the thing caused is made: So the Lorde made woman of the rib of man. Noah the Arke of pine trees. The forme is a cause, by the which a thing is that which it is: and so differeth from all other thinges, as in the example of man before mentioned. But the naturall forme of thinges, though they may bee conceiued by reason, yet they cannot well bee vttered by speeche. The artificiall forme of thynges is muche more easie to bee conceiued in reason, and vttered in words: and therefore of such speeches there be many, as in all writers, so in the Scriptures especially. So God set downe the artificiall forme of the Arke and of the Arke of couenaunt, the Table, the Candlesticke, the Tabernacle, the mercie Seate, the Altare of burnt offeringes, the Court of the Tabernacle, and all the furniture and appurtenances thereunto: by which artificiall forme they bee that they be, and differ from all other thinges. Thus much of the cause: Now followeth the thing caused. The thing caused, is that which is by the whole force of all the causes. As, S. GOD loued the worlde as hee gaue his only be gotten sonne, that who soeuer be leeueth in him shoulde not perishe, but haue eternal life . VVhere our happinesse is the thing caused: the loue of GOD, and faith the efficient cause. Christ the materiall cause, and eternall life the formall cause. So also euery worke or mouing of any thing, is the effecte or thinge caused by the worker or mouer. Hitherto of more agreeable reasons. Of both which, relatiues are a most excellent example, they are those which are so of and by one another, that they are the mutuall causes and effectes one of another. As, The Father and the Sonne, to gius and receiue, to teach and to learne. Now of these lesse agreeable arguments. Lesse agreeable reasons are such in whose agreement lesse is giuen and receiued to and from one another: as appeareth in the example of more agreeable reasons. The subiect is of two sortes,  VVhich receiueth the adioynt. ------ That wherein the adioint is occupied. As in this example. VVheresoeuer the carkasse is, thither wil the Eagles resort . VVhere we see in the first part, the worde where , noting out a place (which is the subiect of the thing that is in it) is the subiect which receiueth: the carkas is the subiect wherin the Eagles which are the adiointes, occupie themselues by resorting. So Husbandrie is the subiect, of an Husbandman: Ruling the Churche is the subiect of the Bishop, because in these thinges they are occupied. The subiect which receiueth also is double.  That which receiueth into it selfe. ------ That which receiueth to itselfe. So Iob was the subiect in which was soundnesse, vprightnes, and the feare of God and the minde is the subiect in which are all euill qualities, So Iob and other menne were and are the subiectes, which receiue to themselues, riches, houses, landes, &c. An adioint is that which is adioyned vnto any thing, as in all the former examples, the thinges referred vnto their subiects, were the adiointes: so whatsoeuer is referred vnto any thing not being cause or effect of the same, it is the adioint. Againe, adiointes are either Common, or Proper.  Either of them separable or inseparable, which for the moste parte arise of the causes or being of the things, and are therefore called essentiall or of the being. --- Common are those whiche are ioyned vnto diuers subiectes, as the power of eating, drinking, sleeping &c. are common adiointes to men and beastes, and can not be separated. So riches, pouertie, sicknesse, and health, are common adiointes to good and euill men, and may be separated from them. A proper adiointe is that whiche is alwayes ioined to one and the same subiect. So rightuousnes, faith, ioy in the holy Ghost, are the proper adiointes to the children of God: so to be seen and felt, are the proper adiointes of a bodie, and these are inseparable. And it was proper to Adam and Ehauah, to enioy Paradise, and yet separable. Also Paule to be rapt vp into the thirde heauen, and yet separable. Hitherto of an agreeable argument, wherby onely those things that differ in them selues may yet be saide to be one. So Christe sayeth: I and my father are one : meaninge in nature or cause. So Iohn saieth: there are three which beare witnesse in heauen, the Father, the VVorde, and the Spirite, and these three are one , meaning in their witnesse, which is their effecte. So paule faith: Hee that planteth and hee that watereth, are one : that is in office and function, which is the adiuncte. Of disagreeable arguments. Disagreeable reasons are those reasons which disagree beeing referred one vnto another. Disagreable reasons are of two sortes  Diuers, or somewhat differing. ------ Suche as can not stande togither, commonly called Opposites. Diuers reasons are those which disagree onely in respect or after a certaine maner, the noteswhereof are comonly these: Not this, but that: albeit, neuerthelesse, notwithstanding, and suche like. As, I know thy workes, thy labour, thy patience, neuerlesse I haue somewhat against thee, because thou hast lefte thy first loue . VVhere wee see, that although these were disagreeing in respect of this Churche, yet they may agree: for Christe may both know their patience and workes, and yet haue nothing against them. And these reasons and all suche aunswering the one to the other, whiche haue notes, are sometimes set down fully by their partes, aunswering one vnto another, somtimes by their notes onely. Reasons which cannot stande together, are reasons which differ not onely in respecte, but also in nature, or the thing it selfe, and therefore can not agree wyth the same thing, at the same time, according to the same respect or consideration. So one can not bee sicke and well at the same time in the same parte, in consideration of the soule or body, but he may be sicke to day, and whole to morrowe, ill in his head, and well in his hand, wel in respect of his body, and ill in respect of the soule. Opposites are either  sundrie, commonly called disperates, ------ or contrarie. Sundrie or disperates are oppsites, whereof one is equally set against manie. Dauid psalme & sheweth, that God hath giuen dominion vnto man, ouer sheepe, oxen beastes of the field, foules of the ayre, fyshes of the sea all which creatures are equally set one against another. Contraries are opposites whereof one is set against one. And therfore they directly right one against another: So Christ and Beliall, light and darkenesse. Christ and Antichriste, heauen and hell, life and death, good and euill, iust and vniust, sicke and whole, to be ones Father and his, begotten Son. And hitherto of vncopared reasons. Of compared argumentes. it hath partes, the first setteth downe the comparison called the propounding part or proposition, the other applieth the comparison to the thing compared called the applying, rendring part or reddition As, Mat. 24. As in the dayes of Noah, so shall the comming of the Sonne of man be. For as in the dayes which were before the floud, they did eate and drinke, they maried and gaue to mariage, euen vnto the days in whiche Noah entred into the Arke, and knewe not till the floude came and tooke them all, so shall the comming of the sonne of man be . In which example in the firste of the verses, there are the signes of the comparison. As, And so , in the two latter verses, are the two partes of the whole comparison, the first setting down the comparison which is taken from the floud of Noah, the other applying the comparison to the thing compared, that is, the comming of Christ. Comparison is eyther in  Quantitie, or ------ Qualitie. Comparison of quantity, is when the quantitie of the thing is compared togither. Quantitie is eyther  Equall, or ------ venequall. Reasons of equall comparison, are those whose quantitie is equall. The notes of the equall reasons are these: As, equall, alike, the same that, so muche, no greater , as in these examples: VVith what measure ye meate, with the same it shalbe measured to you agayne . So Nomb. 9. Yee shall haue the same lawe both for the stranger, and him that is borne in the lande . So Ioshua 14. And yet am I so strong at this time, as I was when Mosches sent me, as strong as I was then, so strong am I newe, eyther for warre or for gouernement . Hebr. 1.4. And is made so much the more excellent than the Aungelles, inasmuch as be hath obtayned a more excellent nature then they. Vnequall are those whose quantitie is not the like. Vnequall reasons are of two sortes  Greater. ------ Lesser. The greater is that whose quantitie is greater then that where vnto it is compared: the notes wherof are these: Not onely, but also: rather this then that : Also euery note of a greater degree of comparison. As, Rom. 5. 3. Neither doo we so onely, but also we reioyce in tribulation Likewise Psal. 88. 10. I had rather be doore keeper in the house of the Lorde, then to dwell in the tabernacle of Princes , And Prouerb. 8. 11. For wisedome is better then Precious stones . Also Psa. 19. And more to be desired then gold, and sweeter also then the hony combe. Also denialles in comparison. As 1. Cor. 1. 16. Christ sent me not to Baptise but to preach , to wit, not so much to baptise, as to preach. The lesser are those whose quantity is lesser then that whervnto it is compared, the signes whereof are these, not this onely, but not that, or no not that, or a dentall of the equal or equalitie . As, 1. Cor. 3. 2. For you were not able to beare it, uo nor are ye now able to beare it . Also Rom. 3. 12. There is none that doth good, no not one . Likewise 2. Kings. 23. 25. VVhere Iosias is denied to be equal to the Kings that were before or after him, and preferred aboue them al . Hezekiah by the same argument is commended. 2. King. 16. 5. So the sorpext it commended to be the subtilest beast of al that were vpon the earth . Gen. 3. 1. Hitherto of the comparison of quantitie. Nowe followeth the comparison of qualitie. VVhich is either of things  Like. ------ Vnlike. Like, which haue the same qualitie, the signes whereof, are, Like as, euen as, and so, also, a denial of the like, vnlike Mat. 13. 24. The kingdome of heaue is like vnto a man that sowed good seede in his fielde . Mat. 6. 5. VVhen thou prayest be not as the hypocrites are . Also Mat. 24. 37. But euon as in the daies of Noah, so shal she comming of the Sonne of man be. Likewise Gal. 4. 1. Then I says, the heire as long as he is a childe, differenth nothing from a seruaunt though he be Lord ouer all. The parts of a similitude are sometimes seuered or distinguished by three considerations or steppes of comparison, commonly called termes: & somtimes by foure. By three. 1. Thes. 3. 2. For you your selues also know perfectly, that the Lorde shal come euen as a theef in the night. VVhere one steppe of comparison must be twice repeated thus: As the theefe in the night commeth sodainly, so the Lords day commeth sodainly. By foure, in the 3. verse thus: For when they shal say, peace and safety, then shal come vpon them sodaine destruction, as the trauel of a woman with child , wherin foure seuered or distinct termes or steppes are plaine and manifest to wit, the carelesse wicked, sudden destruction, the woman with childe, sodayne trauell. Vnlike is that, whose qualitie in comparison is not the same. The signes or notes whereof are, Vnlike, differing, otherwise : As, Dan. 7. 7. And it was vnlike the beasts of the fielde, that were before . Also 1. Tim.6. 3. If any man teach otherwise . Also 5. 25 and 1. 3 Thus much of the first reasons. Now follow those that arise of the first. Reasons arising of the first, are those which are made by the ioyning together of the first. They are of two sortes.  More Artificial. ------ Lesse artificial. More artificiall is that which hath force of it selfe to reason withall. Rom. 4. 6. As Dauid  also describeth the blessednes of a man to whom God imputeth righteousnes without woorkes, Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiuen, and whose sinnes be couered  . VVhere the Apostle setteth forth righteousnes by a declaration arising of two arguments, to witte, agreeing as the cause imputation of righteousnes: disagreeing, without workes. Which reason hath force in it selfe, because of the force which these two arguments giueth vnto it: but the proofe of this declaration which is drawn from the witnes of Dauid, hath not so much authority from the thing saide, or the matter it selfe, as from the author of it Gods spirit by Dauid. Of the more artificial argumentes arising of the first, there are two sortes. Diuision, commonly called ------ Distribution. Definition. Diuision is when the whole is deuided into partes. The whole is that which conteineth or hath in it the parts. The partes is that which is conteined of the whole. A Diuision is made of arguments which are agreeable to the whole, but disagreeable amongst themselues, so that it is so much the more perfect, by how much the parts do more agree to the whole, and more disagree amongst themselues. Diuision is made of reasons which are   More agreeable,     First of the cause. ------ Lesse agreeable.     Then of the thing caused. A Diuision made of the cause, is when the partes be cause of the whole, and the they are properly called members: for a member is that parte which giueth beeing to the whole, and the whole being of such members, is called integral. For a ma in the scripture is often diuided into his members, the soule and the body: and the body into his members, as head, hands, feet, &c. So the whole Law diuided into his two members: First, which teacheth our duty towards God in the first table, & that which teacheth vs our duty towards our neighbour in the second table. The whole Church is deuided into his members, the part in heauen, and the part in earth. Distribution of the thing caused, is whose partes are caused of the whole, or are the effect of the whole, as when the whole kinde or general is deuided into his seuerall sorts of specialls. The whole kinde or general is a whole, which giueth or conteineth the beyng or effence which is common to the seueral sorts or specialls, as a liuing thing is generall to man and beast, conteining in it a bodily substance, which hath life and sense, whiche is the general being of man and beast. A seueral sort, or special, is a part comprehended, vnder the whole kind or general forme, from whence he taketh that beyng which is common to all the other parts or specialls, as in the 12. to the Rom. The Apostle deuideth the ordinary offices of the Church into Prophetes, that is Ministers occupied in the worde, and other Ministers occupied in other busines in the Church. The first sorte he deuideth agayne into the Teacher who is occupied in doctrine, & the Pastor who is occupied in exhortation. The seconde sorte againe into Elders, which rule the Church & Distributors, which distribute to the poore, in which and such like examples, the first is called the moste generall, the other the vndergeneral or subalternal, which in respect of the former, is the special and in respect of that that followeth is the general. The last, is the lowest sort, or most special, because it cannot be deuided into moe specialles, and this diuision of the causes into the effectes, is most excellent: yet that is not to be neglected when the partes are only set forth by their effects, as Salomon maketh a deuision of foure small things in the earth by the effectes, the Emmets prepare their meate in the Sommer, the Mise which make their dwelling in the Rockes, and the Greshoppers, which goe out in bandes. Hitherto of the distribution of more agreeable reasons. Now followeth of lesse agreeable. As of the  Subiect. ------ Adioint. The Diuisions of the Subiect or adioynt, are when the partes are set foorth by the subiectes or adiointes. So Iohn 1. 5. 6. 7. 8. In his diuision of witnesses, setteth foorth the partes by the subiect, some in heauen and some in earth. So Matt. The seede is deuided by the place: Some fell in stonie ground, some in thornie grounde, some in the high way. So for the adiointes. Rom. 14. 5. Christians are deuided by their adioynts, some are strong, some weake. A Definition is a reason arising of the first, which setteth downe what a thing is. It is eyther  Perfect, or ------ Vnperfect. A perfecte Definition or setting foorth of a thing, is that, which is made of the whole kinde or general, and the proper difference of that seuerall sort which is defined, where the first partis called the generall, the other the proper or speciall difference. So sinne is defined to be the going aside from the Lawe or right rule of obedience, where the going aside is the general, & the right rule of obedience is the proper difference. So the Church is a number of men in Christ Iesus, where A number of men is the general, and in Christ Iesus, is the proper difference. A description or an vnperfect setting forth of a thing, doth set a thing forth by any other reason. So Iob describeth Leuiathan by his partes, his adioyntes, comparisons, similitudes, effectes. &c. Thus much of the more artificial argumentes. Now follow the lesse artificiall. Of the lesse artificial argument, called a Testimonie. reasoneth not so much by his owne force, as by the power of other reasons. It is called a Testimonie or witnesse. A testimony is eyther a  Lawe, or ------ Notable sentence, such as be Parables, Riddles, Prouerbes, &c. confessions, and Recordes. &c. And they both are, either only pronounced, or written also. Both of those sortes also may be  VVith an othe, ------ VVithout an othe. And those are the general properties of a testimonie. His sorts are eyther of  God, called Diuine. ------ Man, called humane. For a Law, Rom.7. there is a law written of God, to prooue that a woman may not forsake her husband as long as he liueth. For a notable sentence. Luc.4.23. there is a parable, Phisitian heale thy selfe , So al the prouerbes of Salomon are deuine and notable sentences. Thus much of the spring of reasons. Nowe followeth Iudgement. Of Iudgement. Iudgement is the seconde parte of Logike, concerning the ordering of reasons, whereby they may be the better iudged of, which order sometimes is altered by additions, leauings out, or displacing of any thing, & this is called the hiding of Art when it is done artificially and to good purpose. It is eyther of  One sentence, called an Axiome, and that parte is called ------ Axiomaticall. Moe sentences. An Axiome or sentence is that ordering of one reason with another, whereby a thing is saide to bee or not to be. The partes of an Axiome are  The couple or bande ------ The partes coupled. The couple is that which ioyneth the other partes together. The partes coupled, are  The former. ------ The latter. The former is that parte which goeth before, and is called the Antecedent. The latter which followeth, and is called the Consequent, as in this: A soft aunswere appeaseth wrath : where a soft answere being a cause, and the former part of this Axiome, is ioyned by the couple, doth , with the effect and latter parte, appease anger . An axiome or one sentence is eyther  Affirming, or ------ Affirmatiue. Denying, or negatiue. An affirming axiome is, whose couple doth affirme. Denying is, whose couple doth denie. And although in our english tongue Deniall is set after the bande, yet in reason and in other tounges, it goeth before, and denieth the bande. From this affirming or denying, commeth the gayinsaying or contradiction of axiomes, which is when the selfe same axiome is plainely and flatly affirmed and denied. As in this: Good workes do iustifie, good workes do not iustifie. An axiome is true, when it is so affirmed or denied, as the thing is in deed, otherwise false. VVhich both are eyther,  Necessary or ------ Doubtfull. Necessary when the axiome is true or false without exception: yet to a general axiome to make it necessarily true, exception is to bee added: as whosoeuer putteth away hys wife, except for the case of fornication, committeth adulterie. Doubtful, when the trueth or falshood is vncertayne, which is called a contingent axionie. As: God is good , is necessarily true. The Diuell is good , is necessarily false. The godly do prosper in outwardblessings , is doubtful. And here the iudgemet must be according to the propertie of the axiome: as, that which is necessarily true, must be absolutely graunted or affirmed: and that which is necessarily false, must be absolutely denied: and that which is dubtfull must be doutfully affirmed, or denied: or els for certaintie distinguish howe farre you denie, and how farre you graunt. Now, when axiomes are exactly iudged, they must not onely be according to this rule of truth, but also according to the rules of rightfull placing or rightfulnesse, and wise placing, or rule of wisedome. The rule of rightfull placing is, when reasons are placed in an axiome, according to their proper considerations, spoken of before in Inuention: as, the proper forme with the proper thing formed, the proper subiect, with the proper adiunct: the proper generall, with the proper speciall. As, Al going aside from the rule of goodnes, is sinne , which both is necessarily true,  & the proper general is affirmed of the proper special. But it is contrary wise in this axiome: The Law of God in perfect . For perfectnes is comon to many other things, as to God and his creatures in their first creation. VVise placing, is whe reasons which may be equally affirmed or denied one of the other, are so placed, as that which is best known be in the first place, as in the placing of reasons, the cause must be before the effect, the subiect before the adioint, &c. As, All going from the rule of godlinesse, is sinne , is wisely placed, because the proper generall is set before the proper special, which is, as it may be turned, All sinne is going from the rule of rightuousness , it is truly and rightly placed, but not according too this exact rule, for the proper speciall, not so manifest as: he proper generall, is notwithstanding set before, which yet. 1.10.5. is placed according to this rule. All Vnrightuousnes is sin. ------ Double, called compounde. A single axiome is an axiome, whose band is noted out by is , or are , or some such like. VVher this is to be marked, that in the exact placing of this axiome, nothing els must bee in the second part, but that whereof the first is affirmed or denied: as in this example: Euery sin is to bee blamed : this is a simple axiome, and exactly placed. But euerie man is lying to be blamed : is not exactly placed. And in this kinde of axiome, all arguments, except diuers, and comparisons, and distributions may bee coupled, so that the agreeable bee alwayes affirmed, and the disagreeable be alwayes denied. As, God doth iustifie , where the cause and the effecte are coupled together. Every manne is a lyar . VVhere the subiecte and the adiunct are coupled together. God cannot lie : where we see that two contrary arguments are coupled togither. Ioh. 1. In the beginning was the woorde : Heere the partes are turned: for it must bee thus vnderstood: The worde was in the beginning. So, God is in deede true : there in deede a boundeth, Colloss. 2. 22. All which perishe in the vse, according to the commaundements of men , here prescribed , according to the commaundementes of menne, or some suche thing must bee vnderstoode. So Iohn 1.21. No , meaning I am not the Prophet, where both antecedent and consequent is wanting. The single axiome is eyther  Generall. ------ Speciall. Generall is, when the latter part is generally referred or attributed to the former. As, All men are lyars. Speciall is, when the latter part is specially attributed to the former. Speciall is eyther  Particular. ------ Proper. Particular is a speciall, when the latter part is referred to some of the former, but without certaine limitation: as, Some men are alreadie turned back vnto Satan . VVhere the contradiction must be a generall negatiue axioime: as, No men turned vnto Sathan. Also, Some men haue faith : No man hath faith. Proper is, when the latter parts is referred to the former being one singuler or proper thing: As, Paule is the Apestle of Iesus Christe : whose contradiction is, Paule is not the Aposile of Christ . Thus much of a single axiome. Nowe followeth the double or compounde. A double or compound axiom is, whiche is made of diuers single axiomes, whose band or couple is noted out with and , or if, although, &c . which ioyn sentences togither, and are commonly called coniunctions. Here the turning of parts is very common and to be marked, & especially because of the forme of prouing which shall follow: as, If thou keepe my Sabboth, I will blesse thee . Esay. 58. 13. 14. which must be thus turned, if one will bring it to this certain forme of proofe, If I will blesse thee, thou must keepe my Sabboth, but thou doest not: Ergo. Also a compounde axiome according to the nature of his coniunctions, It is eyther  Gathering, or congregatiue. ------ Seuering, or segregatiue. A gathering or congregatiue axiome is, which by such bands or coniunctios coupleth together the agreeable and disagreeable arguments, affirming the one, and denying the other. The gathering axiome is eyther  Coupling or copulatiue. ------ Knitting or connexiue. Coupling or copulatiue is that, whose band or couple is, and also, &c . Iames, 3.17. The wisedome that is from aboue, is first pure, then peaceable, and gentle, and easie to be intreated, and ful of mercy and good workes, &c. The true iudgement of this copulatiue axiome, dependeth vpon the truth of euerie particular part. For if all the partes be true, it is a true axiome: If one only be false, is a false axiome. Hereunto may be referred the full comparisons and the similitudes, as, Looke what number of starres there be in the heauens, so many in number shall thy seede bee : saide God to Abraham. VVhose contradictions, are the denial of euery part. A knitting or connexiue axiome is, whose couple is, If , as, if you were the children of Abraham you woulde do the workes of Abraham . VVhose contradiction is, If the first be, yet the seconde doth not followe. So that when we iudge this axiome to bee true, wee must iudge the partes to be truly and necessarilye knit together. VVhiche may be though the partes be both false: as in this example: The Iewes neither were Abrahams children, neither did the workes of Abraham. This axiome is doubtfull, when the parts and the folowing are doubtfull: As Paule in the shippe: If you obey my counsell, you shall not perishe . Hitherto must be referred the bande which is expressed by the woorde of time: as, VVhen wee were Gentiles, we liued according to the flesh . Also, when I was a childe, I spake as a childe. A seuering or segregatiue axiome is, whose couple or coniunction is seuering, and therefore is fittest to dispose the disagreeable arguments. It is eyther  Discerning, or discretiue. ------ Disioyning, or disiunctiue. Discerning is, whose couple or coniunction is discerning. Therefore of disagreeable argumentes it is fittest to dispose the diuers. As, although Esau sought the blessing through teares, yet hee found no place to repentance: whose contradiction is the deniall of the principall coniunction as, not although. This axiome is iudged to bee true and wittie, when as the partes be not onely true, but also diuers: otherwise it is iudged false or ridiculous: as although a man be a foole, yet he wanteth wit. The disioyning or disiunctiue axiome, is whose couple or coniunction is disioining as, Rom 14.4. Euery one standeth or falleth, &c. Here the contradiction doth not necessarily make the partes true or false: For the disiunction may be true, although the parts seuerally considered be doubtfull: As eyther Peter was at Rome, or not . VVhere we see the disiunction to be necessary though the partes be doubtfull. Thus much of the Iudgement of one sentence or axiome. Now followeth of moe sentences or axiomes. another, or drawen one out of another. It is eyther  A certaine frame of prouing, called a Syllogisme. ------ Or a plaine and perfect way of handling any thing, called Methode. A frame of prouing or Syllogisme, is that placing of an argument found out, with a question in three Axiomes, where the two first being graunted, the thirde doth necessarily follow. Therefore when an axiome is doubtfull, it is made a question, and for proofe of the truth, we must inuent a third reason, and place it with the question after the forenamed order. The partes of a Syllogisme are,  Former, or antecedent. ------ Latter or consequent. The former or antecedet, is that vpon which the conclusio is inferred or brought in. It hath two partes,  The propounder or proposition. ------ The applier or assumption. The proposition is the first part, wherein at the least the latter part of the question is placed with the reason found out. The assumption is the second part which is taken out of the proposition. The latter part or conclusion is that part which is inferred vpon the antecedent, concluding the question in this sort: Euery sinner is subiect to condemnation, Euery man is a sinner.     Ergo Euery may is subiect to condemnation. In this example we see first, that the conclusion standing vppon two argumentes, the subiect and adiunct, is made a question: and by the third argument, Sinner , the affirmatiue is proued true, by the fit placing of it in these three axiomes, wherein at least the last part of the question is placed in the proposition. Here marke that if any part be wanting it is called the kinde of an imperfect Sillogisme, which is called an Enthimeme, or an holding in the minde. If any thing bee added more then the axiomes vsually placed in a Sillogisme, it is called a prosillogisme, or an addition to a Sillogisme, or seconde proofe. The partes of a Sillogisme are oftentimes disorderly placed, as in this example, where the Apostle proueth that wee are iustified by faith: Eyther we are iustified by faith, or by the workes of the lawe. But not by the workes of the lawe :      Ergo Byfaith. Here the proposition is wanting: the assumption is found in the 20. verse of the 3. Chap. the conclusion in the 22. verse, and in the end of the 20 verse there is a prosyllogisme or second proofe, whereby the assumption is proued: as thus: By the Lawe commeth the knowledge of sinne: Therefore we are not iustified by it. The simple is that wherein the latter part of the question is placed in the proposition, and the former part in the assumption. This is sayde to be affirmatiue, when that all the parts doe affirme: negatiue when that al the partes do denie. General where the conclusion & proposition or assumption be generall: special, when one of them onely is generall: proper, when both of them are proper. There are two sortes of a simple Sillogisme.  The one more plaine. ------ The other more artificiall. A more plaine is, whose order or placing is more plaine then the rest, and it is, whe the reason sound out to proue a particular question, goeth before in both parts, and is affirmatiue in the assumption. All our fathers had the same. Sacraments in subsiance. Many of the Fathers were not saued, therefore some were not saued that had the Sacramentes in subsiance. The proposition is in the 1. of the Cor. the 10. The Assumption vers.5. which sort of simple Sillogismes, because of the plainnes of it, is very seldom foud set forth in al his partes, but most commonly in this order: The argument being put for an exaple. Some putting awaye good conscience, haue made shipwracke of faith, as Alexander and Hymeneus. 1, Tim. 1. The affirmatiue generall. All the iustified shalbe saued: Al the iustified shal raigne with Christ: Therefore Some that raigne with Christ, shalbe saued. The negatiue with the proposition generall. No hypocritical caller vpon God shalbe saued: Al hypocritical callers vpon God, say, Lorde, Lorde, Therefore Some that say, Lord, Lord, shal not be saued. Affirmatiue special: Some who fel in the wildernes, heard the word. Al who fel in the wildernes, tempted God, Therefore Some that heard the word, tempted God. Heb.6.3. Negatiue special is: No right Papist is a true subiect: Some right Papist is a Iesuite: Therefore Some Iesuite is not a true subiect. Affirmatiue proper. Abraham beleeued God, and it was imputed to him for righteousnes: Abrabam was a man, Therefore Some man be leeued, and it was imputed to him for righteousnes. Negatiue proper: Taule was not condemned: Paule was an Apostle. Therefore Some Apoftle was not condemned. Lesse plaine Sillogismes are those whose frame of concluding is not so plaine: and here the proposition must be alwaies general or porper,  & the conclusion negatiue, if eyther proposition or assumption be negatiue: and of this there are two sortes. The first, where the reasons found out doe follow both in the propofition and assumption, and must be denied in one of them. The first generall: Euery true Christian, can iustifie his religion by his workes: The dissembling professor cannot iustifie his religion by his workes. Therefore The dissembling professor is no true Christian. The second generall. Euery Christian loueth God: No transgressor of the commaundement loueth God, Therefore No transgressor of the commaundement is a true Christian. The first speciall. A Pastor is not an Apostle: Paule is an Apostle: Therefore Paule is no Pastor. The second speciall. An Apostle may preach throughout the worlde: Archippus may not preach throughout the world. Therefore  Archippus is not an Apostle. The first proper. Iudas Iscariote was not the seruant of Christ: Iudas the brother of Iames was the true seruant of Christ. Therefore Iudas Iscariote was not the brother of Iames. The second proper. Timothie was an Euangelist: Paule was not an Euangelist: Therefore Timothy was not Paule. Of the 2. sorte, Of a lesse plaine Sillogisme or more fully expressed. In the second kinde, the reason found out goeth before in the proposition, & followeth in the assumption affirmatiuely: The general affirmatiue. Euery sinner is subiect to condemnation: Euery man is a sinner : Therefore Euery man is subiect to condemnation. The general negatiue. No sinner is iustified by his workes: Euery man is a sinner , Therefore No man is iustified by his workes. The speciall affirmatiue. Euery Apostle must preach the Gospell: Taule is an Apostle , Therefore Paule must preach the Gospel. The Special Negatiue. No dissembler was euer approued of God: Anantas was a dissembler , Therefore Ananias was neuer approued of God. The proper affirmatiue. The Sonne of God is the true Messias: I am the sonne of God . Therefore I am the true Messias. The Proper negatiue. Iohn did not denie Christ: This Euangelist is Iohn , Therefore This Euangelist did not denie Christ. Thus much of the simple Sillogisme. Now followeth the compounde. one part of the proposition affirmed and compounded,  & the argument sound out maketh the other part of the proposition. To deny any part in a copound Sillogisme, is to set down the cotradiction thereof. The compound Sillogisme is eyther.  Connexiue, or knitting together. ------ Disiunctiue, or seuering, or disioyning. The knitting together or connexiue is whose proposition is connexiue or framed. with wordes which knit together sentences. This is of two sortes: The first sort is, when the former part of the proposition, is repeated affirmatiuely in the assumption, and the latter part in the conclusion. If God doe iustisie the faithful, no man may condemne them. But God doth iustifie the faithful ,      Ergo No man may condemne them. Here oftentimes the former part of the proposition maketh not the assumption, but that which is greater or of more force to conclud then it is. If the Magistrate doe iustly hate thee for thine offences, then thou oughtest to tremble: But God of heauen hateth thee iustly for thine offences, Therefore thou oughtest to tremble The same kinde of Syllogisme is framed by a worde of time, which hath the same forme with the other. As: If, or seeing, or when we are dead with christ, let us liue with him: But we are dead with Christ, therefore Let us liue with him. The second kinde of a knitting or connexiue Syllogisme. The second kind of a knitting or connexiue Sillogisme is, when the consequent or latter part of the proposition is denied in the assumption, that the former also maye be denied in the conclusion. As: If Abraham were iustified by workes, then be hath to glory with God: But he hath not to glorie with God , Therefore He is not iustified by workes. Rom. 4.1. A disioyning or disiunctiue Sillogisme. It is that whose proposition is disioyned, and is framed after two sortes. The first doth deny one part of the preposition in the assumption, and concludeth the other in the conclusion. As: A man is iustified, either by workes or fayth: But not by workes , Therefore By fayth.     Or thus: Man is iustisied by Faith or workes: But not by workes . Therefore By faith. The seconde frame is that which is made of a disioyned axiome, affirmed in both partes, and affirmeth one part in the assumption, that it may denie or take away the other in the conclusion as thus: Faithful men must eyther be saued or condemned. But they shalbe saued: Therefore not condemned. The same Sillogisme is also made of a coupled or copulatiue axiome being denied, because it hath the same force with a disioyned axiome. VVe can not serue both God and Mammon. But we serue God, Therefore not Mammon.     Or thus: VVe cannot serue both Mammon and God, But God: Therefore not Mammon. Thus much of the certayne frame of prouing or Sillogisme. Nowe followeth the plaine and perfect way of handling any thing, or Methode. being framed according to the properties of an axiome perfectly or exactly iudged, are so ordered as that the easiest and most generall bee set downe first, the harder are lesse generall next, vntill the whole matter be so conueied, as all the partes may best agree with themselues,  & be best kept in memorie. For as we consider in an axiome truth or falshood, in a Sillogisme, necessary following or not following, so in Methode the best and perfectest, the worst and troublesomest way to handle a matter. Therefore according to this perfect way, the definition of that which is to be handeled, must be first set downe, and then the diuision of the same into the members, & the generall properties of the same, and then the diuers sortes of it, if there be anye: so proceeding vntill by fit and apt passages or transitions, the whole be so farre handeled, that it can be no more deuided. A passage or transition is the bande of Methode, whereby one member of a diuision is ioyned to the other, which thing refresheth the Reader or hearer, and helpeth the memorie. Such is that in the Acts.1. Chap, 1. The first Treatie, Theophilus I haue made of all thinges which lesus beganne to say or doe, &c . And so goeth to the other historie of the Actes of the Apostles. Examples heereof you may see in the distribution of the effectes, and in all other things rightly handled, and in the treatise of houshold gouernment following. Nowe this Methode because it is so agreeable to reason, and easie to be practised, is for the most part followed of all writers or speakers, Yet so as they may and doo according to their matter, time, place, persons; and all such circumstances, wisely alter, change, or hide the same: and then it is called the hyding or concealing, or crypsis of Method, wheras they leaue out the former orderly placing of definitions, Diuisions, and transitions, & do take in diuers repititions, declarations, makings lightsome, enlargings, or amplifications, prouings of the thing, preuenting of obiections, out goeing from the matter, called digressions, as it shall make most fit for their purpose. Al which shall appeare in that which is set downe for the practise of Logike. FINIS. easie both to be vnderstoode and practised. It hath two partes,  Garnishing of speech, called Eloquution. ------ Garnishing of the maner of vtterance, called Pronunciation. Garnishing of speeche is the first part of Rothorike, whereby the speach it selfe is beautified and made fine. It is eyther  The fine maner of wordes, called a Trope. ------ The fine shape or frame of speech, called a figure. The fine maner of wordes is a garnishing of speech, whereby one word is drawe from his first proper signification to another, as in this sentence: Sinne lyeth at the dores: : where sinne is put for the punishment of sinne adioyned vnto it: lyeth at the dores signifieth at hand, as that which lyeth at the dores, is readie to bee brought in. This changing of words was first found out by necessitie, for the want of words, afterward confirmed by delight, because such wordes are pleasaunt and gracious too the eare. Therefore this change of signification muste bee shamefest, and as it were maydenly, that it may seeme rather to be led by the hand to another signification, the to be driuen by force vnto the same: yet sometimes this fine manner of speech swerueth from this perfection, and then it is. Eyther  The abuse of this fine speech, called Katachresis, or ------ The excesse of this finesse, called Hyperbole. Be not too iust, nor too wicked , which speech although it seeme very hard, yet it doth not without some finenesse of speech vtter thus much. That one seeke not a rightuousnes beyond the lawe of God, and that when none can liue without all sinne, yet that they take heede, that sinne beare not dominion ouer them: As, My teares are my meate day and night. Those that hate mee are moe in number then the haires of my head : Both whiche doe vtter by an excesse of speeche, a great sorrow, and a great number of enemies. The abuse of speech is when the chaunge of speech is harde, straunge, and vnwonted, as in the first example. The excesse of speech is, when the chaunge of signification is verye high and lotty as in the second example. And Psal 6.7. But the excellencie or finenesse of wordes or Tropes is most excellent, when diuers are  Shut vp in one, or ------ Continued in many. An example of the first sort is in the 2. King. I pray thee let me haue a double portion of thy spirites ; Where by spirite is meant the gift of the spirite, and by thy spirite the giftes of the spirite like to thine. The continuaunce of Tropes called an Allegorie, is when one kinde of Trope is so continued: as, Looke with what kinde of matter it be begunne, with the same it be ended. So in the 23. Psalme, the care of God towardes his Churche, is set foorth by the woordes proper to a shephearde . So in the whole booke of Canticles, the sweets conference of Christe and his Church, is set downe by the wordes proper to the husbande and the wife. So old age is set downs by this garnishing of speech. Eccle. 12. 5. 6. Hitherto of the properties of a fine maner of wordes, called a Trope. Now the diuers sottes do follow. They are those which note out   No comparision     No respect of ------ and are with     Diuision, Or Some comparison     Some respect. The first is double  The change of name called a Metonymie. ------ The mocking speech called an Ironie. The chaunge of name is where the name of a thing is put for the name of a thing agreeing with it. It is double,  VVhen the cause is put for the thing caused, and contrariwise. ------ VVhe the thing to which any thing is adioined, is put for the thing adioyned, and contrariwise: The change of name of the cause is when   The name of the maker     is put for the thing ------ or the matter.     made. Of the maker, when the finder out, or the authour of the thing, or the instrument whereby the thing is done, is put for the thing made. So Moses is put for his writinges . So Loue is put for liberalitie, or bestowing benefites the fruite of loue. So faith the cause is put for religious seruing of God, the thing caused. Rom. I. So the tounge the instrument of speeche, is put for speech it selfe, Rule thy tongue. Iames 3. Of the matter: Thou art dust, and to dust shalt thou returne, that is, one made of dust. Now on the other side, when the thing caused or the effect is put for any of these causes. So the Gospel of God is called the power of God to salvation , that is, the instrument of the power of God. So Loue is saide to be bountifull, because it causeth one to bee bountifull. S.Paule saith, The bread that wee breake, is it not the communion of the body and blood of Christe, that is an instrument of the communion of the body of Christe. So the body is said to be an earthly tabernacle, that is, a tabernacle made of earth. The change of name or Metonymie, where the subiect or that which hath any thing adioined, is put for the thing adioined or adioynt. So the place is put for these or that in the place. Set thine bonse in an order, that is, thy houshold matters: It shalbe easier for Sodome and Gomorra that is, the people in Sodome and Gomorra. So Moses chaire is put for the dectrine taught in Moses chaire. so all lericho and Ierusalem came out , that is all the men in Iertche and Ierusalem. So before, sinne was put for the punishment of sinue. Let his blood rest vpon us and our children , that is the punishment which shall followe his death. So Christ said: This is my body , that is, a signe or sacrament of my body. This wine is the newe testament in my blood , that is, a signe or seale of the new testament in my blood. So Iohn saith. Hee sawe the spirite descending in the likenesse of a Doue , that is, the signe of the spirit. On the other side, the adioint is put for the thing to whiche it is adioyned. As, christe is called eur hope . 1. Tit. that is, on whom our hope did depende. So, wee are iustified by faith , that is by Christ applied by faith. So, Loue is the fulfilling of the law , that is, those thinges to which it is adioyned. Hope, for the thinges hoped for, Rom . 8.28. So in the Epistle to the Ephesians. The dayes are euil , that is, the manner, conuersation, and the deedes of men in the dayes. Hytherto of the Metonimie or change of name. Now followeth the mocking speech or Ironie. said, Man is like to one of vs . So Christe laith: Sleepe on , and yet by and by, Arise, let vs go . So Paule saith, You are wise, and I am a foole. This Trope is perceiued either by the contrariety of the matter or the manner of vtterance, or both: So Elias saide to the Prophets of Baal: Crie aloude, &c . So the Iewes said vnto Christe: Hayle king of the Iewes. Hitherto appertaineth the palsing by a thing, which yet with a certaine elegancy noteth it. So Philemon. 19. That I say not thou owest by selfe vnto me . Hitherto of the finesse of wordes which respect no diuision. Now followeth that which respecteth diuision, called Synechdoche. A Synechdoche is when the name of the whole is giuen to the parte, or the name of the part to the whole. And it is double,  VVhen the whole is put for the member, and contrarily. ------ VVhen the generall or whole kinde is put for the speciall, or some sort, and contrarily, So S . Iohn. Not only for our sixnes, but for the sinnes of the whole worlde. So rightuousnesse , a member of goodnesse , is put for all goodnes . So vnrigiuousnes is put for all maner of sinnes. Examples of the second sort, as these: So Israel is put for those of Iuda sometimes . So nations for the Heathen, A minister of Christ, for an Apostel of Christe, Rom. 1. A minister put for a disstributer. Rom. . 12. On the other side, one sort or speciall is put for the whole sorte or generall in the examples following. In the Lords prayer Bread one helpe of life is put for all helps: This day one time for al times. So Salomon faith, The thing of the day in his day , that is, the thing of the time in his time. So sometimes lesse is spoken, and yet more is vnderstoode, which is called diminution or Meiosis, as, I am , saith, to him that knoweth howe to doe well and doth not, it is sin , that is, a great sinne. So our Sauiour Christe sayth, If they had not knowen, they had had no sinne , that is, no suche greate sinne as they haue nowe. Lykewise the denyal by comparison. So Salomon sayeth, Receiue my woordes and not siluer , that is, my wordes rather then siluer. So paule saith, I was sent to preach, and not to baptise , that is, not so muche to baptise as to preach. Hitherto of the finenesse of woordes, which note out no comparison. Now foloweth the fineneste of wordes which noteth out comparison called a Metaphor. A Metaphor is when the like is signified by the like: as, I. Cor. The Apostle saith. Doctrine muste bee tryed by fier , that is the euidence of the worde spirite trying doctrine as fire doth metals. So Christe is said to baptise with fire , Where fire is put for the power of the holy Ghost purging as fier. So Christ saith, Noneshalenter into the kingdome of God, but he that is borne of the holy Ghoste and water . So Paule calleth himselfe the Father of the Corinthes , Who saith that he begat them in Christ . So he calleth Timothie and Titus his naturall sonnes in the saith. Hitherto of a Trope or garnishing of speech in one worde, where the Metaphoris most vsuall, then the change of name, than the Synechdoche, & last of all the ironie. Now followeth the fine frame or shape of speeche, called a figure. A Figure is a garnishing of speech, wherein the course of the same is chaunged fro the more simple and plaine maner of speaking, vnto that which is more ful of excellencie & grace. For as in the finenesse of words or a trope, wordes are considered asunder by themselues: so in the fine shape or frame of speech or a figure, the apte and pleasant ioyning together of many words is noted. The garnishing of the shape of speach or a Figure is garnishing of speach  In wordes. ------ In a sentence. The garnishing of speach in wordes called Figura dictionis , is wherein the speache is garnished by the pleasant and sweet sound of wordes ioyned together. This is eyther  In the measure of soundes. ------ In the repetition of sounds. The measure of soundes is belonging either to  Poets, with vs called Rymers. ------ Oratours, with vs called eloquent pleaders. The first is the measure of soundes by certayne and continual spaces. And it is eyther  Ryme. ------ Verse. Ryme is the first sort, containing a certayne measure of Sillables ending alike, and these in the mother tongues are most fit for psalmes, songs or Sonets. Verses are the second sort, conteining certaine feete fitly placed. A foote is a measure framed by the length & shortnes of Syllables. For the Seueral sortes whereof, as also of the verses made of them, because we haue no worthy exaples in our English tongue, we iudge the large handling of them should be more carious then necessary. The measure of sounds belonging to Orators. is that which as it is not vncertain, so it differeth altogether from ryme and verse, & is very chageable with it self. Therfore in that eloquent speache you must altogether leaue ryme and verse, vnlesse you alleadge it for authority and pleasure. In the beginning of the sentence litle care is to be had, in the middle least of al, and in the end chiefest regard is to be had, because the fal of the sentence is most marked, & therefore least it fall out to be harshe and vnpleasaunt both to the mind and eare, there must be most variety and chaunge. Now this chaunge must not be aboue sixe syllables from the end, and that must be set downe in feet of two syllables. And thus much of garnishing of speach by the measure of soundes, rather to giue some taste of the same to the Readers, then to draw any to the curious & vnnecessarye practise of it. Now followeth the repeating of soundes. Repetition of sounds is eyther of   The like     sounde. ------ The vnlike     sounde. Of the like is eyther   Continued to the end     of the same sentence. ------ Broken of     of a diuers. Cotinued to the end of the same sentence is when the same sound is repeated with out any thing coming betweene, except a parethesis that is, somthing put in without the which notwithstanding the sentence is ful. And it is a ioyning of the same sond, as Rom.1. As vnrighteousnes, fornication, wickednes . And in the prayer of Christ, My God, my God, from men by thine hand O Lord, form men. &c, Psal. 17. Continued in a diuers sentence is either a  Red oubling, called Anadyplosis. ------ A pleasaunt clyming, called Clymax. Redoubling is when the same sound is repeated in the end of the former sentece, and the beginning of the sentence following. As, Psal. 9.8. The Lord also wilbe a refuge to the poore, a refuge I say in due time. Psal. 48. 14. For this God is our God  . But more plaine in the 8. As we haue heard se haue we seene in the citie of the Lord of hostes, in the citie of our God. God wil ostablish is for euer. A pleasant climing is a redoubling continued by diuers degrees or steppes of the same sounds: As Rom. 8.17. If we be childie, we be heires, euen heires of God annexed with Christ . Rom. 8.30. VVhom be predestinated, them also he called, and whom he called, them also he iustified, & whom be iustified, them also he glorified . Also Rom. 9.14.15. And hitherto of the same sound continued to the end. Now followeth the same sound broken of. ------ In the end. In the beginning is called Anaphora, a bringing of the same again. As Ro. 8.38. Nor death, nor life, nor Angelles, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature shalbe able to seperate vs from the loue of God whiche is in Christe Iesus our Lorde . So likewise Ephe. 4.11. Some to be Apostles, some Preachers, some prophetes, some Euangelistes . So Gal. Nor lowe, nor Gentil, nor bonde, nor free . So likewise Hebr. II.1.2. Repetition of the same sounde in the ende is called Epistrophe, a turning to the same sound in the end. so Ezech. Behold greater abhominations then these . Lament. 3,41.42 Let vs life vp our heartes with our hands vnto God in the heauens, wee haue sinned, and haue rebelled, therefore thou hast not spared. VVhen both of these are ioyned togither, it is called a coupling or Symploce, As, 2. Cor. 6.4. to the II. But in al thinges we approue our selues, as the Ministers of God, in muche patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, in stripes, in prisons, in tumultes, in labours. By watching, by fastinges, by puritie, by knowledge, by suffering, by kindnesse, by the holye Ghoste, by loue vnfayned, by the worde of trueth, by the power of G O D, by the armour of righteousnesse, on the right hande and on the lefte, by honour and dishonour, by euill report and good roport, as deceiuers and yet true: as vnknowen add yet knowen, as dying and yee beholde we liue, as chasteued, and yet not killed, as sorrowing and yet alwaies reioycing as poore and yes make manye riche, as hauing nothing, and yet possessing all thinges . See also 2. Cor. 22.23. Hitherto of the repetitions in the same place. Now of those that doe enter change their place. They are eyther  Epanalepsis, which signifieth to take backe. ------ Epanados, which signifieth a turning to the same tune. The first is when the same sound is repeated in the beginning and the ending, as My sonne Absolon, my sonne . Sam. 19.1. Epanados is when the same sound is repeated in the beginning and the middle, in the middle and the ende, as Ezech. 35.6. I will prepare thee vnto blood, and bloode shall pursue thee: except thou hate blood, euen blood shall pursue thee . And 2. Thes. 2. So that he that dothful as God, in the temple of God, sheweth himselfe that he is God . Hitherto of the repetition of those soundes which are alike. Now of those that are vnlike. Vnlike are  A smal chaunging of the name, as Paronomafia. ------ A smal chaunging of the ende or case, as Polyptoton. A small chaunge of name is, when a worde by the chaunge of one letter or Syllable, the signification also is changed, As, Patience, experience , Rom. 5.4.19. VVe walke after the flesh, not warre in the flesh. So by honor and dishonor, as vnknowen, and yet knowen. A final chaunging of the ende or case, is when wordes of the same beginning rebound by diuers ends: Christ being raised from the dead, dieth no more, death hath no more power ouer him. He that doth righteousnes is righteous, if ye know that he is righteous, know ye that he that doth righteously, is borne of him . And of both these there are manye in the Scripture, but the translations cannot reach them. Hitherto of the garnishing of the shape of speach in words. Nowe followeth the garnishing of the shape of speach in a sentence. Garnishing of the frame of speache in a sentence, is a garnishing of the shape of speach, or a figure, which for the forceable mouing of affectios, doth after a sort beautifie the sence and very meaning of a sentence. Because it hath in it a certain manly maiesty, which farre surpasseth the softe delicacy or daintines of the former figures. It is eyther the garnishing of speach  Alone. ------ with others. The garnishing of speach alone, is when as the sentence is garnished without speach had to other. And it is eyther in regarde  Of the matter. ------ Of the person. In regard of the matter, is eyther  A crying out, called Exclamation. ------ A pulling or calling backe of himselfe, called Rouocation. A crying out or Exclamation is the first, which is set foorth by a worde of calling out: Sometimes of wonder, As, Rom. 8. O the depth of the iudgements of God ! Psa. 8. O Lord, how excellent is thy Name! Sometimes of pity, also these wordes, Behold, alas, oh , be signes of this figure. As, O Ierusalem, Ierusalem, which stonest the prophetes . Sometimes of desperation, As, My sinne is greater then can be forgiuen. Behold thou driuest me out. &c . Sometimes of wishing. As, O lord hosts, how amiable are thy tabetuacles . Sometimes of disdayning. As, Rom. 7. in the end. O miserable wretch that I am, who shal deliuer me from this body of sinne ? Sometimes of mocking, as they which said to our sauiour Christ, A show that, &c. Sometimes of cursing & detestation, as in Dauid, Let their table be made a snare, & bow downe their backs alwaies . Also when this Figure is vsed in the end of a sentence, it is called a shooting out of the voyce or Epiphonema, as when the finnes of Iesabel were spoken against, this is added at the end, Seemed it a litle to her to doe thus and thus ? So after the high setting sorth of the name of God, Dauid shutteth vp his praise with this: Blessed he his glorious name and let al the earth be filled with his glory . Sometimes here is vsed a certaine liberty of speach, wherein is a kinde of secrete crying out: As Pet. 3. Act. saith: Ye men of Israel heare these words . And Paul. 1. Cor.11. VVould to God you could suffer a litle my foolishnes, and indeede ye suffer me. Thus much of crying out. Now followeth the Figure of calling backe, or reuocation. Reuocation is when any thing is called backe, and it is as it were a coolinge and quenching of the heate of the exclamation that went before. And this is eyther  A correction of ones selfe, called Epanorthrosis. ------ A holding of ones peace, called Aposiopesis. Epanorthrosis is correction, whe some thing is called back that went before: as Paul correcteth his doubtfulnes of Agripp ae , his beliefe, when he saith, Beleeuest thou King. Agripp ae, I know than beleeuest . Paul. 1. Cor. 15. I laboured more aboundantly then they all, yet not I, but the grace of God in me. A keeping of silence or Apofiopesis is when the course of the sentence begon is so stayed, as thereby some part of the sentence not being vttered, may be vnderstood. So our Saulour Christ saith, My soule it heauy: what shall I say, lohn. 12 .27 . Thus much of a Figure garnishing the speach alone in regard of the matter. Now followeth the garnishing of the speach alone in regard of the person. Garnishing of the speache alone in regard of the person is double. Eyther in  Turning to the person, called Apostrophe. ------ Feyning of the person, called Prosopopeia. Apostrophe or turning to the person, is when the speach is turned to another person, then the speach appointed did inted or require. And this Apostrophe or turning is diuersly seene, according to the diuersitie of persons. Sometimes it turneth to a mans person. As Dauid in the 6. Psalme, where hauing gathered argumentes of his safetie, turneth hastily to the wicked, saying, Away from me al yee workers of iniquitye, for the Lord hath heard the voyce of my petition. Sometimes from man to God, as Psal. 3. Dauid being dismayed with the number of his enimies, turneth himselfe to God, saying: But thou Lord art my bucklar, &c. Sometimes to vnreasonable creatures without sense. Esai. 1. Esai. 20. 1. Prosopopeia or a Feyning of the person is whereby we doe feyne another person speaking in our speach, And It is double  Imperfect. ------ Perfect. Imperfect is when the speach of another person is set down lightly and indirectly. As in the Psal. 10. Dauid bringeth in the wicked, VVho say vnto my Soule, Flie as the birde unto yonder hill. A perfect Prosopopeia is when the whole feyning of the person is set downe in our speech, with a fitte entring into the same, and a leauing it of. So VVisd. Pro. 8. VVhere the entrance is in the first verses, her speach in the rest of the Chapter. Hitherto of the figures of sentences concerning one speaking alone. Now follow the other which concerne the speeches of two. ------ In answering. That of asking is eyther  In deliberation. ------ In preuenting an obiection. Deliberation is when we doe euer nowe and then aske as it were reasons of our consultation, whereby the minde of the hearers wauering in doubt, doth set downe some great thing. This deliberation is eyther  In doubting. ------ In communication. A doubting is a deliberating with our selues, as Paul. 1. Philip. 22. doubting whether it were better to die then to liue, he garnisheth his speech on this manner: For I am greatly in acubt in both sides, desiring to be loosed, and to be with Christ which is best of al:neuerthelesse to abide in the flesh is more needful for you. Communication is a deliberation with others. Gal. 3. 1. 2. O foolish Galathians, who bath bewitched you, that you should not obey the trueth, to whom Iesus Christ before was described in your sight, and amongst you crucified: This only woulde I learne of you, Receiusd you the spirite by the workes of the law, or by the hearing of the worde preached ? And hitherto of the figure of speech betweene two called deliberation. Now followeth the figure of speech betweene two called the preuenting of an obiection, or occupation. Occupation is when wee doo bring an obiection, and yeeld an aunswere vnto it: Therefore this speech betweene two in the first part is called the setting downe of the obiection or occupation: in the latter Part, an answering of the obiection or the subiection: as Rom. 6. VVhat shall we say then? Shall wee continue still in sinne, that grace may abounde ? In which wordes is set downe the obiection, the aunswering in these wordes: God forbid . And here this must be marked, that the obiection is many times wanting, which must be wisely supplyed by considering the occasion and answere of it: As, 1. Tim. 5. They wyll marry, hauing condemnation . Now least any might say, what, for marying? He answereth: No, For denying their first faith. Hitherto of the figures of asking. Now followeth the figures of answering. They are eyther in  Suffering of a deede, called permission. ------ Graunting of an argument, called concession. Suffering of a deed or permission is, when mockinglie we giue libertie to any deed, being neuer so filthie, as Reuel. Let him that is filthie, be filthie still . And 1. Cor. 14. If any be ignorant, let him be ignorant. Concession or granting of an argument is, when an argument is mockingly yeelded vnto, as, Eccle. II. Reioyce young man in thy youth, and let thy heart cheare thee in the dayes of thy youth, and walke in the wayes of thy hearte, and in the sight of thine eies: but knowe that for al these thinges God will bring thee to iudgement. Hitherto of the first part of Rhetorike of the granishing of speech: the seconde part which is the granishing of veterance, because it is not yet perfect (for the preceptes for the most part pertaine to an Oratour) which when it shal be perfect, it shall eyther onely conteine common preceptes for the garnishing of vtterance in all, or also proper preceptes for the same in Magisttates, Ambassadours, Captaines, and Ministers, therefore vntill it be so perfected, we think it vnnecessarie to be translated into English. Although the rules of Sophistrie bee needelesse for them that bee perfect in Logike: yet because the knowledge of them bringeth some profite to young beginners, both for the readie aunswering of the subtill arguments, and the better practising of Logike and Rhetorike, we haue thought good to turne it into the English tounge. Sophistrie is the feined Art of Elenches, or coloured reasons. A colourable reason, or Elenche, is a shewe of reason to deceiue withall. It is either  VVhen the deceit lyeth in the wordes. ------ In the default of Logike called a Sophisme. In wordes is either  VVhen the deceit lyeth in one worde. ------ In wordes ioyned together. In one worde is eyther  The darknesse of a worde. ------ The doubtfulnesse of a worde. The darknesse of a worde, or an insolencie deceiueth, when by a reason the meaning is not vnderstood, whether the straungenesse be through the oldnesse, newnesse or swelling vanitie of the wordes, and of the last sorte is that spoken of in 2. Pet.2. 18. By this fallacian the Papistes conlcude, the fathers to be on their side for deseruing by good workes. VVhosoeuer saith mans merites are crowned, they say mens workes doe deserue, But the fathers say, mans merites are crowned, Therefore the fathers say, mans workes de serue. VVhere Merites is an olde worde, put for any workes done vnder the hope of rewarde, whether it come by desart or freedome of promise. Doubtfulnesse of a worde is either  Likenesse of name, called Homonymia. ------ By a Trope or finenesse of speech. The likenesse of name, or Homonimia, is when one worde is giuen to sfignifie diuers thinges: As, He that beleeueth shalbe saued: The hypocrites to whom our Sauiour Christ would not commit himselfe, beleeued: Therefore they shalbe saued. where faith doth note out both a iustifiyng faith, and a dead faith. Doubtfulnes by a Trope, is when a worde is taken properly, which is meant figuratiuely or contrarily. As: That which Christ saith is true: Christ deith that bread it his body. Therefore it is true. VVhere by body is meant the signeh Sacrament of his body. Vnto the first a perfect Logician would answere, that the proposition is not an axiome necessarily true, according to the rule of truth, because of the doubtfulnes of the old and new signification of merite . And if the worde be farre worne out of vse that it be not vnderstood, then the answere must be, I vnderstand it not, or put your axiome in plaine wordes. To the second, he would answere, that the proposition of first part is not according to the rule of righteousnes, because the proper subiect and adioynt are not ioyned togither: which if it were, it should be, VVho soeuer hath iustifying saith, or belecueth sincerely, shalbe saued , and then the assumption being in the same sence inferred, is false. Vnto the third he would aunswere, that the assumption is not necessarily true, because if the word Body be taken properly, it is not then true that is set downe, but if it be taken figuratiuely, it is true,  & therfore would bid him make the assumptio necessarily true, and then say, Christ saieth in proper wordes, it is my body , and then it is false. Hitherto of the fallacians in single words. Now of those ioyned together. It is eyther  Amphibolia, or the doubtfulnesse of speech. ------ Exposition, or vnapt setting downe of the reason. The first is when there is doubtfulnesse in the frame of speech, as thus: If any obeynes our worde by a letter, note him : wheresome referre, by a letter , to the first part of the sentence and some to the latter, where the signification of the word and right pointing doth shew, that if must be referred to the first. The answere is, that the right and wise placing of the sentence is peruerted. Vnapt setting downe of the reason, is when the partes of the quistion and the reasons intreated is not set downe in fit words: as, All sinne is euell: Euerie childe of God doth sinne. Therefore euery childe of God is euill Heere the answeare according to Logike, is that the assumption doth not take the argument out of the proposition, but putteth in another thing, and so it is no righte frame of concluding, as appeareth by the definition of the assumption. Hitherto of the deceites of reason which lie in wordes. Now of the default of Logike, called Sophisme It is eyther  Generall. ------ Speciall. The generall are those which cannot be referred to any part of Logike. They are eyther  Begging of the question, called the ------ petition of the principle. Bragging of no proofe. Begging of the question is when nothing is brought to prooue, but the question or that which is as doubtfull: As, That rightuousnes which is both by faith and workes, doth iustifie: But this rightuousnesse is inherent rightuousnesse. Ergo Here the proposition in effect is nothing but a question. If together with the blood of Christe we must make perfect satisfaction for our sinnes before wee come to heauen: Then there must bee purgatorie for them that die without perfect satisfaction. But the first is so. Ergo . where the argument they bring is as doubtfull,  & needeth as much proofe as the question. The answere is this out of the definition of the Syllogisme that there is no new argument inuented, therefore it cannot be a certaine frame of concluding. Bragging of no proofe is when that which is brought is too much, called redouding. It is eyther  Impertinent or another matter called Heterogenium. ------ A vaine repetition, called Tautologia. Impertinent or not to the purpose is when any thing is brought for a proof, which is nothing neere to the matter in hand, whereunto the common prouerb giueth answere: I aske you of cheese, you answere mee of chauke. A viane repetition is, when the same thing in effect, though not in wordes is repeated, as they that after long time of prayer say, Let vs pray . And this fallacian our Sauiour Christ condemneth in prayer, Mat. 5. and this is a fault in Methode. Speciall are those which may be referred to certaine partes of Logike, and they are of two sortes. Such as are referred  To the spring of reasons, called inuention. ------ To iudgement. Those referred to Inuention are, when any thing is put for a reason which is not, as no cause for a cause, no effect for an effect, and so of the rest. In the distribution this is a proper fallacian, when any thing simply or generally graunted, thereby is inferred a certaine respect or speciall not ment nor intended: as, He that saith, there are not sauen Sacraments, faith true: He that saith, there are only three, saith there are not seuen: Therefore be that saith there are three, saith true. The right answere is, that the proposition is not necessarilie true, for there may be away to say, there are not seuen, and yet affirme an vntruth. Fallacians of Iudgement are those that are referred to the iudgement  of one sentence. ------ of moe. Of one sentence eyther to the  properties of an axiome. ------ Sortes, To the properties, as when a true is put for a false and contrarilie: an affirmatiue for a negatiue, and contrarily. So some take the wordes of S. Iohn: I do not say concerning it that you shall not prey , for no deniall, when as it doth denie to pray for thatsinne. To the sortes are referred eyther to the  Simple. ------ Compound. The first when the generall is taken for the speciall, and contrarily. So the papists by this fallacian do answere to that generall saying of Paul: VVee are iustified by faith, with ous the workes of the law . VVhich they vnderstande of workes done before faith, when that was neuer called in doubt. The fallacians which are referred to a compound axiome, are those which are referred eyther to a  Disioyned. ------ Knitting. Axiome. To a disioyned axiome when the partes indeed are not disioyned. As, Salemen was either a King, or did beare rule. To a knitting axiome is when the partes are not necessarily knit together. As, If Rome be on fire, the Popes chayre is burnt. And hitherto of the first sort of fallacians referred to iudgement, Now followeth the second. And they be either those that are referred  To a sillogisme. ------ To Methode. And they againe are  Generall. ------ Speciall. Generall which are referred to the generall properties of a Sillogisme. It is eyther when all the partes are  Denied. ------ Particular. All partes denied: As, No Pope is a Diuel: No man is a Diuel, Therefore No man is a Pope. And this must bee answered, that it is not according to the definition of a negatiue fillogisme, which must haue alwayes one affirmatiue. Al particular: As, Some vnlawful thing must be suffered, as namely that which cannot be taken away: The stewes is some unlawful thing. Therefore the stewes must be sufferedo This is answered by the definition of a speciall fillogisme, which is that hath one part generall. The special are those which are referred to the  Simple. ------ Compound. The first simple  Of the first sort. ------ Of the second. Of the first sort,  More playne. ------ Lesse plaine. More plaine is when the assumption is denied, or the question is not particular: As, Euery Apostle may preach abroade: Some Apostle is not a Pope. Therefore Some Pope may not preach abreade. Also: Euery Pope is a Lord: Some Pope may giue an universal licence. Therefore euery Lord may giue an universal licence. Lesse plaine hath one fallacian in common, when the proposition is speciall: As, Some playeris a roge: Euery vagabond is a roge, Therefore, euery plaier is a vagabond. Also. Some player is a Roge: Euery vagabound is a player, Therefore euery player is a Roge. The fallacian of the first kind is when al the partes be affirmatiue: As, Al Pauls Bishops were ordeined for vnitie: Al Archbishops be ordained for vnitie, Therefore al Archbishops are Pauls Bishops. The fallacian of the second kind is when the assumption is denied: As, Euery puritane is a Christian: No L. Bishop is a puritane, Therefore, No L. Bishop is a Chiristian. Hitherto of the fallacians referred to a simple Sillogisme. Nowe followe those which are referred to a compounde, which are those which are referred eyther  To the connexiue. ------ To the disioyned. Of the first sort one is when the first part or antecedent is denied, that the second or consequent may be so likewise: As, If any man haue two benefices, he may escape vnpunished at the Bishops hands, But he may not haue two benefices , Therefore He may not escape unpunished at the Bishops handes. The second is when the second part is affirmed, that the first may be so also. As, If euery ignorant minister were put out of the Church, and a Pre aecher in his place, we should haue good order: But we haue good order, Therefore Euery ignorant. minister is put out of the Church, and a Pre aecher in his place. Of those referred to the disioyned, the first is when al the parts of the disiunction or proposition are not affirmed: As, Euery ignorant minister is to be allowed or not, But he is not: Therefore he is. The second kind is when the second part of the copulatiue negatiue axiome is denied, that the first may be so. As, A non resident is either a faithful or unfaithfull minister: But he is unfaithful, Erge, &c. And thus much of the fallacians in a Sillogisme. The fallacian in Methode is when to deceiue withall, the end is set in the beginning, the special before the general, good order begon, confounded: And finally, whe darknes, length and hardnes is laboured after. FINIS. 
