 house by the Church in Lime-Streete in London. Master Demetrius , I earnestly commend this bearer M. Doctor Haruey , my good frend, vnto you: being a very excellent generall Scholler. Who is desirous of your acquaintance and friendship, especially for the sight of some of your antiquities  & monuments: and also for some conference touching the state of forraine countries: as your leisure may conueniently serue. You shall assuredly find the Gentleman very honest, and thankefull: and me ready to reacquite your courtesie and fauour to him so shewen, in that I possibly may. And so with the remembrance of my hartyrecommendations, with like thankes for your two letters of forreine newes, receiued the last weeke: I committe you to the Protection of the Almighty. Walden this 29. of August 1592. Your louing frend Christopher Bird. In steed of other nouels, I sende you my opinion, in a plaine, but true Sonnet, vpon the famous new worke, intituled, A Quippe for an vpstart Courtier ; or forsooth, A quaint Dispute betweene Veluet-breeches, and Cloth-breeches : as fantasticall and fond a Dialogue, as I haue seene: and for some particulars, one of the most licentious, and intollerable Inuectiues, that euer I read. Wherein the leawd fellow, and impudent rayler, in an odious and desperate moode, without any other cause, or reason; amongst sondry other persons notoriously deffamed, most spitefully and villanously abuseth an auncient neighbour of mine, one M. Haruey , a right honest man of good reckoninge; and one that aboue twenty yeres since bare the chiefest office in Walden with good credite: and hath mainetained foure sonnes in Cambridge and else where with great charges: all sufficiently able to aunsweare for themselues: and three, (in spite of some few Greenes ) vniuersally well reputed in both Vniuersities, and through the whole Realme. Whereof one returning sicke from Norwich to Linne , in Iuly last, was past sence of any such malicious iniury, before the publication of that vile Pamphlet. Liuor post fata quiescat: & bene a singulis audiant, qui omnibus volunt bene. For his dainty deuise, deserueth the hauter. A rakehell: A makeshift: A scribling foole: A famous bayard in Citty, and Schoole. Now sicke, as a Dog: and euer brainesick: Where such a rauing, and desperate Dick? Sir reuerence, A scuruy Master of Art, Aunsweared inough with a Doctors fart. He scornes other Aunsweare: and Enuy salutes VVith shortest vowels, and with longest mutes. For farther triall, himself he referres To proofe, and sound iudgement, that seldome erres. Now good Robin-good-fellow, and gentle Greenesleeues. Giue him leaue to be quiet, that none aggreeues. Miserrima Fortuna, quae caret inimico. Maister Bird , in the absence of M. Demetrius , I deliuered your letter vnto his wife, whome I found very courteous. My next businesse was to enquire after the famous Author: who was reported to lye dangerously sicke in a shoemakers house neere Dow-gate: not of the plague, or the pockes, as a Gentleman saide, but of a surfett of pickle herringe and rennish wine, or as some suppose, of an exceeding feare. for in his extreamest want, he offered ten, or rather then faile twenty shillinges to the printer (a huge som with him at that instant) to leaue out the matter of the three brothers: with confession of his great feare to be called Caram for those forged imputations. a conscious mind, and vndaunted hart, seldome dwell together: hee was not the first, that bewrayed,  & punished his owne guiltines, with blushing for shame, or trembling for dread, or drouping for woe. Many can heape misery inough vppon their owne heads: and neede no more penalty, but, their owne contrition, and the Censure of other. I would not wish a sworne enimie to bee more basely valued, or more vilely reputed, then the common voice of the cittie esteemeth him, that sought fame by diffamation of other, but hath vtterly discredited himselfe: and is notoriously grown a very prouerbe of Infamy, and contempt. I little delight in the rehearfall of such paltrye: but who like Elderton for Ballating: Greene for pamphletting: both, for goodfellowship, and bad conditions: Rayling was the Ypocras of the drunken rimester: and quipping the Marchepane of the madde libeller. they scape faire, that goe scot-free in such sawcy reckonings: I haue knowne some, read of many, and heard of more, that wantonly quipped other,  & soundly nipped themselues. the hoattest bloud of choller may be cooled: and as the fiercest Fury of wild-fire, so the fiercest wild-fire of fury, consumeth it selfe. Howbeit a common mischiefe would be preuented: and it generally concerneth all, and particularly behooueth euery one, to looke about him, when he heareth the belles ringing backward, and seeth the fire running forward: and beholdeth euen Death in person, shooting his peremptory boltes. you vnderstand me without a Glosse: and here is matter inough for a new ciuill war, or shall I say for a new Troyan siedge, if this poore Letter should fortune to come in print. I deale directly; and will plainly tell you my fancy, if Titius continue to vpbraid Caius with euery thing,  & nothing. I neither name Martin-mar-prelate: not shame Papp wyth a hatchet: nor mention any other, but Elderton , and Greene : two notorious mates,  & the very ringleaders of the riming, and scribbling crew. But Titius , or rather Zoilus in his spitefull vaine, will so long flurt at Homer : and Thersites in his peeuish moode, so long fling at Agamemnon ; that they wil become extremely odious  & intollerable to all good Learning, and ciuill Gouernement: and in attempting to pull downe, or disgrace other without order, must needes finally ouerthrow themselues without relief. Oratours haue challenged a speciall Liberty: and Poets claimed an absolute Licence: but no Liberty without boundes: nor any Licence without limitation. Inuectiues by fauour haue bene too bolde: and Satyres by vsurpation too- presumptuous: I ouerpasse Archilochus, Aristophanes, Lucian, Iulian, Aretine , and that whole venemous and viperous brood, of old  & new Raylers: euen Tully , and Horace otherwhiles ouer-reched: and I must needes say, Mother Hubbard in heat of choller, forgetting the pure sanguine of her sweete Feary Queene, wilfully ouer-shott her malcontented selfe: as elsewhere I haue specified at larg, with the good leaue of vnspotted friendshipp. Examples in some ages doe exceeding-much hurt. Salust , and Clodius learned of Tully , to frame artificiall Declamations,  & patheticall Inuectiues against Tully himselfe, and other worthy members of that most-florishing State: if mother Hubbard in the vaine of Chawcer , happen to tel one Canicular tale; father Elderton ; and his sonne Greene , in the vaine of Skelton , or Scoggin , will counterfeit an hundred dogged Fables, Libles, Calumnies, Slaunders, Lies for the whetstone, what not,  & most currishly snarle, & bite where they should most kindly fawne, and licke. Euery priuate excesse is daungerous: but such publike enormities, incredibly pernitious, and insuportable: and who can tell, what huge outrages might amount of such quarrellous, and tumultuous causes? Honour is precious: worship of value: Fame inualuable: they perillously threaten the Commonwealth, that goe-about to violate the inuiolable partes thereof. Many will sooner loose their liues, then the least Iott of their reputation. Lord, what mortall feudes, what furious combats, what cruell bloudshed, what horrible slaughterdome haue bene committed, for the point of Honour, and some few Courtly cerimonies? Though meaner persons do not so highly ouerprise their credite; yet who taketh not discourtesie vnkindly, or slaunder displeasingly? For mine owne part, I am to make an vse, of my aduersaries abuse: and will endeuour to reforme any default, where of I may iustly, or probably be empeached. Some Emulation hath already done me good: both for supply of great imperfections: & for encrease of small perfections. I haue, and who hath not, found it better, to be tickled & stinged of a busy ennemy: then to be coyed, & lulled of an idle frend. Plutarch is grauely wise:  & Macchiauell subtilly politike: but in either of them, what sounder, or finer piece of cunning, then to reape commodity by him, that seeketh my displeasure:  & to play vpon the aduauntage of his detection of my infirmities: Other cauilling, or mote-spying Malice confoundeth it selfe: & I continue my accustomed simplicity, to aunswere vanity with silence: though peraduenture not without daunger of inuiting a newe iniury, by intertaining an old. Patience hath trained mee to pocket-vp more hainous indignities: & euen to digest an age of Iron. They that can doe little, must be contented to suffer much. My betters neede not take it grieuously, to be taunted, or reproched in that booke, where Saint Peter, & Christ himselfe are Lucianically & scoffingly alleadged: the one for begging, the other for graunting a foolish boone; (pretended euer since the fatall destiny of the gentle crafte.) Some men wil haue their swinge, & their bugges- woordes, though it be against all Gods-forbid: & what Cesars might, or Catoes integrity, or what Saints deuotion can stop such mouths: yet neither themselues the better: nor other the woorse: that depend not on their allowance, but rely on their owne iustification: and desire to confute their impudency not with words, but with deeds, Howbeit I am not to preiudice my Brother aliue: or to smoother the wrong, offered to my Brother deceased: or to tollerate the least diffamation of my good Father, whome no illwiller could euer touch with any dishonesty, or discredite in any sort. Nothing more deere, or inestimable, then a mans good name: & albeit I contemne such pelting iniuries, vainely deuised against my selfe, yet am I not to neglecte so intollerable a wrong, so notoriously published against them. There is law for desperatest out-lawes: & order for most disorderly fellowes. They that cannot gouerne themselues, must bee ruled by other; and pay for their folly. Whiles I was thus, or to like effecte, resoluing with my selfe, and discoursing with some speciall frendes: not onely writing vnto you: I was suddainely certified, that the king of the paper stage (so the Gentleman tearmed Greene ) had played his last part,  & was gone to Tarleton : whereof I protest, I was nothing glad, as was expected, but vnfainedly sory: aswell because I could haue wished, he had taken his leaue with a more charitable farewell: as also because I was depriued of that remedy in Law, that I entended against him, in the behalfe of my father, whose honest reputation I was in many dueties to tender. Yet to some conceited witt, that could take delight to discouer knaueries, or were a fitte person to augment the history of Conny-catchers: O Lord, what a pregnant occasion were here presented, to display leaud vanity in his liuely coullours, & to decipher the very misteries of that base Arte? Petty Cooseners are not woorth the naming: he they say, was the Monarch of Crosbiters, and the very Emperour of shifters. I was altogether vnaquainted with the man, & neuer once saluted him by name: but who in London hath not heard of his dissolute, and licentious liuing; his fonde disguisinge of a Master of Arte with ruffianly haire, vnseemely apparell, and more vnseemelye Company: his vaineglorious and Thrasonicall brauinge: his piperly Extemporizing, and Tarletonizing; his apishe counterfeiting of euery ridiculous, and absurd toy: his fine coosening of Iuglers, and finer iugling with cooseners: hys villainous cogging, and foisting; his monstrous swearinge, and horrible forswearing; his impious profaning of sacred Textes: his other scandalous, and blasphemous rauinge; his riotous, and outragious surfeitinge: his continuall shifting of lodginges: his plausible musteringe, and banquettinge of roysterly acquaintaunce at his first comminge; his beggarly departing in euery hostiffes debt; his infamous resorting to the Banckeside, Shorditch, Southwarke, and other filthy hauntes: his obscure lurkinge in basest corners: his pawning of his sword, cloake, and what not, when money came short; his impudent pamphletting, phantasticall interluding, and desperate libelling, when other coosening shiftes failed: his imployinge of Ball, (surnamed, cuttinge Ball) till he was intercepted at Tiborne, to leauy a crew of his trustiest companions, to guarde him in daunger of Arrestes: his keping of the foresaid Balls sister, a sorry ragged queane, of whome hee had his base sonne, Infortunatus Greene : his forsaking of his owne wife, too honest for such a husband: particulars are infinite: his contemning of Superiours, deriding of other, and defying of all good order; Compare base fellowes, and noble men together:  & what in a manner wanted he of the ruffianly, and variable nature of Catiline , or Antony , but the honourable fortunes of Catiline , and Antony ? They that haue seene much more, then I haue heard; (for so I am credibly infourmed) can relate straunge, & almost incredible Comedies of his monstrous disposition: wherewith I am not to infect the Aire, or defile this paper. There be inough, and inough such Histories, both dead, and liuing: though youth bee not corrupted, or age accloyed with his Legendary. Truely I haue beene ashamed, to heare some ascertayned reportes of hys most woefull, and rascall estate: how the wretched fellow, or shall I say the Prince of beggars, laid all to gage for some few shillinges: and was attended by lice: and would pittifully beg a penny- pott of Malmesie: and could not gett any of his old acquaintance to comfort, or visite him in his extremity, but Mistris Appleby, and the mother of Infortunatus. Alas, euen his fellow-writer, a proper yong man, if aduised in time, that was a principall guest at that fatall banquet of pickle herring, (I spare his name, and in some respectes wish him well) came neuer more at him: but either would not, or happily could not performe the duty of an affectionate, and faithfull frend. The poore Cordwainers wife was his onely nurse: and the mother of Infortunatus hys sole companion: but when Mistrisse Appleby came, as much to expostulate iniuries with her, as to visite him. God helpe good fellowes, when they cannot helpe themselues. Slender reliefe in the predicamente of priuations, and fained habites. Miserable man, that must pearish: or be succoured by counterfeite, or impotente supplies. I once bemoned the decayed and blasted estate of M. Gascoigne : who wanted not some commendable parts of conceit, and endeuour: but unhappy M. Gascoigne , how Lordly happy, in comparison of most-vnhappy M. Greene ? He neuer enuyed me so much, as I pittied him from my hart: especially when his hostisse I sam , with teares in her eies,  & sighes from a deeper fountaine, (for she loued him derely) tould me of his lamentable begging of a penny-pott of Malmesy: and sir reuerence how lowsy he, and the mother of Infortunatus were (I would her Surgeon found her no worse, then lowsy:) and how he was faine poore soule, to borrow her husbandes shirte, whiles his owne was a washing: and how his dublet, and hose, and sword were sold for three shillinges: and beside the charges of his winding sheete, which was foure shillinges; and the charges of hys buriall yesterday in the New-churchyard neere Bedlam, which was six shillinges, and foure pence; how deeply hee was indebted to her poore husbande: as appeered by hys owne bonde of tenne poundes: which the good woman kindly shewed me: and beseeched me to read the writting beneath: which was a letter to his abandoned wife, in the behalfe of his gentle host: not so short as persuasible in the beginning, and pittifull in the ending. Doll, I charge thee by the loue of our youth, & by my soules rest, that thou wilte see this man paide: for if hee, and his wife had not succoured me, I had died in the streetes. Robert Greene. Oh what notable matter were here for a greene head, or Lucianicall conceit: that would take pleasure in the paine of such sorry distressed creatures? whose afflicted case, to euery charitable, or compassionate mind cannot but seeme most commiserable, if not for their owne cause, yet for Gods sake: who deserueth infinitely of them, whome hee acquitteth, not according to iudgement, but according to mercy. I rather hope of the deade, as I wish to the liuinge, that Grace might finally abounde, where wickednesse did ouerflow: and that Christ in his diuine goodnesse shoulde miraculously forgiue the man, that in his diuelish badnesse blasphemously reuiled God. the dead bite not: and I am none of those, that bite the dead. When I begin to conflict with Ghostes, then looke for my Confutation of his fine Quippe, or quaint Dispute, whome his sweete hostisse for a tender farewell, crowned with a Garlande of Bayes: to shew, that a tenth Muse honoured him more being deade; then all the nine honoured him aliue. I know not, whether Skelton, Elderton , or some like flourishing Poet were so enterred: it was his owne request, and his Nurses deuotion: and happily some of his fauourites may imitate the example. One that wished him a better lodging, then in a poore Iourneymans house,  & a better graue, then in that Church-yard in Bedlam, hath perfourmed a little peece of a greater duety to a Laureat Poet. Here lies the man, whome mistrisse Isam crown'd with bayes; Shee, shee that ioyde to heare, her Nightingales sweete layes. Which an other no sooner read, but he immediately subscribed: as speaking to the ignorant passenger. Heere Bedlam is: and heere a Poet garish, Gaily bedeck'd, like forehorse of the parish. Other Epitaphes, and funerall deuotions I am promised by some, that deepely affect inspired Bardes, and the adopted sonnes of the Muses: but you may imagine, I haue smal superfluity of leysure, to entend such businesse: and yet nothing of frend, or foe, can be vnwelcome vnto mee, that sauoureth of Witte, or rellisheth of Humanity, or tasteth of any good. In the meane, as euer before for a generall Defence, so still for a speciall Apology, I referre my selfe to euery indifferent Iudgement: and presume they will conceiue well, that perceiue no ill. Charity recommendeth Fauour to superiours; Amity to equalls: and good-will to all; that either reuerence Diuinity, or regarde Humanity. Friendes haue Affection; and the wiser sort Reason, to value men, not by others report, but by their owne desart, or probable hope: which I would willingly nourish, as I honestly may, till it shall please God to affoord some conuenient occasion of more actuall proofe. And as for Enuy, or hatred to any party: I did euer abhorre them both: and I imagine there is not any, that either more resolutely disdayneth the one, or, more peremptorily detesteth the other: as perhaps may yer long visibly appeere: if some other requisites concurre with my intention, or fall-out aunsweareable to my expectation. Promise is debt: and I hadd rather perfourme, then promise any thinge: but a minde, desirous to pleasure frendes, to reconcile foes, to displease fewe, to displeasure none. They that haue little else, to winne or continue credite, had neede haue Humanity, in supply of other defectes. Let the worlde deale with simple men, as it pleaseth: I loath to be odious to any: and would be loth to bee tedious to you. The next weeke, you may happily haue a letter of such French occurrences, and other intelligences, as the credible relation of inquisitiue frendes, or imployed straungers shall acquaint me withall. That most valorous, and braue king wanteth no honourable prayses, or zealous prayers. Redoubted Parma was neuer so matched: and in so many woorthy histories, aswell new, as olde; how few comparable either for Vertue, or Fortune? The Spanyard, politique inough, and not ouer-rashly audatious, will bee aduised, before he entangle himselfe with more warres attonce: knowing how the braue Earle of Essex, woorthy Sir Iohn Norrice, and their valiant knightes, haue fought for the honour of England; and for the right of Fraunce, of the Low countries, and of Portugall. Thrise happy Fraunce; though how vnhappy Fraunce, that hast such a Soueraine Head, such resolute Hartes, and such inuincible Handes to fight for thee: that will either recouer thee most mightily, or die for thee most honourably. Were I of sufficient discourse, to record the valiauntest, and memorablest actes of the world; I would count it a felicity, to haue the oportunity of so egregious, and heroicall an argument: not pleasurably deuised in counterfaite names, but admirably represented to the eie of France, and the eare of the world, in the persons of royall, and most puissaunt knightes; how singularlie worthy of most glorious, and immortal fame? Gallant wits, and braue pennes may honorably bethinke themselues: and euen ambitiouslye frame their stile to a noble emulation of Liuy, Homer, and the diuinest spirits of all ages: I returne to my priuate businesse. Good maister Birde, commende me to my good friendes: and fare you hartely wel. London this 5. of September. Your euer assured: Gabriell Haruey. Albeit for these twelue, or thirteene yeares, no man hath beene more loth, or more scrupulous, then my selfe, to vnderlie the censure of euery curious conceite, or rigorous iudgement, that pretendeth a deepe insight in the perfections of wits and stiles, insomuch that euen Actions of Silence and Patience haue bene commenced against me: and although I stil dwel in the same opinion that nothing would be committed to a publike view, that is not exactly laboured both for matter and maner: and that importeth not some notable vse, to one, or other effecuall purpose: Yet partlie the vehemente importunity of some affectionate friends, and partly mine owne tender regard of my fathers, and my brothers good reputation, haue so forcibly ouer-ruled me, that I haue finally condescended to their passionate motion: and in an extraordinarie case, haue respectiuely yeelded my consent to an extraordinary course. Which I would vnpartially commend to the reasonable allowance of euery indiferent peruser that carrieth Courtesie in his Tongue, or honesty in his Hart. For mine own iniury, the more I consider, the lesse I estimate the same as one born to suffer,  & made to contemne iniuries. He that in his youth flattered not himselfe with the exceeding commendations of some greatest schollets in the worlde: cannot at these yeares, either be discouraged with misreporte, or daunted with misfortune. A premeditate, & resolute minde lightly shaketh off the heauiest crosses of malice, and easely passeth ouer a thousande grieuances with a smile. Some haue learned of Reason, some of Philosophy, some of History, some of Diuinitie, some of Experience, some of all, to endure patiently, whatsoeuer befalleth, & euen to make the cruellest paine pleasant, as some make the swetest pleasure painefull. I had rather name Titius or Sempronius ; then my selfe: But the vrgent entreaty of friends, and your eager expectation haue suddainely obtained that, which no personall empeachment, or real enforcement could in many yeres extort. Howbeit I shall hardly content them, to satisfy you: that am neither to offend any, but in case of notoriety: nor to defend my selfe, but in case of necessity, or honesty. if anie haue charged mee, or do charge mee with insufficiency, I confesse: perfection is no common gifte: if with ignorance, I graunt: many seeme, fewe are learned: if with simplicity, I yeeld: wondrous wittes are rare birdes: if with ill-lucke, I deny not: good lucke is not euerie mans lotte: yet who euer hearde me complaine of ill-lucke, or once say, Fortune my Foe ? But in the plainnesse of my nature, and simplicitie of my Arte, I can easely defie the proudest, that dareth cal my credite in question: or accuse me of any dishonest, or scandelous parte, either in deede, or in word. Many thinges are made offensiue in the handling, that are tollerable inough in their owne nature: or fie on an odious circumstaunce, where the substance it selfe might be more gratious. Letters may bee priuately written, that would not bee publikely diuulged: I was then yong in yeares, fresh in courage, greene in experience, and as the manner is, somewhat ouerweeninge in conceit: and for varietie of study, and some deeper intelligence in the affayres of the worlde, otherwhiles reading inuectiues, and Satyres, artificially amplifyed in the most exaggerate and hyperbolicall kinde, I coulde hardlye refraine from discoueringe some little part of my reading: I had curiously laboured some exact, and exquisite poyntes of studie and practise, and greatly misliked the preposterous and vntoward courses of diuers good wits, ill directed; there wanted not some sharpe vndeserued discourtesies to exasperate my mind: shall I touch the vlcer? it is no such mysterye, but it may be reuealed: I was supposed not vnmeet for the Oratorship of the vniuersity, which in that springe of mine age, for my Exercise, and credite I earnestly affected: but mine owne modest petition, my friendes diligent labour, our high Chauncelors most-honourable and extraordinarye commendation, were all peltingly defeated, by a slye practise of the olde Fox: whose acts, and monumentes shal neuer dye: some like accidents of dislike, for breuity I ouerslip: young bloud is hot: youth hasty: ingenuity open: abuse impatiente: choler stomachous: temptations busie: the Inuectiue vaine, a sturring, and tickeling vaine: the Satyricall humour, a puffinge, and swellinge humor: Conceit penneth, leisure peruseth, and Curtesy commendeth many needlesse discourses: Idlenesse, the greatest Author  & variablest Reader in the world: some familiar friendes pricked me forward: and I, neither fearing daunger, nor suspecting ill measure, (poor credulitie sone beguiled) was not vnwilling to content them, to delight a few other and to auenge, or satisfie my selfe, after the manner of shrewes, that cannot otherwise ease their curst hearts, but by their owne tongues, & their neighbours eares. Signor Immerito (for that name will be remembred) was then, and is still my affectionate friend, one that could very wel abide Gascoignes Steele glasse, and that stoode equallie iudifferent to either part of the state Demostratiue: many communications, and writings may secretlie passe betweene such, euen for an exercise of speech, and stile that are not otherwise conuenient to be disclosed: it was the sinister hap of those infortunate Letters, to fall into the left handes of malicious enemies, or vndiscreete friends: who aduentured to imprint in earnest, that was scribled in iest, (for the moody fit was soone ouer:) and required their priuate pleasure with my publike displeasure: oh my inestimable, and infinite displeasure. When there was no remedie, but melancholy patience: and the sharpest parte of those vnlucky Letters had bene ouer read at the Councell Table: I was aduised by certaine honourable,and diuers worshipfull persons, to interpreate my intention in more expresse termes: and thereupon discoursed euerie particularitie, by way of Articles or Positions, in a large Apology of my duetiful, and entier affection to that flourishing Vniuersitie, my deere Mother: which Apology, with not so few as forty such Academicall Exercises, and sundry other politique Discourses, I haue hitherto suppressed, as vnworthie the view of the busie world, or the entertainement of precious Time: but peraduenture these extraordinarie prouocations may worke extraordinarilie in me; and though not in passion, yet in conceit sturre me vp, to publish many Traictes, and Discourses, that in certaine considerations I meant euer to conceale, and to Dedicate vnto none, but vnto obscure Darkenesse, or famous Vulcane. It were pittie, but wonderous wits (giue enemies their due) should become more woonderous by comparison, conference maketh excellent things appeare more admirablie: & I am so far fro being a Saturnist by nature, or a Stoick by discipline, that I can easily frame a certaine pleasurable delight vnto my selfe, by ministring some matter vnto them, that now are faine to make some thing of nothing: and wittily to plaie with their own shadowes. it goeth somewhat hard in my harsh Legend, whe the father of Musicke must be mocked, not Tubulcam, as he mistearmeth him, but Tuball, whom Genesis voutlaseth honourable mention: and the Hexameter verse flouted: where of neither Homer in Greeke, nor Virgill in Latine, (how valorous Autors?) nor Alexander in conquest nor Augustus in maiesty, (how puissaunt Princes?) were ashamed: but accompted it the onely gallant trompet of braue, and Heroicall Acts: and I wis, the English is nothing too good to imitat the Greeke, or Latine, or other eloquent Languages, that honour the Hexameter, as the soueraigne of verses, and the high Controwler of Rimes. If I neuer deserue anye better remembraunce, let mee rather be Epitaphed, The Inuentour of the English Hexameter: whome learned M. Stanihurst imitated in his Virgill; and excellent Sir Phillip Sidney disdained not to follow in his Arcadia, & elsewhere: then be chronicled, The greene maister of the Blacke Arte: or the founder of vgly oathes: or the father of misbegotten Infortunatus : or the Scriuener of Crosbiters: or as one of his owne sectaries termed him the Patriarch of shifters. Happy man I, if these two be my hainousest crimes, and deadliest sinnes, To bee the Inuentour of the English Hexameter, and to bee orderlie clapt in the Fleete for the foresaide Letters: where he that sawe me, sawe mee at Constantinople. Indeede Sir Iames Croft (whome I neuer touched with the least tittle of detractions) was cunningly incensed, and reincensed against mee: but at last pacified by the voluntarie mediation of my honourable fauourers, M. Secretary Wilson, and Sir Walter Mildmay: vnrequested by any line of my hand, or any woord of my mouth. Neither did I otherwise sollicite, or intreate Sir Iames, till I had assured notice of his better satisfaction: when I writte vnto him, as became mee, in respectiue, and duetifull sorte: not for feare of any daunger, but for loue of honourable fauour. Which Letters, albeit not so ceremoniouslie pleasing, as effectually contenting, the wise knight not onely receiued courteously, but accepted fauourablie, and commended honourablye: and for my selfe, earnestly affirmed, I was first wronged by other, and then mistaken by him: but now found another man, then I was supposed. As for my olde Controwler, Doctor Perne (for he indeed was the man that otherwhiles flattered me exceedingly, otherwhiles ouerthwarted me crosly, alwaies plaied fast, and loose with me) he was old enough, to aunsweare for himselfe, and should not bee defended by him. Onely he wished me to proceede louingly with the Vniuersity, howsoeuer I dealt with that Doctor. And that was all the Fleeting, that euer I felt: sauing that an other company of speciall good fellowes, (whereof he was none of the meanest, that brauely threatened to coniure-vpp one, which should massacre Martins witt, or should bee lambackd himself with ten yeares prouision) would needs forsooth verye courtly perswade the Earle of Oxforde, that some thing in those Letters, and namely the Mirrour of Tuscanismo, was palpably intended against him: whose noble Lordeship I protest, I neuer meante to dishonour with the least preiudicial word of my Tongue, or pen: but euer kept a mindefull reckoning of many bounden duties toward the same: sincein the prime of his gallatest youth, hee bestowed Angels, vpon mee in Christes Colledge in Cambridge, and otherwise voutsafed me many gratious fauours at the affectionate commendation of my Cosen, M. Thomas Smith, the sonne of Sir Thomas, shortly after Colonel of the Ardes in Ireland. But the noble Earle, not disposed to trouble his Iouiall mind with such Saturnine paltery, stil continued, like his magnificent selfe: and that Fleeting also proued, like the other a silly bullbeare, a sorry puffe of winde, a thing of nothing. But a strong imagination pierceth deepely: and the Paper Fleete will not bee so aunswered. Iesu, what would such notable fellowes write, or rather would they not write, if they could probably say, or fantastically surmize by me, as I can euidently proue by them? But I seeke not the condemnation of the deade, or the disgrace of the liuing: but the good amendement of the one, by the naughty example of the other. And for mine own farther iustification in the premistes or otherwise: I had rather my larger writings and other actions should plead for mee, then this, or any slighte Letter: wherein I am not to infourme pregnant conceits, that may imagine more by a little: or to addresse any peece of mine own history, though wiser men in case of vnworthy reproch, haue not made nice to vndertake their owne defence, and euen to labour their owne commendation. The plausible Examples of Tully, Cato, Marius, Scipio, diuers such vertuous Romanes, and sundry excellent Greekes, are famously knowen; but not greatly fit for euery mannes imitation. Were other of my disposition, small time should be lost in auenging, or debating verball iniuries, especially to my selfe: who can verie well suffer poore spite to shoote at mee, and to hitte himselfe: and sometime smile at the silly flie, that will needs martyr it selfe in my candle. But me thinkes, the wildest head, and desperatest mind should consider: they that speake il must not looke to heare well: the worlde is not giuen to pocket vp infamies: who cannot returne home a Quippe, or require one libell with an other? nothing more common in bookes, or more readye in mouthes, then the Inuectiue vaine, and the whole Arte of railing: some schollers haue choyce of nimble pennes,  & smooth tongues at comandement & there was a time, when paraduenture I coulde speake with them, that talked we me. Though the case be altered: and I now, none of the hastiest to striue for those bucklers: yet a general, a special, a glowing, a piercing indignitie may rekindle some little sparkes of courage, and affection will be affection, though not in proper reuenge, yet the common duetie, I am not to dispute the nature of Force, or the force of nature, who knoweth not, how violentlie force prouoketh force, or how mightilie nature worketh in compatible natures? But how far publike obiections, or famous imputations require publike aunswers; or how insufficient the formallest Iudiciall remedie in any one Court, may seeme, in case of a printed diffamation, that with the wings of Mallice in some, of Enuie in more, and of Leuity in most, flieth through the Realme, and ouer the Sea: bee it indifferentlie decided by euerie discreete iudgement, or reasonable consideration. Especially when the guiltie part is deceased: and the iniury not the lesse, but the more notorious. The best is, the persons abused, are not altogether vnknowen, they haue not so euell a neighbour, that euer reade, or hearde those opprobrious villanies, (it is too-mild a name, for my brother Richardes most abhominable Legend, who frameth himselfe to liue as chastely, as the leawde writer affected to liue beastly) but hath presentlie broken out into some such earnest, or more passionate speeches: o pestilent knauery, who euer heard such arrant forgeries, and ranke lies? A mad world, where such shameful stuffe is bought, and sould: and where such roisterly Varlets may be suffered to play vpon whome they lust, and how they lust. Is this Greene with the running Head, and the scribling Hand, that neuer linnes putting-forth new, newer,  & newest bookes of the maker? If his other bookes bee as holesome geere, as this, no maruaile, though the gay-man conceiue trimlie of himselfe, and statelye scorne all beside. Green , vile Greene , would thou wearest halfe so honest, as the worst of the foure, whom thou vpbraidest: or halfe so learned, as the vnlearnedst of the three. Thanke other for thy borrow ed,  & filched plumes of some little Italianated brauery: & what remaineth, but flat Impudencie, and grosse Detraction: the proper ornaments of thy sweete vtterance? I alleadge not mine owne inuentions, (who cannot forget the two Athenian Temples of Impudencie, and Calumnie, when I remember him:) I could nominate the Gentlemen, and substantiall Yeoman, Gentlemens fellowes, that vttered much more by his life, and can hardlie for beare him since his death: and who of acquaintance with him, or them, whome hee depraueth, could either partiallie excuse the one, or reasonablie accuse the other? Their liues effectually speake for themselues: and he that liued not, to see nine and twentie yeares, died not, till the Vniuersitie of Cambridge had bestowed vpo him a grace to bee a Doctor of his facultie, and till hee was reputed in Northfolke, where he practised phisicke, a proper toward man, and as skilfull a Phisition for his age, as euer came there: how well beloued of the chiefest Gentlemen, and Gentlewomen in that Shire, themselues testifie. That is gone to Heauen, cannot bee recouered on Earth: it is our comfort, that he liued in good credite, and died in good minde. I must euer remember some of his notable sayings (for in deede so they were): and can neuer forget that sweete voice of the dying Cignet: o frater, Christus est optimus Medicus,  & meus solus Medicus, Vale Galene, valete humanae Artes: nihil divinum in terris, prater animum aspirantem ad coelos . That best and his onelie Phisition knoweth, what spiritual phisicke I commended vnto him, when I beheld in his meager and ghastly countenance, that I cannot rehearse without some fit of compassion. Wee must in order follow him, that shoulde in nature haue gone before him, and I know not by what destinie, hee followed him first, that foled him last. How he departed, his ghostly mother Isam, can truliest, and will fauourabliess report: how he liued, London remembreth. Oh, what a liuelie picture of Vanity? but oh what a deadlie Image of miserie? And oh what a terrible Caueat for such & such? I am not to extenuate or preiudice his wit, which could not any way be great, though som way not the least of our vulgar writers & mani-waies very vngracious: but who euer estemed him either wise, or learned, or honest or anyway credible? how many Gentlemen, and other say of him? Let the paltry fellow go: Lord, what a lewde Companion was hee? what an egregious makeshift, Where should Conny-catchers haue gotten such a Secretarie: How shal cosenage do for a new Register: or Phantasticallitye for a new Autor, They wronge him much with their Epitaphes, and other solemne deuises, that entitle him not at the least, The second Toy of London; the Stale of Poules, the Ape of Euphues, the Vice of the Stage, the mocker of the simple world: the flowter of his friendes, the Foe of himselfe: and so foorth. What durst not hee vtter with his tongue: or diuulge with his Penne: or countenance with his face? Or whome cared hee for, but a carelesse crewe of his own associates? Peruse his famous bookes: and in steede of, Omne tulet punctum, qui miscuit vtile dulci (that forsooth was his professed Poesie) Loe a wilde head, ful of mad braine and a thousande crochets: a Scholler, a Discourser, a Courtier, a ruffian, a Gamester, a Louer, a Souldier, a Trauailer, Merchaunt, a Broker, an Artificer, a Botcher, a Petti-fogger, a Player, a Coosener, a Rayler, a beggar, an Omnigatherum, a Gay nothing: a Stoarehouse of bald and baggage stuffe, vnwoorth the aunswering, or reading: a Triuiall, and triobular Autor for knaues,  & fooles: an Image of Idlenes: an Epitome of fantasticalitie: a Mirrour of Vanitie: Vanitas Vanitatum, & omnia vanitas . Alasse, that anie shoulde say, as I haue heard diuers affirme: His witte was nothing, but a minte of knauerie: himselfe a deuiser of iugling feates: a forger of couetous practises: an Inuentour of monstruous oathes: a derider of all religions: a contemner of God, and man: a desperate Lucianist: an abhominable Aretinist: an Arch- Athiest: and he arch-deserued to be well hanged seauen yeares agoe. Twenty, and twentie such familiar speeches I ouer passe: and bury the whole Legendary of his Life, & Death, in the Sepulchre of eternall Silence. I will not condemne, or censure his workes, which I neuer did so much as superficially ouer-runne, but as some fewe of the occursiuly presented themselues in Stationers shops, and some other houses of my acquaintaunce. But I pray God, they haue not done more harme by corruption of manners, then good by quickening of witte: and I would, some Buyers had either more Reason to discerne, or lesse Appetite to desire such Nouels. The world is full inough of fooleries: though the humor be not feasted with such luxurious, and riotous Pamphlets. Howe vnlike Tullies sweete Offices: or I Socrates pithy instuctios: or Plutarches holesome Morrals: or the dilicate Dialogues of Xenophon , and Plato : or the sage Tragedies of Sophocles , and Euripides or the fine Comedies of the dainetiest Atticke wittes: or other excellent monumentes of antiquity, neuer sufficientlie perused? yet the one as stale, as oldest fashions: and what more freshly current for a while, then the other? Euen Gaicciardines siluer Historie, and Ariostos golden Cantoes, grow out of request  & the Countesse of Pebrookes Arcadia is not greene inough for queasie stomackes, but they must haue Greenes Arcadia: and I beleeue, most eagerlie longed for Greeues Faerie Queene. O straunge fancies;  o monstrous now fanglednesse. The wittier sort tasteth, & flieth: as the Dog from Nilus: other wantons find Experience the mistris of fooles: and need no other pennance but their owne repentaunce. The verie Time confuteth Vanitie: and the verie place requireth sobrietie. No publike security without priuate moderation and the more bondes of gouernment, the more indefeasible assurance. Due Circumspection may do much good: and an aboundant Cautele can do little hurt. Youth is youth: & age corruptible: better an hundred Ouides were banished, then the state of Augustus endangered, or a soueraigne Empire infected. Especially in a tumultuous age, and in a world of warre: wherin not Bacchus, but Mars: not Venus, but Mercury, not Ryot, but Valour, not Phansy, but Pollicy must strike the stroke. Gallant Gentlemen, be-thinke your selues of the olde Romane Discipline, and the newe Spanish industry: and I am not to trouble you with any other accusation of them, that condemne them selues, and neede no other shame, or punishment, but their own woorkes. Onely I request some busy pennes to stay their wisedomes: and either to publish a iustifyable trueth, or to conceale their bad disposition. Woe to that study, that mispendeth pretious Time, and consumeth it self, in needlesse, and bootlesse quarrels. Comparisons, they say, are odious: but Inuectiues more odious: & what so abhominable, as forged & suborned calumnies? One, or two miserable examples may stand for an hundred: I will not aggrauate or discourse particulars. A pitiful case, that such lusty beginninges should haue such sorry ends: and who can tell, what dowty yoonker may next gnash with his teeth? Terrible Creatures, and the curst Cowe, haue sometime short hornes. The wildest Colte is soone tamed: and be like neither Death, nor Shame, nor Misery are affraid of them, that vaunt themselues, Like vnto Death, and will Sommer, in sparing none. God helpe, and Charity pittie the, that haue neither hability to help, nor witt to pitie themselues: but will needs try a conclusion betweene their heads, and the next wall. I haue heard of Gyants in conceit, and Pigmeis in performance: yong Phaetons, younge Icary, young Choroebi, and I shall say young Babingtons, and how many millions of greene youthes, haue in ouermounting, most ruefully dismounted, and left behinde them full-lamentable Histories? for the very mention of some direfull Tragedies, were horrible, and what so wretched, as headlong enterprises: or so hideous, as the desperate attempt of Impossibilities? Philostratus in his Icones, pleasurably reporteth, according to to the tradition of Greeke Poets, how on a time, A resolute bande of dowty Pigmies, triumphantly marched to inuade Hercules asleepe. Woe to such braue aduentures.  Æsops Toade, A proud aspiring Creature, shamefullie ouermatched her swelling, and bursten selfe. Great, and small things may in some proportion be compared together: and beholde as miserable a spectacle, in their kinde. Flourishing M. Greene is most-wofully faded, and whilest I am bemoaning his ouer-pittious decay;  & discoursing the vsuall successe of such ranke wittes. Loe all on the suddaine, his sworne brother, M. Pierce Penni-lesse , (still more paltery, but what remedy? we are already ouer shoes and must now goe through) Loe his inwardest companion, that tasted of the fatall herringe, cruelly pinched with want, vexed with discredite, tormented with other mens felicitie, and ouerwhelmed with his owne misery; in a raving, and franticke moode, most desperately exhibiteth his supplication to the Diuell. A strange title, an od wit, and a mad hooreson, I warrant him: doubtles it wil proue some dainty deuise, quiently contriued by way of humble Supplication To the high, and mighty Prince of Darkenesse: not Dunsically botched-vp, but right- formally c oueied, according to the stile, and tenour of Tarletons president, his famous play of the seauen Deadly sinnes: which most-dealy, but most liuely playe, I might haue seene in London: and was verie gently inuited thereunto at Oxford, by Tarleton himselfe, of whome I merrily demaunding, which of the seauen, was his owne deadlie sinne, he bluntly aunswered after this manner; By God, the sinne of other Gentlemen, Lechery. Oh but that, M. Tarleton, is not your part vpon the stage, you are too-blame, that dissemble with the world  & haue one part for your frends pleasure, an other for your owne. I am somewhat of Doctor Pernes religion, quoth he: and abruptlie tooke his leaue. Surely it must needes bee current in matter, and autentical in forme, that had first such a learned president: and is now pleasantlie interlaced with diuers new sounde phrases of the Tauerne: and patheticallie intermixt with sundry dolefull pageantes of his own ruinous, & beggerlie experience. For the poore Tennement of his Purse, (quoth himselfe, gramercy good Tarlelon ) hath bene the Diuels Dauncing schoole, anie time this halfe yeare, and I pray God, (quoth another) the poore Tennement of his Heart, hath not also beene the Diuels Fencing Schoole, twise as long. Particulars, and Circumstances are tedious, especially in sorrowfull, and forlorne causes, the summe of summes is. He tost his imagination a thousand waies, and I beleeue, searched euery corner of his Grammer-schoole witte, (for his margine is as deepelie learned, as Fausts precor gelida ) to see if he coulde finde anie meanes to relieue his estate, but all his thoughtes, and marginal notes, consorted to his conclusion. that the worlde was vncharitable, and he ordained to be miserable. It were cruelty, to ad affliction to afflictio: what flintly Heart would not sigh or rather melt, to heare the bewailefull moane of that sobbing, and groning Muse, the daughter of most-pregnant, but most-wretched Niobe ? Why ist damnation, to despaire, and die, When Life is my true happines disease? And a little after: Diuines, and dying men may talke of Hell: But in my Heart, her seuerall tormentes dwell. And so foorth most-hideouslie. For the Text is much more dolefull, then the Glosse: and who woulde not be moued with more pittifull compunction, to heare the lamentable Farewell. England adieu, the soile that brought me foorth, Adieu unkinde, where Skill is nothing worth: Then to read that profound Quotation, Hei mihi, quam paucos h aec mea dicta mouent? Which was thought Patheticall out of crie. Forgiue him God, although he curse his Birth, Since Miserie hath dawnted all his Mirth. Now good sweete Muse, I beseech thee by thy delicate witte, and by all the queintest Inuentions of thy deuiseful braine, cast not thy drearie selfe headlong into the horrible Gulph of Desperation: but being a Creature of so singular, and wonderfull hope, as thy inspired courage diuinelie suggesteth, and still reare-vp mountaines of highest Hope: and either gallantlie aduance thy vertuous self, maugre Fortune: (what impossible to aspiring industry?) or mightilie enchant some magnificent Mecoenas, (for thou canst doe it) to honour himselfe in honouring thee; and to blisse the eies of the gazing worlde, with beholding those Miracles, which some round liberality, and thy super-thankfull minde, would hugelie enable thee to worke. Let it neuer be said, that the Minion of the Muses, should forsake himself, or abandon them, whose very shadowes he adoreth. A braue Hart, in extreamest distresse, neuer languisheth: no such affrighting Death, or gnashing Hell, as the deuouring Abysse of dispaire. Yet better a man without money, then money without a man: Pennilesse is not his purse but his minde: not his reuenue, but his resolution: A m a is a man though he haue but a hose vpon his head: for euerie curse, there is a blessing, for euerie malady, a remedie, for euerie winter, a sommer: for euerie night a day, a dog hath a day. Nocte pluit tota: redeunt spectacula man e. Right magnanimitie neuer droupeth, sweet Musike requickeneth the heauiest spirites of dumpish Melancholy, fine Poetry abhorreth the loathsome, and vgly shape of forlorne pensiuenes: what gentle minde detesteth not cursed, and damnable desperation? All abiect dolefulnes, is woefully base, and baselie woefull. The die, the ball, the sponge, the siue, the wheele of Fortune, Fortune hirselfe, a trifle, a iest, a toy in Philosophy, & diuine resolution. Be a Musitian, & Poet vnto thy self, that art both, and a Ringleader of both, vnto other, be a Man, be a Gentleman, be a Philosopher, be a Diuine, be thy resolute selfe; not the Slaue of Fortune, that for euery fleabiting crieth out-alas & for a few hungry meales, like a Greeke Parasite, misuseth the Tragedy of Hecuba: but the friend of Vertue, that is richest in pouerty, freest in bondage, brauest in ieopardie, cheerefullest in calamitie, be rather wise, and vnfortunate, with the siluer Swanne, then fortunate & vnwise, with the golden Asse: remember thine owne marginal Embleme, Fortuna fauet fatuis . Oh, solace thy miraculous selfe, and cheere the Muses in cheering thy daintie soule, sweetelie drunken with their delitious Helicon, and the restoratiue Nectar of the Gods. What can I say more? That cordial liquor, and that heauenly restoratiue, bee thy soueraigne comfort: and scorne the basenes of euerie crased, or fainting thought, that may argue a degenerate minde. And so much briefly touching thy deere selfe: whome I hope neuer to finde so pathetically distressed, or so Tragically disguised againe. Now a word, or two concerning him, who in charitie kisseth thy hand, and in pitie wisheth thee better lucke. May it please gentle Pierce, in the diuine fury of his rauished spirite, to be graciouslie good vnto his poore friendes, who would be somewhat loath, to be silly sheepe for the wolfe, or other sheepe biter: I dare vndertake, the abused Autor of the Astrological discourse, (euerie page thereof, vnder correction of inspired and supernaturall conceits, discouereth more Arte, and Iudgement, the the whole Supplicatio of the Parturient Mountaine) notwithstanding the notorious Diabolicall discourse of the saide Pierce , a man better acquainted with the Diuels of Hell, then with the Starres of Heauen: shall vnfainedly pray for him: and onely pray him to report the knowen truth, of his approoued learning,  & liuing, wihout fauor. Otherwise, it were not greatlie amisse, a little to consider, that he, which in the ruffe of his freshest iolity, was faine to cry, M. Churchyard , a mercy in printe, may be orderlie driuen to crie more peccauies, then one. I would thinke the Counter, M Churchyard , his bostisse Penia , and such other sensible Lessons, might sufficientlie haue taught him, that Pennilesse is not Lawlesse: and that a Poets, or Painters Licence, is a poore security, to priuiledge debt, or diffamacion. I woulde wish the burned child not to forget the hot Element: and would aduise ouer-weening youthes, to remember themselues, and the good auncient oracle of sage Apollo . There is a certaine thing, called Modestie, if they could light vpon it: and by my younge Masters leaue, some pritty smacke of discretion would relish well. The Athenians were noted for lauish amplifieng; the Cretensians for craftie lying, the Thessalians for subtle cogging: the Carthaginians for deceitfull perfidie: Hanniball, Fabius, Agathocles, Iphicrates, Vlisses , and a thousand such, for counterfeit pollicie, but all their forgeries were seasoned with the salt of probabilitie,  & onelie vsed at occasions of aduauntage: and although the Grecians generallie were ouer- lightheaded, and vaine-spoken, yet their leuitie sauored of elegant wittinesse, and the flying birde carried meate in the mouth. Euen Lucians true Tales are spiced with conceite: and neither his, nor Apuleius Asse, is altogether an Asse. It is a piece of cunning in the most fabulous Legends, to interlace some credible narrations, and verie proble occurrences, to countenance and authorize the excessiue licentiousnesse of the rest. Vnreasonable fictions palpably bewray their odious grosnesse: and hee that will be a famous deuiser in folio, must be content with the rewarde of a notable Lier, not to be credited, when he auoweth a trueth. The pleasant man talketh of a Batchelers hoode, turned ouer his eares, for abusing of Aristotle: and imagineth goodlie matters of casting the Heauens water: of anatomizing the skies intrailes: of the vniuersal adulterie of Planets of the bawd of those celestial bodies: how Saturne, & Iupiter proued honester men, then al the world took the for:o braue Tarlton thou wert hee, when all is done, had not Aretine bene Aretine, when he was, vndoubtedlie thou hadst beene Aretine, gramercy capricious, and transcendent witte, the onelie high Pole Artique and deepe Minerall of an incoparable stile. Yet Tarltons Iests not sufficient: but Roscius must haue his Stale, to make him more admirable al were nothing, vnlesse Eldertons ale-crammed nose, had beene consumed to nothing, in beare-baiting him, with whole bundels of ballats: that forsooth is not so good a gentleman, (for euery heire of a Nash is a good gentleman at the least as the heard of Thomas Nash, the maister butler of Pembrooke Hal whose graue countenance, like Cato able to make him runne out of his wittes for feare, if he looke sternely vpon him, and I wot not what, and what trumpetie else, as childish, & garish stuffe, as euer came in print, yet what packe of vanity is not in print, I will not cry, Absurde, Absurde: as hee madly exclaimeth, Monstrous, Monstrous: But who in that Vniuersity can deny, but M. Haruey read the publike Philosophie Lecture with special good liking, and many will say with singular commedation, when this mightie lashing Gentleman (now well read in the late exploites of Vntrusse, and for Tarletons amplifications A perse A) was not so much as idonens auditor etuilis scienti ae . What hee is improued since, excepting his good olde Flores Poetarum , and Tarletons surmounting Rhetorique, with a little Euphuisme, and Greenesse inough, which were all prettily stale, before he put hand to penne. I report me to the fauourablest opinion of those that know his Prefaces, Rimes, and the very Timpanye of his Tarltonizing wit, his Supplication to the Diuell, oh that is the Diuell  & al. I am so farre from doting vppon mine owne, or my Brothers Writinges, in any matter of moment, that I vse to censure them with a more curious and rigorous iudgement, then I examine any thing else, wherein my eare is so loath to flatter me, & my conceit so affraid to cosen me, that my mind euer remaineth vnsatisfied, & nothing hitherto could fulfill my desire, insatiably couetous to do better. But as those perfunctorie Discourses are, (which were more hastilie, then speedilie published without my priuity) let the best of them goe for wast paper, & serue the basest shops, if the worst of them importe not more publike, or priuate vse, then his gayest-flower, that may thanke Greene, & Tarlton for his Garland. Were my brother, not my brother, but some familiar acquaintance, I might in Trueth, & should in Reason, make other comparisons, with applause inough: (for what indifferencie seeth not the difference? or what so silly, as he could make Pierce, with voice, or pen? notwithstanding those Miracles of the white rauen in the cloudes): But the Vniuersitie, the Cittie, the whole Realme, all good Learning, & ciuil Gouernement, be their Iudge, & my mouth especially in this Martinish and Counter-martinish age: wherein the Spirit of Contradiction reigneth, and euerie one superaboundeth in his owne humor, euen to the annihilating of any other, without time, or reason. Some would bee Mutes, if they might bee suffered to be, as were meetest for them, and onelie to dwell in the excellente monuments of diuine wittes, whose sweet company they cannot enjoy inough, but what is to be done, when vowels are coursed, & Mutes haunted, and that heauenlie conference hellishlie disturbed, God, or good Order, circumcise the Tongues, and Pennes, that slaunder without cause, and raile without effect, euen in the superlatiue degree of cauing. Areone, and the Diuels Oratour, might very well bee spared in Christian, or Piliticke Comonwealthes: which cannot want contagion inough, though they bee not poysened with the venemous potions of Inckhorne witches. Fine plesant witt was euer commendable: and iudiciall accusation lawfull: but fie on grosse scurility, and impudent calumny: that wil rather goe to Hell in iest, then to heauen in earnest, and seeke not to reforme any vice, to backebite, and depraue euery person, that feedeth not their humorous fancy, a vile mind: and what a pestelenter villany? but some odd wittes forsooth, will needes bee accompted terrible BullBeggars, and the onely Killcowes of their age: for how should they otherwise keepe the simple world in awe: or scare multitudes of plaine folke, like idiot crowes, and innocent dooues? All the Inuectiue, and Satyricall Spirites, are their Familiars: scoffing, and girding is their daily bread: other professe other faculties: they professe the Arte of railing: Noble, Reuerend, or whatsoeuer, al pesants, and clownes: gowty Diuels, aud buckram Giants: Midasses, and golden Asses: Cormorants, and Drones, Dunces, and hypocriticall hoat spurres Earth-wormes, and Pinchefart Penny-fathers: that feede not their hungry purses, and eager stomackes: they haue termes, quoth a maruellous doer, steeped in Aqua Fortis , and Gunnepouder, that shal rattle through the skies, and make Earthquakes in such pesauntes eares, as shall dare to sende them awaie with a flea in their eare: (howe might a man purchase the sight of those, puissant, and hideous termes?) they can lash poore slaues, and spurgall Asses mightily, they can tell parlous Tales of Beares and Foxes, as shrewdlye as mother Hubbard, for her life: they will dominiere in Tauernes, and Stationers shops, to die for't: they will be as egregiouslly famous, as euer was Herastratus , or Pausanias , or Kett , or Scoggin: Agrippa , and Rabelays but Ciphers to them they haue it onely in them. Would Christ, they had more discretion in them, and lesse rancour against other, that neuer wished them the least euill, but still beseech G O D to encrease the best, and to pardon the worst in them. the Quippe knoweth his rewarde, and the Supplication to the Diuell, expressly dedicated to the Prince of Darkenesse, I comitte to the censure of Wisedome, and Iustice, with fauour: onelye requesting that mightie Bombarder of termes, to spare quiet men that meane him no harme, and to keepe the huge maine; shot of his ratling Babies for Buckrame Giants. Alasse;-what should I touch their parents, or twit the by their other friendes: Let it be one of their iolities to offer,  & one of our simplicities to suffer that iniury: which neither impaireth the reputation of the Father: nor abaseth the credite of the Sonnes: nor argueth any thing, but the impudente despightfulnesse of the Libeller. Fewe Sonnes haue felinger cause to loue, or reuerence, or defend their Fathers, then my selfe: but his dealing is such, where he tradeth: and his liuing such where he conuerseth, that he may easely shame himselfe, which goeth-about to shame him, or vs in him. I will not trouble you with the rehearsall of his inheritance, which I could haue wished more then it was, yet was it more, by the fauour of that terrible Thundersmith of termes, the the inheritances of both their fathers together. Put case, I haue inquired, what speciall cause the Pennilesse Gentleman hath, to bragge of his birth: which giueth the woefull poueretto good leaue, euen with his Stentors voice, & in his ratling terms to reuiue the pittifull historie of Don Lazarello de Thoemes: to contend with colde, to conuerse with scarcitie: to be laid-open to pouertie: to accuse Fortune: to raile on his patrons, to bite his penne, to rend his papers, to rage in all points, like a mad man, to torment himselfe in that agony a long time, to be miserable, to be vacuus viator : to haue opus and vsus knocking at his doore twenty times a weeke, when he is not within: to seek his dinner in poules with Duke humfrey: to licke dishes, to be a beggar. To ban the Aire, wherein he breathes A wretch: to be the Diuels distressed Orator, to proclaime his owne desolate and abiect estat, in these  & such other most-base, and shamefull complaints, scarcely beseeming the rascallest siser in an Vniuersity, or the beggarliest mendicant frier in a country. Forgive him God, although he curse his birth. I, but who so excessiuely thankefull to his other friends? One kind freend, more worth then two vnfreendlie kinsemen. Affection will relieue, where nature faileth: he must needes abound in deuoted and bountifull freendes, that sheweth himselfe so meritoriously freendlie, and so vnspeakeably gratefull. O friendes, no friendes, that then ungentlie frowne, When changing fortune casts vs headlong downe I had nigh-hand ouer-skipped the learned allegation in the margine, solemnely auouched with a very-patheticall Pol, Palme occidistis Amici . All which, and most of the Premisses, I had altogether omitted, but that the two vnmeete Companions, a Lordes heart, and a beggars purse must somewhat remember themselues, or be a little, as it were pulled by the ragged sleeue. Young schollers can tel how Vlysses handeled irus/and olde Truants haue-not altogether forgotten, howe sawsie the Harpios were, till they were interteined accordingly. But what though the decayed Gentleman, so commendeth his owne woorshipfull birth, and trusty freendes? Many noble Houses haue seene their own ruines: and sometime the brothers of the prodigall Sonne, will not stick to curse, wher they should reuerently blesse. The Table-fellow of Duke Humfrey,  & Tantalus, might learne of him to curse Iupiter, and to ban not onely the four Elementes, but also the seauen Planets, and euen the twelue houses of Heauen. And what though the other sorry Magnifico, as very a Bisonian, as he for hys life, would sweare in a brauery, his Father was of foure & twenty religions: and himselfe a Diuine from his mothers womb: an Image of both Churches, & both Synagogues too: a naturall Perne artificially emproued: the thrise-and thrise-learned sonne, of his foure & twenty times- learned father? So Greene would flourish. Euery man is to answere for hys owne defaultes: my trespasse is not my fathers, nor my fathers mine: a Gibeline may haue a Guelph to his sonne, as Barthol saith:  & hath neuer a Saint had a Reprobate to his father? are all worthy minds, the issues of noble houses: or all base mindes, the ofsprings of rascall stockes? Were it not a felicity, to be the woorst of a thousande, that being descended of meanest parentage, haue prooued, as Histories testify, & the world daily confirmeth? Or might not Greene, and his Complices, haue beene much better, then they were, or are, although their Parentes had beene much worse, then they were, or are? What saith the afflicted Suppliant himselfe? Ah woorthlesse wit, to traine me to this woe: Ill thriue the Folly, that bewitch'd me so. Haue we not a nomber of excellente industrious men and valorous knights, not greatly beholding vnto Fortune for their progeny? Malo pater tibi sit Thersites , who knoweth not that onely Arte of Heraldry? Qu amte Thersitae similem producat Achilles . The Argument of Nobility, is a gallant, and plausible argument: but what Common-place so braue, and honourable, as the Common-place of vertue? Can any thinge bee obscure, where desert is famous: or any thing famous, where desert is obscure? Gramercy Sweete margine, for that notable Poesy: Meritis expendite causam : in earnest, a singular Rule of infallible iudgemente: and I imagine, himselfe deserueth somethinge, that specially alleadgeth Deserte. It is longe, since I declaimed vpon any Theame: but who would not pleade Vertues cause, in whatsoeuer subiecte? or what honest Eloquence is not furnished with Catilinaries,  & Phillippiques against Vice? Not the Father, & the Sonne, but Vertue, and Vice, the efficientes of Honour, and Dishonour. He onely base, he onely simple, he onely contemptible, that hath Vice to his father, & Ignoraunce to his mother: the onely Parentes of rascality. And may I not truly affirme, that not only Osorius, or Patritius gallantly proue, but all wise Autors seriously approue, and euen Vertue, & Skill themselues, with their owne soueraine mouth, honorably professe? No right sonne, & heire apparant of theirs, either vnnoble in himselfe, or obscure in the world: or despised in the highest, or vnregarded of the lowest or dishonorable in his Life, or inglorious after his Death. I speake not for any person, but for the matter: and cannot eyther condignely praise the valorous seede of the one: or sufficiently blisse the fruitfull wombe of the other. And what so vngentle in Nature, or so vnnoble in Fortune, as their Contraries: how barbarously opposed against that diuine race, and heauenly generation: that cannot sturre, vnaccompanied with Enuy, and a worlde of moates? Yet neither the vnhappiest creature vtterly deuoide of all graces: (I praise somethinge in Elderton, and Greene:) nor the excellentest personage thoroughly accomplished with all perfections: (ah, that Sir Humfrey Gilbert , and Sir Phillip Sidney , hadd bene as cautelous, as aduenturous:) nor they, that obiect, nor we, that answeare, nor any, but a few singular men, the Miracles of the world; either for wit wondrous, or for Art exquisite, or for action admirable, or for integrity notable. I-wis, we little neede, to be charged with our fathers offences: it is inough for one, yea for the best one, to carry the burthen of his owne transgressions, and errours. Errours are infinite: and follies how vniuersally rife, euen of the wisest sorte? Oh that vertues were as like the starres of heauen, or the birds of the Aire, as vices are like the sandes of the Sea, and the Beastes of the Earth: hee that seeith leaste, seeith much amisse: the fine Discouerer, and curious Intelligencer, goe inuisible,  & stratagematically discry many hidden priuities of publique, and priuate misgouernment: there is an eie, that pierceth into the secretest sinnes, and most-in-scrutable thoughtes of profoundest Hypocrisy: in whose pure sight nothing is iustifiable, but by pardon. Diuinity flyeth highe: and wadeth deepe: But euen in Humanity, & in the view of the world, who liueth inculpable? or who is not obnoxious to some criminall, or ciuill actions? or, Wher shud I find, that I seeke, A person cleere as a Christal? Where man God to man? where one not Diu'l to an other? Where that Zeal diuine, whose heauenly Sunshin acheerith The dreryest drouping: and fellist rancor alayeth? Where thossame mealting bowels of tender agreement, That mildly conquer most rowgh, and hideous outrage? Where Moses meeknes? wher Dauids sweetnes Olimpique? Where thatsame gentle kindnes, that bounty renowned, That gratious fauour, that whilom bewtifi'd Honour: That Looue aduanced: that abandoned odious Hatred: That Sirenized Furies: that rocks Adamantine Mollifid: arreared Pillars of Glory triumphant? And so foorth: for the verse is not vnknowen:  & runneth in one of these vnsatyricall Satyres, which M. Spencer long since embraced with an ouerloouing Sonnet: A token of his Affection, not a Testimony of hys Iudgement. What should I labour a needlesse point? or what should I weary you with tediousnesse, that may much-better bestow your vacant houres. Enough, to any is inough: to some, ouer-much. God knoweth, and who knoweth not, how sensually corrupt some good fellowes were, and are, that so sharpely, and bitterly noted, and do note, so many imaginatiue corruptions in other. Would God, they had bene as quietly disposed, as their parentes: or as aduisedly stayed, as some of their frendes, that wished them a milder course:  & some of our pens might haue bene employed to better vse, then this idle businesse, or rather busy idlenesse. Wherof I desire no other fruite, but some little contentation of friendes, and some reasonable mittigation of ill-willers: vnto whose good I am diligently to addresse, & euen affectionately to dedicate any my endeuour. If in some tearmes I haue vsed a little plaine dealing, albeit not without respecte, (but euery one seeith not into an others considerations: & diuers Circumstances alter the case) I craue pardon for the least ouersight: and will be as ready to commend any little good, euen in an aduersary: as I was vnwillinge. but enforced to touch soome palpable badd: which I would wish amended, where it may be redressed: and quite forgotten, where it ought to be buried. My meaning was not, to displeasure, or discredite any: but onely to satisfie the pleasure, and mainetaine the credite of those, vnto whome I owe many dueties, aswell in speciall consideration, as in naturall affection. Had I not bene more depely stinged in them, then in my selfe: who haue made Comedies of such Tragedies; and with pleasure giuen such hoatspurres leaue, to run themselues out of breath: what folio of folly might not for me haue passed vntouched? or who for me, might not haue flourished, or lashed in Poules Church yarde, Cum gratia & Priuilegio? It were good, that they, which haue a dexterity in writing trimly vppon euery matter, white, or blacke: should also haue a felicity in speaking well vppon euery person, that deserueth not ill: especially such as can say something, and thinke more. The terriblest tearmes may be repayed-home with aduauntage: I haue knowen the raylingest Sophister in an Vniuersity, sett non plus : and haue seene the mad braynest Roister-doister in a countrey, dashte out of countenaunce. There is Logicke inough, to aunsweare Carters Logicke: and playe inough, to tame Horse-play. Wronged men are seldome tounge-tied: the patientest Creature wanteth not bloud in his hart, or incke in his penne: and although his bloud be not wildfire, yet it is bloud; that will not be cooled with a Carde, or daunted with bugs-wordes: and although his incke, be not pitch, or poison, yet it is incke; that will neither blushe for shame, nor waxe pale for feare; but will holde his owne, when perhaps gayer coullours shal loose their coullor; and Aqua fortis valiantly eate his owne harte. Good sweete Masters quiet your selues: or thincke not much, to beare a little for company, that are so forward to load other without mercy. No man loather then my selfe, to contend with desperate Malecontentes: or to ouerthwart obstinate Humoristes: or to encounter Incke- horne Aduentures: nor to quarrell with any sorte of wrangling Companions: (skoldinge is the language of shrewes: and raylinge the stile of Rakehells:) or so much as to call busy heads, by their vsuall, and proper names: (the thinges are paltry: and the very names sauour of rascallity:) but there is a time, when such douty warriours must be appeased;  & such wise men answeared according to their wisedome. Howbeit, in fauour of a priuate, and publike quietnesse, I will thanke the honest fellowes the more, the lesse occasion they geue me, to interrupt better exercises: to trouble the world with triflinge discourses vppon peltinge matters: to disease themselues: to pleasure none, but the printer, & idle creatures, the onely busy readers of such Nouellets. I would gladly be specially beholdinge vnto them for this courtesy: and dare vndertake it shall redounde more to their credite, to approue their desire of reconciliation, by silence: then to continue the opinion of their rooted despight, by sturring more coales. I hope this winde hath not shaken any suche corne, but fellow-schollers, (as Doctor Caius would say) and now forsooth fellow-writers, may bee made friendes, with a cup of white wine, and some little familliar conference, in calme and ciuile termes. I offer them my hande: and request their: which I will accept thanckfully: & kisse louinglye: and euer commende the good Nature, that would; and the better Gouernemente, that coulde master Affection with Reason, and sweeten gall with Humanity. For it is not my energeticall persuasion, but their owne patheticall motion, that must doe it: as the enchanting Muse of Orpheus redeemed the ghastly ghost of his owne Euridice out of Hell. Such an Experimente of profounde, and diuine Arte, as I woulde compassionately recommend to euery amiable minde, disguised with hellishe passion: the foulest deformity of any fayre wit. Otherwise, if it stande more with their credite, to be reputed willfull, then wise: or if a peruerse, and froward resolution, be the better pollicy: they are free-men: and haue incke at will, and paper at commaundement: and a number of greedy Eares, that egerly longe, and as it were daunce attendaunce, to heare those dreadfull inuincible termes, steeped in Aqua fortis ,  & Gunpowder. The intoxicate sprite of the grisly Euridice (I speake to a Poet: and cannot more mildly terme that infernall Fury) may eftsoones returne to her accursed lodginge, and in steede of heauenly Orpheus, embrace the hellish Oratour of the Blacke Prince: whome I will not any way make worse, but wold wish infinitely better, then he hath made himselfe, For I thancke God, I am neither so profanely vncharitable, as to send him to the Sancebell, to trusse- vp his life with a trice: nor so abiectly timorous, as for extreme fearefulnes to wish, with a professed deuotion: So be it: Pray Penne, Incke, and Paper on their knees, that they may not bee troubled with him any more. Good Lorde, what fantasticall panges are these? who euer endighted in such a stile, but one diuine Aretine in Italy,  & two heauenly Tarletons in England: the sole platformers of odd Elocution, and onely singularities of the plaine worlde? Two of them, that so wantonly played with the highest and deepest subiectes of spirituall contemplation: Heauen, and Hell, Paradise, and Purgatory: know their locall repose: and seriously admonish the third, to be aduised, how he lauish in such dalliance. No variety, or infinity so infinite, as Inuention: which hath a huge worlde, and a maine Ocean of scope, to disport, and raunge it selfe, though it arreare not vayne Hyperboles of the reuerende mysteries of God. Good sweete Oratour, be a deuine Poet indeede: and vse heauenly Eloquence indeede: and employ thy golden talent with amounting vsance indeede: and with heroicall Cantoes honour right Vertue,  & braue valour indeede: as noble Sir Philip Sidney, and gentle Maister Spencer haue done, with immortall Fame: and I will bestow more complements of rare amplifications vpon thee, then euer any bestowed vppon them: or this Tounge euer affoorded: or any Aretinish mountaine of huge exaggerations can bring-foorth. Right artificiality, (whereat I once aimed to the vttermost power of my slender capacity,) is not mad-brained, or ridiculous, or absurd, or blasphemous, or monstrous: but deepe-conceited, but pleasurable, but delicate, but exquisite, but gratious, but admirable: not according to the fantasticall mould of Aretine , or Rabelays , but according to the fine modell of Orpheus, Homer, Pindarus ,  & the excellentest wittes of Greece, and of the Lande, that flowed with milke, and hony. For what Festiuall Hymnes, so diuinely dainty, as the sweete Psalmes of King Dauid, royally translated by Buchanan ? or what sage Gnomes, so profoundly pithy, as the wise Prouerbes of King Salomon; notably also translated: but how few Buchanans? Such liuely springes of streaming Eloquence:  & such right-Olympicall hilles of amountinge witte: I cordially recommend to the deere Louers of the Muses: and namely to the professed Sonnes of the-same; Edmond Spencer, Richard Stanihurst, Abraham France, Thomas Watson, Samuell Daniell, Thomas Nash , and the rest: whome I affectionately thancke for their studious endeuours, commendably employed in enriching,  & polishing their natiue Tongue, neuer so furnished, or embellished, as of late. For I dare not name the Honorabler Sonnes, & Nobler Daughters of the sweetest, & diuinest Muses, that euer sang in English or other language: for feare of suspition of that, which I abhorre: and their owne most delectable, and delicious Exercises, (the fine handy-worke of excellent Nature, and excellenter Arte combined) speake incomparably more, then I am able briefly to insinuate. Gentle mindes, and flourishing wittes, were infinitely to blame, if they should not also for curious imitation, propose vnto themselues such faire Types of refined, and engraced Eloquence. The right Noouice of pregnante, and aspiring conceit, wil not ouer-skippe any precious gemme of Inuention, or any beautifull floure of Elocution, that may richly adorne, or gallantly bedecke the trimme garland of his budding stile. I speake generally to euery springing wit: but more specially to a few: and at this instante singularly to one: whom I salute with a hundred blessings: and entreate with as many prayers, to loue them, that loue all good wittes: and hate none, but the Diuell, and his incarnate Impes, notoriously professed. I protest, it was not thy person, that I any-way disliked: but thy rash, and desperate proceeding against thy well-willers: which in some had bene vnsufferable: in an youth, was more excusable: in a reformed youth is pardonable: and rather matter of concordance, then of aggrieuance. I persuade my selfe, rather to hope the best, then to feare the worst: & euer wish vnto other, as I would wish other, to wish vnto mee. It is my earnest desire, to begin, and ende such friuolous altercations at once: and were it not more for other, then for my selfe, assuredly I would be the first, that should cancell this impertinent Pamflet: and throw the other twoo Letters, with the Sonnets annexed, into the fire. Let them haue their swinge, that affect to be terribly singular: I desire not to be a blacke Swanne: or to leaue behind me any Period in the stile of the Diuels Oratour: or any verse in the vaine of his Dammes Poet: but rather couet to be nothing in printe, then any thinge in the stampe of needelesse, or fruitlesse Contention. As I am ouer-ruled at this presente, and as it standeth now: I am not to be mine owne Iudge, or Aduocate: but am contente to bee sentenced by euery courteous, or indifferente peruser, that regardeth honesty in persons, or trueth in testimonies, or reason in causes. Or seeing some matters of Fame are called in question: I am not onely willing, but desirous to vnderlye the verdicte, euen of Fame her-selfe; and to submit our whole credites, to the voice of the people, as to the voice of Equity, and the Oracle of God: to whose gratious fauours he recommendeth your Courtesy, that neither flattereth the best: nor slaundereth the woorst: nor willfully wrongeth any: but professeth duety to his superiours: humanity to his equals: fauour to his inferiours: reason to all: And by the same Rule, oweth you amends for the premisses: not spedily dispatched, but hastily bungled-vp, as you see. London: this 8. and 9. of September. The frend of his frendes, & foe of none. To the same fauourable, or indifferent Reader. Honest Gentlemen (for vnto such I especially write) giue me leaue in this slender Pamflet, onely to fulfill the importune requestes of a fewe: with your small delighte, and mine owne lesse contentmente: and pardon mee, though I no way affect to feede the dainty humour of curious conceites, carried with an insatiable expectation of I wot not what imagined perfection: which may easely display it selfe, wher it is, but cannot possibly appeere, where it is not. I presume, I cannot lesse satisfie any, then I haue satisfied my selfe: who hauing wedded my selfe to priuate study, and deuoted my mind to publike quietnesse, tooke this troublesom penne in hand, with such an alacrity of courage, as the sorry Beare goeth to the stake: & now reioyce in that, which with more hast, then speede is dispatched; as AEsops Hart, with more affection, then reason, gloried in his Hornes, till he found his fugitiue legges, his surer friendes. For in many cases, I take it a better Pollicy, to vse the flying Legge, then the cumbersome Horne: and at this instant, I should much more haue pleased my selfe, if I had still practised my former resolution, to scorne the stinginge of a pieuish waspe: or the biting of an eluish gnat: or the quipp of a mad companion: and rather to pocket-vp a pelting iniury, then to entangle my selfe with trifling businesse: or any-way to accrew to the most-contemptible fellowship of the scribblinge crew, that annoyeth this Age, and neuer more accloyed the world. Alas, he is pitifully bestead, that in an Age of Pollicy, and in a world of Industry, (wherein the greatest matters of Gouernement, and Valour, seeme small to aspiring capacities) is constrained to make woefull Greene, and beggarly Pierce Pennylesse, (as it were a Grasshopper, and a Cricket, two pretty musitians, but silly creatures) the argumente of his stile: and enforced to encounter them, who onely in vanity are somthings: in effect, nothing: in account, lesse then nothinge: howsoeuer the Grashopper enraged, would bee no lesse then a greene Dragon: and the Cricket male-contented, not so little as a Blacke Bellwether: but the only Vnicorne of the Muses. Some in my case, would perhaps be content for their owne credite, to haue them notoriously so reputed: and in cunning, would peraduenture not sticke, to straine at a Gnatt, as it were at a Camell: but plain dealing vseth no such Rhethorick: they that haue Eies, can see: and they that haue Eares, can heare, as sensibly as I: and I must in reason leaue them, as in proofe I finde them: either meere Paper-bugs, and Inckehorne-pads: or a greate deale worse: so far, as the Ringleaders of leaud Licentiousnes, are more pestilent, then the Platformers of vaine Fantasticallity: or the poison of corrupted mindes, is more pernitious, then the venome of disguised witts. Any slightnesse, curious inough: and any cost, too-much, vpon such an argumente: a subiecte of losse to the writer; of gaine to none: but duety must obey: and courtesy yeelde: and it is the lucke of some pelting Comedies, to busy the Stage, as well as some grauer Tragedies. Were nothing els discoursiuely inserted, (as some little else occasionally presented it selfe) what paper more currently fit for the basest mechanicall vses, then that, which containeth the vile misdemeanours, and Truth will say, the abhominable villanies of such base shifting companions: good for nothinge, in the opinion of good mindes, but to cast-away themselues, to spoile their adherentes, to pray vppon their fauourers, to dishonour their Patrons, to infecte the Aire, where they breath. Might Pierce be entreated, to quallifye his distempered veine; and to reclaime his vnbrideled selfe: as some bold Gawins, vppon milder consideration haue bene glad to doe : ( good Pierce be good to thy good friendes: and gentle to thy gentle selfe:) I assuredly would be the first, that should wrapp-vp such memorials, not in a sheete of wast-paper, but in the winding-sheete of Obliuion: and will not sticke, to embalme the dead corps of a professed ennemy, to sweeten the liuing spirite of a wished friend: howsoeuer extreamely meane, or famously obscure. The gratious Lawe of Amnesty, a soueraine Law: but the diuine Law of Charity, the Law of Lawes. Who cannot contemne the insolentest arrogancy? but who must not condescend to any reasonable accord? Hee that was neuer dismayed with any necessary distresse, yet euer escheweth all vnnecessary trouble: and he that least feareth the swoord of vniust Calumny, yet most dreadeth the scabbard of iust Infamy: and would gladly auoide the lightest suspition of that, which hee abhorreth. Though the painted sheath bee, as it is, (for it needeth no other Painter, to pourtray it selfe) yet neuer childe so delighted in his ratling baby; as some old Lads of the Castell, haue sported themselues with their rappinge bable. It is the proper weapon of their profession: they haue vsed it at large, and will vse it at pleasure, howsoeuer the patient heale himselfe at their cost. It were a worke of importance, to aunsweare that weapon: I long since gaue them ouer in the plaine field: and am now become a suter to their towardest schollers, to remember the glorious conquest of their witty Masters. I would willingly please, or not displease, as I may: but no Life, without self-contentment no performance of any action without Resolution. The least may thinke vppon Fabius Maximus: who with an honourable obstinacy pursued the course of his owne platforme, notwithstanding a thousand empeachments: & although slowly, with much murmuringe, yet effectually, with more reputation, atchieued his politicke purpose: like an experte Pilot, that in a hideous tempest regardeth not the foolishe shrickinges, or vaine outcries of disorderly passengers, but bestirreth himselfe, and directeth his marriners, according to the wise rules of orderly Nauigation. A wauering and fleeting minde, seldome, or neuer accomplisheth any negotiation of value. It is none of the least comfortes in distresse, that Patience is an excellent quality: and Constancy the honourablest vertue in the world. I am not to dilate, where a sentence is a discourse, and a woorde more then inough. It hath bene my desire, to conforme my intentions to my quality, and my exercises to my intentions: but as they are, it shall go very-hard, before I begin to abandon hope: or relente to friuolous motions: or forget my selfe, and my friends, to remember my ennemies: who are best remembred, when they are most forgotten. Some are cunning: & can imaginatiuely cast beyonde the Moone: but he is a simple Temporiser, that would attempt to raise a fantasticall, or putatiue opinion in an actiue worlde: and who so kindly cooseneth himselfe, as he that seeketh a cloak, to couer his owne sluggish Idlenesse, or vnweedly insufficiency? Let them affect mysticall commendation, that professe occult Philosophy: and let them crosbite themselues, that can finde no other Conny- catchers, to play that part. It was a principall Maxim in Socrates discipline, That euery one should contend to be indeede, whatsouer he would couet to seeme in apparance: some that haue often recommended that Maxim vnto other, and often called it the soueraine Rule of sound, and honourable proceeding; were neuer forwarder to allow his precept in discourse, then ready to follow his example in practise. There bee other inough, to make a gallant show: and some trim fellowes, will not stick to maintaine a braue Paradoxe, that the opinion, and semblaunce of thinges, neither euer was, nor is now, inferiour to the very thinges themselues: but in preferment and reputation many times superiour. I am not here to argue the case: Fortune is a fauourable Lady to some forward aduenturers: they may easely swim, that are holden vp by the chinne: such, & such haue liued in estimation, & purchased landes: but what did they euer effectuate of any worth: or wherin appeared ther sufficiency, to discharg any weighty function, or to performe any notable act? A reed is a sory staffe: & Fortune as changeable, as the Moone: no counterfeit, or pretended commendation endureth long: only desert holdeth out infallibly, when many a goodly gentleman beshreweth himselfe: I must not stand vpon particularities: no Education to the Trainement of Cyrus: nor any proceding, to the emploiment of Cesar. Pregnant Rules auail much: but visible Examples amount incredibly: Experience, the onely life of perfection, & onely perfection of life. Whatsoeuer occasion causeth me to be mistaken, as ouer- much addicted to Theory, without respect of action: (for that is one of the especiallest points, which I am importuned to resolue:) I neuer made account of any study, meditation, conference, or Exercise, that importeth not effectual vse, & that aymeth not altogether at action: as the singuler marke, whereat euery Arte, & euery vertue is to leuell. I loue Method: but honour Practise: must I shew the difference? Either Arte is obscure, or the quickest capacity dull: and needeth Methode, as it were the bright Moone, to illuminate the darkesome night: but Practise is the bright Sun, that shineth in the day, & the soueraigne Planet, that gouerneth the world: as else-where I haue copiously declared. To excell, ther is no way but one: to marry studious Arte to diligent Exercise: but where they must be vnmarried, or diuorced, geue me rather Exercise without Arte, then Arte without Exercise. Perfect vse worketh masteries: and disgraceth vnexperienced Arte. Examples are infinite: and dayly display themselues. A world without a Sunne: a Boddy without a Soule: Nature without Arte: Arte without Exercise: sory creatures. Singular practise the only singuler, and admirable woorkeman of the world. Must I dispatch the rest, that is exacted? It is no fit place: and the least little wil seme too-much. As in other thinges, so in Artes, formality doth well: but materiality worketh the feat. Were Artists as skillfull, as Artes are powerfull, wonders might be atchieued by Arte emprooued: but they that vnderstand little, write much: and they that know much, write little. The vayne Peacocke, with his gay coullours, and the pratling Parrat with his ignorant discourses , (I am not to offend any, but the Peacocke, and the Parrat) haue garishly disguised the worthiest Artes, and deepely discredited the profoundest Artistes, to the pitifull defacement of the one, and the shamefull preiudice of the other. Rodolph Agricola, Philip Melancthon, Ludouike Viues, Peter Ramus, and diuers excellent schollers, haue earnestly complaned of Artes corrupted, and not ably reformed many absurdities: but still corruption ingendreth one vermine or other: and still that pretious Trainement is miserably abused, which should be the fountaine of skill, the roote of vertue, the seminary of gouernment, the foundation of all priuate, and publike good. The Methodist, & Discouser might be more materiall: the Theorist, and Practitioner more formall: all fower more effectuall: or how commeth it to passe, that much more is professed, but much lesse perfourmed, then in former ages? especially in the Mathematikes, and in naturall Magie: which beeing cunningly and extensiuely imployed (after the manner of Archimedes, Archytas, Apollonius, Regiomontanus, Bacon, Cardan, and such like industrious Philosophers, the Secretaries of Art, and Nature,) might wonderfully bestead the Commonwealth: with many puissant engins, and other commodious deuises, for warre, and peace. In actuall Experimentes, and Polymechany, nothing too- profound: a superficiall slightnesse, may seeme fine for sheetes, but proueth good for nothinge: as in other businesse, so in learninge, as good neuer a whit, according to the Prouerbe, as neuer the better: one perfect Mechanician worth ten vnperfect Philosophers: an ignorant man lesse shameth himself, lesse beguileth his frend, lesse disableth the Common-wealth, then a putatiue Artiste: a whole naturall wit more seruiceable, and more sufficient, then a Demi-scholler: who presuming on that, which he hath not, abateth the force of that, which he hath. He must not dreame of perfection, that emproueth not the perfectest Art, with most perfect industrie. A snatch, and away, with Neoptolemus, and the common sort of studentes, may please a little, but profiteth nothing. It is the Body, not the shadow, that dispatcheth the businesse. The flower delighteth to-day, and fadeth to-morrow: the fruite edifieth, and endureth: the visard, the painted sheath, and such terrible braueries, can best report their owne entertainment: the peacock, and the parrat haue good leaue to prancke vppe themselues, and leysure inough to reuiue, and repolish their expired workes. What can last allwayes, quoth the neat Tayler, when his fine seames began to cracke their credite at the first drawing-on. I appeale to Poules Churchyard, whether lines be like vnto seames: and whether the Deft writer be as sure a workeman, as the neat Taylor. There may be a fault in the Reader, aswell as in the weauer: but euery manne contente himselfe, to beare the burthen of his owne faultes: and good sweete Autors infourme your selues, before you vndertake to instruct other. Excellent effectes must flow from the spring of excellent causes: and nothing notable without notable Endeuour. The Print is abused, that abuseth: and earnestly beseecheth flourishing writers, not to trouble the Presse, but in case of vrgent occasion, or important vse. Or if you conceiue extraordinarily of your owne pregnancy: and will needes imploy your youthfull Tallent: remember, that corruptions in manners, and absurdities in Arte, haue too-lately ouerflowed the banckes of all good Modesty, and discretion. Hee that hath but halfe an Eie, can see no lesse: & he that hath but halfe a Tonge, may say more: I onely note by the way, that hindereth many a gallant wit in the way: and without empeachment to any, wish all rather to be excellent, with Socrates, then to seeme famous, with the Philosopher of the Court. My meaning is not, to teach, but to touch: & albeit I haue cursorily spoken somethinge for myselfe, and something as it were against other; yet the one little, and the other lesse, are both vttered with a mind, that will rather excuse other , then my selfe; and rather accuse my selfe, then other: wheresoeuer I find the least reason for them, or the least cause against my selfe: and if in any thing I am any thing, it is in nothing so much, as in a zealous desire, to see Learning flourish: Vertue prosper: the good proceede from better to better: the bad amend: the Body cherrish the members: the Members tender the body: all generally maintaine Concord with all: euery one particularly nurrish accord with euery one. Howbeit at this instant I must craue licence, to stand vpon such tearmes, not as I would most willingly choose, but as the present occasion forcibly suggesteth. No man loather, to minister the least, or to take the greatest occasion of publike contention, or priuate discontentment: choler is as soone inflamed, as flaxe; and small sparkles of dissention, haue kindled horrible fires of faction: there be wrangling, & quarreling hoatspurres inough, though I be none: Ignis fatuus neuer so spritishly busy: neuer so many threatning Comets: neuer such a terrible sky of Blasing, and falling stars: neuer such lustly stirring of liuely coales, and dead cinders: euery Martin Iunior, and Puny Pierce, a monarch in the kingdome of his owne humour: euery pert, and crancke wit, in one odd veine, or other, the onely man of the Vniuersity, of the Citty, of the Realme, for a flourish or two: who but he, in the flush of his ouerweening conceit? giue him his peremptory white rod in his hand, and God-night all distinction of persons, and all difference of estates: his Pen is his mace, his launce, his two-edged sword, his scepter, his Hercules club: and will beare a predominant sway, in despight of vaineglorious Titles, and ambitious Degrees. Lordes must take heede, how they Lord-it in his presence: but he forsooth may play the Lord Great-Maister , cum gratia: & a sawcy Sophister take vpon him, like a mighty Tyrant , cum Priuilegio. God helpe, when Ignorance, and want of Experience, vsurping the chayre of scrupulous, and rigorous Iudgement, will in a fantasticall Imagination, or percase in a melancholy moode, presume farther, by infinite degrees, then the learnedest men in a ciuill Common-wealth, or the sagest counsellours in a Princes Court. Our new-new writers, the Load-stones of the Presse, are wonderfully beholdinge to the Asse; in a manner the onely Autor, which they alledge: the world was euer full inough of fools, but neuer so full of Asses in print: the very Elephant, a great Asse: the Camell, a huge Asse: the Beare, a monstrous Asse: the Horse, an absurd Asse: the Fox himselfe, a little Asse, or for variety, an Ape: who not an Asse, or an Ape in good plaine English, that chanceth to come in the wise Asse-makers, & mighty Ape-dubbers way? they are fine men, & haue many sweete phrases: it is my simplicity, that I am so slenderly acquainted with that dainty stile; the only new fashion of current Eloquece in Esse: far surpassing the stale vein of Demosthenes, or Tully: Iewel, or Harding: Whitgift, or Cartwright: Sidney, or Spencer. But I could wish, Ignorance would fauour it selfe: & it were not amisse, that want of Experience should be content to be a little modest, or somewhat quiet: & both enforce les occasion to be termed, as they will needes notoriously proclaime themselues: as it were, with a publike Oh-is, or a generall Nouerint vniuersi per praesentes. For if any thing indeede, be a right Asse in print, it is the one: and if any thing indeede, be a right Calfe in print, it is the other. Ignorance, the famousest Asse; and want of Experience, the notablest Calfe in the world: Yet the one, the terrible controwler: the other the singuller Refourmer of the world: both, the busiest aduenturers, and dowteest doers in a world. They trouble many much: some exceedingly: themselues most: mee little: who can very well leaue them to the iollity of their owne swinge: or onely pray them to stay the nimble course of their forwarde wisdomes, till they haue soberly reade, and hearde a little, and a little more: (for I wis something resteth vnconsidered:) and till they haue effectually seene, and tried a great-deale, and a great-deale more: (for much remaineth vnaprooued:) I loue not to sollicite them greatly, that loue to importune all other excessiuely: that little I haue done, I haue done compelled, and would wish vndone, rather then any storme of Debate, or the least fit of Mallice should insue thereof: let them glory in Pen-scolding, and Paper-brabling, that list: I must not, I cannot, I will not: I hate to intend such arrant paltry, not for feare, but for contempt, not for lasinesse, but for weightier businesse: good honest youthes spare an olde Truante, meeter now to play the Dumme Dog, with some auncientes, then the bauling Cur, or the hissing Snake, with you springals: a thousand Examples pierce deepe, and ouer- sensibly teach me the miserable inconuenience of such mischiefe, and the miserable mischief of such inconuenience: better a pecke of troubles, then a load of agonies: no plague to irkesome vengeance: no ioy, or treasure to industrious imploiment: no felicity, to a commodious intercourse of sweete study, sweeter conuersation, and sweetest action: that wanteth, must be supplied, as sufficient as it may: extraordinary incombrances little neede: Time is pretious, and would not be prodigally wasted in wast paper, or contemptuously thrust out by the shoulders: my first Letter, was in a manner voluntary: my second, in sort necessary: this, wholy superfluous, but violently extorted after the rest: all wearysome vnto me; but this most tedious: and any thing more, would seeme intollerable: Especially in the Inuectiue veine: the little Fury of this Age, & great Incendiary of the world: whose vnmeasurable outrage I would rather mittigate with twenty Insinuatiue, & persuasiue Orations, then any-way aggrauate with one Offensiue, or defensiue Letter. Some Comicall Iars may be endured: but no act so ioyfull, as the Plaudite: &whatsoeuer the beginning happeneth to be, I would allwayes wish a pleasant, or amicable end: the scope whereat I as dilligently aime, as any, that most religiously affecteth unity. Only any determination is, rather to be a Sheepe in Wolfes printe, than to suffer my selfe, or my deerest frendes, to be made Sheepe in the wolfes walke: and onely my request is, that euery descreete, and courteous minde, will as considerately weigh the cause, as censoriously note the effect. I hope, there neither is, nor shalbe any default committed, but may in conuenient time bee redressed with some reasonable amendes: vntill which time, I am not to dedicate any thing vnto any personage of name; but a mind, affectionately desirous to honour the worthiest: to reuerence the wisest: to commend the learnedest: to embrace the best: to appease the worst: to iniury none: to render euery one, the vttermost of his desart, or other quality. Which mind I entierly recommend vnto you all: and you all vnto God: whome I beseech, to accomplish that, which I cannot effect: and euen to worke a miracle vppon the deafe. London; this 11. and 12. of September. Your affectionate frend, G.H. To the foresaid Maister Emmanuell Demetrius, Maister Christopher Bird, and all gentle wits, that will voutsafe the reading. Alas that I so hastely should come, To terrifie the man with fatall dread, That deemed quiet Pennes, or dead, or dum, And stoutly knock't poore Silence on the head. Enough can say: dead is the Dog of spite: I, that for pitie praised him aliue, And smil'd to heare him gnaw, and see him bite, Am not with sory carcasses to striue. The worst I list of Famous him report: Poules hath the Onely Pregnant Autor lost: Aihme, quoth Wit in lamentable sort, Vvhat worthy wight shall now commaund the rost ¿ Fame heard the plaint: and pointed at A man, As greene as Greene, and white as whitest Swanne. commended. Vnlucky I, vnhappiest on Earth, That fondly doting vpon dainty witts, And deepely rauish'd with their luring fitts, Of gentle fauours find so hard a Dearth. Is it my Fate, or Fault, that such fine men Should their Commender so vnkindly bite? That looues to looue, in spite of rankest Spite, And hates to hate, with Hart, or Tongue, or Pen. Sweet Writers, as yee couet to be sweet, Nor me, nor other, nor your selues abuse: Humanity doth courteously peruse Ech act of frend, or foe, with fauour meet. Foule Diuel, and fouler Malice cease to raue: For euery fault I twenty pardons craue. The flourishing, and gaily-springing wight, That vainely me prouok'd with vile reproch, Hath done his worst, and hath no more to broche: Maugre the Diuell of villanous despite. I cannot raile, what-euer cause to raile: For Charity I louingly imbrace, That me for Enuy odiously deface: But in their highest rage extremely faile. I can doe him no harme, that is in Heauen: I can doe him no good that is in Hell: I wish the best to his Suruiuours fell, Deepely acquainted with his Six: and Seauen. O be not like to Death, that spareth none: Your greenest Flower, and Peacockes taile is gone. The iolly Fly dispatch'd his silly selfe: What Storyes quaint of many a douty Fly, That read a Lecture to the ventrous Elfe? Yet he will haue his lusty swing, to dy. Currage, and sturring witt in time do well: But that same obstinate Desperation, A furious fiend of selfe-deuouring Hell, Rushing with terrible Commination, (What storme so hideous, as Rages spell?) Concludes with horrible Lamentation: Each blessed tongue accurse malediction, The vgly mouth of ruthfull confusion. Nothing so doulcely sweete, or kindly deare, As sugred lippes, and Harts delicious cheare. I Am not to instruct, where I may learne: But where I may persuasiuely exhort, Nor ouer-dissolute, nor ouer-sterne, A curteous Honesty I would extort. Good loathes to damage, or vpbraid the good: Gentle how loouely to the gentle wight? Who seeith not, how euery blooming budd Smileth on euery flower fairely dyght, And biddeth fowle illfauordnesse Godnight? Would Alciats Embleme, or sum scarlet whood. Could teach the Pregnant sonnes of shiny Light, To interbrace each other with delight. Fine Mercury conducts a dainty band Of Charites, and Muses, hand in hand. I Wott not what these cutting Huffe-snuffes meane: Of Ale-house-daggers I have little skill. I borrow not my phrase of knaue, or queane, But am a dettour to the Ciuill quill. It is restoratiue vnto my hart, To heare how gentle Cheeke, and Smith convers'd: No daintier peece of delicatest Art, Then cordiall Stories charmingly rehears'd, That whilom rudest wooddes, and stonesamp re'd. Who now beginnes that amiable part? Haddon farewell: and Ascham thou art stale, And euery sweetenes tastes of bitter bale. Oh, let me liue to interuiew the face Of faire Humanity, and bounteous Grace. Neuer Vlysses, or Æneas tyr'd, With toyling trauailes, and huge afflictions: As arrant penne, and wretched page bemyr'd With nasty filth of rancke-maledictions. I seldome call a snarling Curr, a Curr: But wish the gnarring dog, as sweete a mouth, As brauest horse, that feeleth golden spurr: Or shrillest Trompe, that soundeth North, or South: Or most enchaunting Sirens voice vncouth. Selfe-gnawing Harts, and gnashing Teeth of murr How faine would I see Orpheus reuiu'd, or Suadas hoony-bees in you rehiu'd? O most-delicious hoony-dewes, infuse Your daintiest influence into their Muse. Let them forgett their cancred peeuishnes: And say to Choller fell; Thou wert our fall: Hadst thou not boilde in fretting waywardnes, We might haue laught at Fortunes tossing Ball. Choler, content thy malecontented selfe: And cleerest Humour of right Sanguine pure, Neately refin'd from that felonious Elfe, With Iouiall graciousnes thy selfe enure. If euer siluer conduictes were abroche Of streaming Witt, and flowing Eloquence: Yee fludds of milke, and hoony reapproache, And bounteously poure-out your Quintessence. Gently assemble Delicacies all, And sweetely nectarize this bitter gall. friend. VVere I as meete, as willing to aduise: I would in amicable termes entreat Some forward witts to change their headlong guise, And lesse in print, and more in mint to sweat. Pithagoras, and Apollonius sage, Two woonders of capacity diuine; Trained their followers to temper rage, And Tongue with curious silence to refine. There is a Time to speake: a Time to write: But blessed be the Time, that sees, and heares: Let Petty Starres suppresse their twinckling light: And glorious Sunne advance his beamy peeres. O you of golden mould, that shine like Sun. Display your heauenly giftes: and I haue dun Yet let Affection interpret selfe: Arcadia braue, and dowty Faery Queene cannot be stain'd by Gibelin, or Guelph, Or goodliest Legend, that Witts eye hath seene. The dainty Hand of exquisitest Art, And nimble Head of pregnantest receit, Neuer more finely plaid their curious part, Then in those liuely Christals of conceit. Other faire Wittes I cordially embrace: And that sweete Muse of azur Dy, admire: And must in euery Sonnet interlace The earthly Soueraine of heauenly fire. A fitter place remaineth to implore, Of deepest Artists the profoundest lore. additon, inserted at the request of one, that might commanunde. Blacke Art auaunt: and Haile thrise-grace-full Grace, That whitest white on Earth, or Heauen exceedes, In purity, and souerainety immense. Or locke my mouth: or schoole my infant-lippes, Resplendent lightes of Milky Way to sing, Rare Subiectes of thy indulgence supreame. Yet what should I conspicuous Mirrours sing, That radiantly display their beauteous beames of glistring Vertue, and reshining Witt: The Luminaries great of little world? Folly impossibilities attempts: Astonishment such brightnesse best becummes: Or lend me Pegasus, thy mounting winges: And let me heare, how quire of Angels singes. VVere fine Castilio, the Heire of Grace: What gallant port more graciously fine? As dainty Petrach was sweete Sirens sonne: What witching tune more Orpheously sweete? Him, him, the Idee high, and deepe Abysse Of noble Excellence I would proclaime. But what should drowsy Muse of Phantoms dreame? Cast glauncing eie into Queene Pallas Court: And scorne the dimnes of thy dazeled sight, Astound with Lord-and Lady-Graces view: Idees how high, Abysses how profounde Of valour braue, and admirable worth? Poore glimmering Gemmes, and twinckling Stars adieu: Here, here the Sun, and Moone of Honor true. Liue euer valorous renowned Knightes: Liue euer Smith, and Bacon, Peereles men: Liue eiuer Walsingham, and Hatton wise: Live ever Mildmayes honorable name. Ah, that Sir Humfry Gilbert should be dead: Ah, that Sir Philip Sidney should be dead: Ah, that Sir William Sackeuill should be dead: Ah, that Sir Richard Grinuile should be dead: Ah, that braue Walter Deuoreux should be dead: Ah, that the Flowre of Kinghthood should be dead, Which, maugre deadlyest Deathes, and stonyest Stones, That coouer worthiest worth, shall neuer dy. Sweete Fame, adorne thy glorious Triumph new: Or Vertues all, and Honours all adieu. Bvt Vertues all, and Honours all suruiue: And Vertues all, and Honours all inflame Braue mindes to platfourme, and redoubted handes To doe such deedes, and such exploites atchieue, As they, and they couragiously perform'd. Egregious men, and memorable Knightes: Ay memorable Knightes, whiles Sunne shall shine, And teach industrious Worth, to shine like Sunne: To liue in motion, and action hoat: To eternize Entelechy diuine: Where Plutarches Liues: where Argonautiques braue: Where all Heroique woonderments concurr. Oh, Oh, and Oh a thousand thousand times, That thirsty Eare might heare Archangels rimes. Then would I so my Melody addoulce, And so attune my Harmony to theirs, That fellest Fury should confesse her selfe Enchaunted mightily with charmes diuine: And in the sweetest termes of sacred Leagues, With pure deuotion reconcile her rage. Meane-while I seeke, and seeke, but cannot finde That Iewell rare of precioussest worth: Gentle Accord, and soueraigne Repose, The Paradise of Earth, and blisse of Heauen. Be it in Earth, o Heauen direct my course: Be it in Heauen alone, o Earth Farewell. Or well-fare Patience, that sweetens sowre, And reares on Hellish Earth an Heauenly Boure. prosperity in any. Some me haue spited with a cruell spite: But Fount of Mercy so reclense my sinne, As I nor them maligne, nor any wight: But all good mindes affect, like deerest kinne. Small cause I haue to scorne in any sort: Yet I extreamely scorne to aunsweare some, That banish Conscience from their report, And ouerwantonly abuse the dumme. God keepe Low-Countrymen from high Disdaine: Yet I disdaine with haughtiest contempt To enuy any persons Fame, or Gaine: Or any crooked practise to attempt. Iesu, that we should band, like Iohn Oneale, That tenderly should melt in mutuall zeale. O Mindes of Heauen, and wittes of highest Sphere, Molten most-tenderly in mutuall zeale: Each one with cordiall indulgence forbeare, And Bondes of Loue reciproquely enseale. No rose, no violet, no fragrant spice, No Nectar, no Ambrosia so sweet: As gratious Looue, that neuer maketh nice, But euery one embraceth, as is meet. Magnes, and many thinges attractiue are: But nothing so allectiue vnder skyes, As that same dainty amiable Starre, That none, but grisly mouth of Hell, defyes. That Starre illuminate celestiall Harts: And who, but Rancour, feeleth irkesome smarts? Come fellow Greene, come to thy gaping graue: Bidd Vanity, and Foolery farwell: Thou ouer-long hast plaid the madbrain'd knaue: And ouer-lowd hast rung the bawdy bell. Vermine to Vermine must repaire at last: No fitter house for busy folke to dwell: Thy Conny-catching Pageants are past: Some other must those arrant Stories tell. These hungry wormes thinke long for their repast: Come on: I pardon thy offence to me: It was thy liuing: be not so aghast: A Foole, and Phisition may agree. And for my Brothers, neuer vex thy selfe: They are not to disease a buried Elfe. Yet fie on lies, and fie on false Appeales: No Minister in England lesse affectes Those wantor kisses, that leaud folly steales, Then Hee, whome onely Ribaldry suspectes. Were I a foole, (what man playes not the foole? The world is full of fooles, and full of sectes:) Yet was Iohn never spoyled with the toole, That Richard made: and none, but none infectes. The third is better knowne in Court, and Schoole, Then thy vaine Quipp, or my Defence shalbe: Whose Eie, but his, that fitts on Slaunders stoole, Did euer him in Fleete, or Prison see? Lowd Mentery small confutation needs: Auaunt black Beast, that sowes such cursed seedes Ah my deere Father, and my Parent sweete, Whose honesty no neighbour can empeach: That any Ruffian should in termes vnmeete, To your discredite shamfully outreach. O rakehell Hand, that soribled him a knaue, Whome neuer Enemy did so appeach: Repent thy wicked selfe, that so didst raue, And cancell that, which Slaunders mouth did teach. Nor euery man, nor euery trade is braue: Mault, haires, and hempe, and sackcloth must be had: Truth him from odious imputations saue: And many a gallant Gentleman more bad. Foure Sonnes, him cost a thousand pounds at lest: Well may he fare: and thou enioy thy rest Let memory of grose abuses sleepe: Who ouer-shooteth not in recklesse youth? Were sinnes as redd, as reddest scarlet deepe, A penitentiall Hart preueneteth ruth. Well-wishing Charity presumes the best: Nothing impossible to powrefull Trueth: Body to Graue; and Soule to Heauen addrest, Leaue vpon Earth, the follies of their youth. Some Penury bewaile: some feare Arrest: Some Parmaes force: some Spanyardes gold addread: Some vnderly the terrible inquest: Some carry a jelous: some a climing Head. We that are dead, releas'd from liuing woes, Soundly enjoy a long, and long Repose. view of the former Sonnets, and other Cantos, in honour of certaine Brauemen. Some Tales to tell, would I a Chaucer were: Yet would I not euen-now an Homer be. Though Spencer me hath ofen Homer term'd And Monsieur Bodine vow'd as much as he. Enuy, and Zoilus, two busy wightes: No petty shade of Homer can appeere, But he the Diuell, and (he his Dam display: And Furies fell annoy sweete Muses cheere. Nor Martins I, nor Counter-martins squibb: Enough a doo, to cleere my simple selfe: Momus gainst Heauen; and Zoilus gainst Earth, A Quipp for Gibeline; and whip for Guelph. Or purge this humour: or woe-worth the State, That long endures the one, or other mate. Ille Ego, cui risus, rumores, sesta, puell ae Vana libellorum scriptio, vita fuit: Prodigus vt vidi Ver, Æstatemq furoris, Autumno, atque Hyemi, cum Cane dico vale. Ingenij bullam; plumam Artis; fistulam Amandi; Ecqu ae non misero plangat auena tono? At Iunioris erat, Seniori pangere carmen Funebre, ni fati lex violenta vetet. Quid frustra exclamem, Frater, fraterrime Frater? Dulcia cuncta abeunt: tristia sola manent. Totus ego Funus, pullato squallidum amictu, Quamuis c aelicolae, stebile dico Vale.
