 wee say Phy , as if therewithall we should spit. In attention Haa , in calling Whowpe , in hallowing Wahabowe , all which (in my eare) seeme to be deriued from the very natures of those seuerall affections. Grow from hence to the composition of words, and  6 therein our language hath a peculiar grace, a like significancie, and more short then the Greekes, for example in Moldwarp wee expresse the nature of that beast. In handkercher the thing and his vse. In vpright that vertue by a Metaphore. In Wisedome and Doomes-day , so many sentences as words, and so of the rest, for I giue onely a taste that may direct others to a fuller obseruation of what my sudden memorie cannot represent vnto mee.  7 It may passe also the masters of this significancie, that in a manner all the proper names of our people doe import somewhat which from a peculiar note at first of some one of theprogenitors in processe of time inuested it selfe in a possession of the posteritie, euen as wee see like often befall to those whose fathers bare some vncouth Christian names. Yet for the most part wee auoide the blemish giuen by the Romans, in like cases, who distinguished the persons by the imperfections of their bodies, from whence grew their Nasones, Labeones, Frontones, Dentones ,  & such like: how euer Macrobius coloureth the same. Yea  8 so significant are our words that amongst them sundry single ones, serue to expresse diuers things, as by Bill is meant weapon, a scroll, and a birds beake, by Graue , sober a tombe, and to carue, and by Light, Marke, match, file, sore , and pray , the semblable. Againe, some sentences, in the same words carrie a diuers sence as, till desart ground: some signifie one thing forward, and another backeward as Feeler I was no fo , Of on saw I releefe . Some signifie one selfe thing forward and backeward, as Ded deemed , I ioi, reuiuer, and this, Eye did Madam Erre . Some carrie a contrarie sence backeward, to that they did forward, as I did leuell ere veu , veu ere leuel did I. Some deliuer a contrary sence by the diuers pointing as the Epistle in Doctor Wilsons Rhetoricke, and many such like, which a curious head, leasure, and time, might picke out. Neither may I omit the significancie of our prouerbes  9 concise in words but plentifull in number, briefely pointing at many great matters, and vnder the circuite of a few syllables prescribing sundry auaileable caueats. Lastly, our speech doth not consist onely of words but  10 in a sort euen of deeds, as when wee expresse a matter by Metaphors, wherein the English is verie fruitfull and forcible. And so much for the significancie of our language in meaning. Now for his easinesse in learning, the same shooteth  11 out into branches. The one, of others learning our language, the second of our learning that of others. For the first, the most part of our words (as I haue touched) are Monasyllables and so the fewer in tale, and the sooner reduced to memorie, neither are wee loden with those declensions, flexions, and variations, which are incident to many other tongues, but a few articles gouerne all our verbes and Nownes, and so wee reade a very short Grammer. For easie learning of other languages by ours, let these  12 serue as proofes, there are many Italian words, which the French men cannot pronounce, accio for which hee saith ashto : many of the French with the Italian can hardly come away withall, as Bayller chagzni. Postillon , many in ours which neither of them can vtter, as Hedge Water . So that a stranger though neuer so long conversant amongst vs, carrieth euermore a watch-word vpon his tong to descrie him by, but turne an Englishman at any time of his age into what countrie soeuer allowing him due respite, and you shall see him profit so well that the imitation of his vtterance, will in nothing differ from the patterne of that natiue language. The want of which towardnesse cost the Ephramites their skinnes; neither doth this crosse my former assertion of others easie learning our language. For I meane of the sence and words, and not touching the pronuntiation. 13 But I must now enter into the large field of our tongs copiousnesse, and perhaps long wander vp and downe without finding easie way of Issue, and yet leaue many parts thereof vnsurueied. 14 . My first proofe of our plenty I borrow from the choise which is giuen vs by the vse of diuers languages. The ground of our owne appertaineth to the old Saxon little differing from the present low Dutch , because they more then any of their neighbours haue hitherto preserued that speech from any great forreine mixture; here amongst, the Brittons haue left diuers of their words intersowed, as it were thereby making a continuall claime to their auncient possession. Wee may also trace the footsteps of the Danish bitter (though not long during) soueraigntie in these parts, and the Romane also imparted vnto vs of his latine riches with no sparing hand. Our neighbours the French, haue bin likewise contented we should take vp by retaile as well their tearmes as their fashions: or rather we retaine yet but some remnant of that which once here bare all the sway, and daily renew the store. So haue our Italian trauailers brought vs acquainted with their sweete relished phrases, which (so their conditions crept not in withall) were the better tolerable, yea euen wee seeke to make our good of our late Spanish enemie, and feare as little the hurt of his tongue as the dint of his sword. Seeing then we borrow (and that not shamefully) from the Dutch , the Britaine , the Romane , the Dane , the French , the Italian , and Spanyard ; how can our stocke bee other then exceeding plentifull? It may be obiected that such patching maketh Littletons , hotch-pot of our tongue, and in effect brings the same rather to a Babellish confusion, then any one entire language. It may againe bee answered, that this theft of words is no lesse warranted by the priuiledge of a prescription,  15 auncient and vniuersall, then was that of goods amongst the Lacedemonians by an enacted law; for so the Greekes robbed the Hebrewes, the Latins the Greekes (which filching Cicero with a large discourse in his booke de Oratore defendeth) and (in a manner) all other Christian Nations the Latine. For euidence hereof, many sentences may be produced consisting of words that in their originall are Latine, and yet (saue some small variance in their terminations) fall out al one with the French Dutch, and English,  16 as Ley, Ceremonious persons, offer prelate preest, cleere Candels flamme, in Temples Cloistre, In Cholerick Temprature, Clisters purgation is pestilent, pulers preseruatiue, Subtill factors, aduocates Notaries, practize, Papers, libells, Registers, Regents, Maiesty, in pallace, hath triumphant Throne, Regiments Scepter, Vassals, Supplication , and such like. Then euen as the Italian Potentates of these daies make no difference in their pedegrees and successions betweene the bed lawfull or vnlawfull, where either an vtter-wart or a better desert doth force or entice them thereunto, so may the consenting practise of these nations, passe for a just Legittimation of these bastard words which either necessitie, or conueniencie hath induced them to adopt. For our owne parts, we employ the borrowed ware so  17 . farre to our aduantage that we raise a profit of new words from the same stocke, which yet in their owne countrey are not merchantable. For example, wee deduce diuers words from the Latine, which in the Latine it selfe cannot bee yeelded, as the verbs, To Aire, to beard, to crosse, to flame , and their deriuations, ayring, ayred; bearder, bearding bearded,  &c. as also closer, closely, closenesse, glosingly, hourely, maiesticall, maiestically. In like sort we graffe vpon French words those buds, to which that soile affoordeth no growth, as chiefly, faulty, slauish, precisenesse . Diuers words  18 also wee deriue out of the Latine at second hand by the French, and make good English, though both Latine and French haue their hands closed in that behalfe, as in these verbes, Pray, Point, Paze, Prest, Rent, &c. and also in the Aduerbes Carpingly, Currantly, Actiuely, Colourably , & c . Againe in other languages there fall out defects,  19 while they want meanes to deliuer that which another tongue expresseth, as (by Ciceroes obseruation) you cannot interpret Ineptus vnapt, vnfit, vntoward, in Greeke. Neither Porcus Capo Veruex , a barrow hog, a Capon, a Weather, as Cuiacius noteth, ad Tit . de verb . signif . No more can you expresse to stand in French, to Tye in Cornish, nor Knaue in Latine, for Nebulo is a clowdie fellow, or in Irish; whereas you see our abilitie extendeth thereunto. Moreouer the copiousnesse of our language appeareth in the diuersitie of our Dialects, for wee haue Court and wee haue Countrey English, wee haue Northeine, and Southerne, grosse and ordinarie, which differ each from other, not onely in the terminations, but also in many words, termes, and phrases, and expresse the same things in diuers, sorts yet all right English alike, neither can any tongue (as I am perswaded) deliuer a matter with more varietie then ours, both plainely and by prouerbs and Metaphors: for example, when wee would bee rid of one, wee vse to say, bee going, trudge, packe, bee faring , hence, away, shift , and by circumlocution; Rather your room then your company, lets see your backe, come againe when I bid you, when you are called, sent for, intreated, willed , desired, inuited, spare vs your place, another in your steed, a shippe of Salt for you, saue your credite, you are next the doore , the doore is open for you, there is no body holdeth you, no body teares your sleeue, &c. Likewise this word Fortis wee may synonymize after all these fashions, stout, hardy, valiant, doughty, couragious, aduentrous, &c. 20 . And in a word, to close vp these proofs of our copiousnesse, looke into our Imitations of all sorts of verses affoorded by any other language, and you shall finde that Sir Philip Sidney , Maister Puttenham , Maister Stanihurst , and diuers more haue made vse how farre wee are within compasse of a fore imagined possibilitie in that behalfe. I come now to the last and sweetest point of the  21 sweetnesse of our tongue, which shall appeare the more plainely, if like two Turkeyses or the London Drapers wee match it with our neighbours. The Italian is pleasant but without sinewes as a still fleeting water. The  22 French, delicate, but euen nice as a woman, scarce daring to open her lippes for feare of marring her countenance. The Spanish maiesticall, but fulsome, running too much on the O. and terrible like the diuell in a play. The Dutch manlike but withall verie harsh, as one readie at euerie word to picke a quarrell. Now we in borrowing from them, giue the strength of consonants to the Italian, the full sound of wordes to the French, the varietie of terminations to the Spanish, and the mollifying of more vowels to the Dutch, and so (like Bees) gather the honey of their good properties and leaue the dregges to themselues. And thus when substantialnesse combineth with delightfulnesse, fulnesse with finenesse, seemelinesse with portlinesse, and currantnesse with stayednesse, how can the language which consisteth of all these, sound other then most full of sweetnes? Againe, the long words that we borrow being intermingled  23 with the short of our owne store, make vp a perfect harmonie, by culling from out which mixture (with iudgement) you may frame your speech according to the matter you must worke on, maiesticall, pleasant, delicate, or manly more or lesse, in what sort you please. Adde hereunto, that whatsoeuer grace any other language carrieth in verse or Prose, in Tropes or Metaphors, in Ecchoes and Agnominations, they may all bee liuely and exactly represented in ours: will you haue Platoes veine? reade Sir Thomas Smith , the Ionicke ? Sir Thomas Moore. Ciceroes? Ascham, Varro? Chaucer, Demosthenes ? Sir Iohn Cheeke (who in his treatise to the Rebels, hath comprised all the figures of Rhetorick. Will you reade Virgill? take the Earle of Surrey. Catullus ? Shakespheare and Barlowes fragment, Ouid? Daniell, Lucan? Spencer, Martial? Sir Iohn Dauies and others: will you haue all in all for Prose and verse? take the miracle of our age Sir Philip Sidney. And thus if mine owne eyes bee not blinded by affection, I haue made yours to see that the most renowned of other nations haue layed vp, as in treasure, and entrusted the Diuisos orbe Britannos , with the rarest Iewels of their lips perfections, whether you respect the vnderstanding for significancie, or the memorie for easinesse, or the conceite for plentifulnesse, or the eare for pleasantnesse: wherin if enough be deliuered, to adde more then enough were superfluous; if too little, I leaue it to be supplyed by better stored capacities; if ought amisse, I submit the same to the discipline of euery able and impartiall censurer. 
