 As we are delighted in deformed creatures artificiallye painted: so in poetrie, which is a liuely adumbratio of things, euil matters ingeniously contriued do delight. As Phisitians vse for medicine the feete and wings of the flies Cantharides , which flies are deadly poyson: so we may gather out of the same poem, that may quell the hurtfull venome of it; for poets do alwaies mingle somewhat in their Poems, wherby they intimate that they condemne, what they declare. idem. As our breath doth make a shiller sound being sent through the narrow channell of a Trumpet, then if it be diffused abroad into the open aire: so the well knitte and succinct combination of a Poem, dooth make our meaning better knowen and discerned, then if it were deliuered at random in prose. Seneoa. As he that drinkes of the Well Clitorius , doth abhorre wine: so they that haue once tasted of poetry, cannot away with the studie of philosophie; after the same maner holdes the contrarie. As the Anabaptists abhorre the liberall artes and humane sciences: so puritanes and precisians detest poetrie and poems. As Eloquence hath foud many preachers and orators worthy fauourers of her in the English toug: so her sister poetry hath foud the like welcome and entertainment giuen her by our English poets, which makes out laguage so gorgeous & delectable amog vs As Rubarbe and Sugarcandie are pleasant & profitable: so in poetry ther is sweet nes and goodnes M. Iohn Haring in his Apologie some for poetry before his traslated Ariosto. Many cockney and wanton women are often sicke, but in faith they cannot tell where: so the name of poetrie is odious to some, but neither his cause, nor effects, neither the summe that contains him, nor the particularities descending from him, giue any fast handle to their carping dispraise. Sir Philip Sidney in his Apologie for poetry. precepts are to be vsed in hearing and reading of poets, least they infect the mind Plut. & Plin. lib. 37. cap. 9. As in those places where many holsome hearbes doe growe, there also growes many poysonfull weedes: so in Poets there are many excellent things, and many pestilent matters. Plut. As Simoni aes sayde, that the Thessalians were more blockish, then that they could be deceiued of him: so the riper and pregnanter the wit is, the sooner it is corrupted of Poets. idem. As Cato when he was a scholler woulde not beleeue his maister, except hee rendered a reason of that he taught him: so wee are not to beleeue Poets in all that they write or say, except they yeelde a reason. Idem. As in the same pasture the Bee feaseth on the flower, the Goate grazeth on the shrub, the swine on the root, and the Oxen, Kine and Horses on the grasse: so in Poets one seeketh for historie, an other for ornament of speech, another for proofe, and an other for precepts of good life. idem. As they that come verie suddainlie out of a very darke place, are greatly troubled, except by little and little they be accustomed to the light: so in reading of Poets, the opinions of Phylosophers are to bee sowne in the mindes of young schollers, least many diuersities of doctrines doe afterwardes distract their mindes. idem. As in the portraiture of murder or incest, we praise the Art of him that drewe it, but we detest the thing it selfe: so in lasciuious Poets let vs imitate their elocution, but excrate their wantonnes. idem. Some thinges that are not excellent of themselues, are good for some, bicause they are meet for them: so some things are commended in Poets, which are fit and correspondent for the persons, they speake of although in themselues they bee filthy and not to be spoken: As lame Demonides wished, that the shoes that were stolne from him, might fit his feet that had stoln them. idem. As that ship is endaungered, where all leane to one side, but is in safetie, one leaning one way, and another another way: so the dissension of Poets among themselues, doth make them, that they lesse infect their readers. And for this purpose our Satyrists, Hall, the Author of Pigmalions Image, and certaine Satyres, Rankins , and such others, are very profitable. As a Bee doth gather the iuice of honie from flowres, whereas others are onely delighted with the colour and smel: so a Philosopher findeth that among Poets which is profitable for good life, when as others are tickled only with pleasure. Plut. As wee are delighted in the picture of a Viper or a spider artificially enclosed with in a precious ie well: so Poets do delight vs in ye learned & cuning depainting of vices. As some are delighted in couterfet wines confected of fruites, not that they refresh the hart, but that they make drunke: so some are delighted in Poets only for their obscenity, neuer respecting their eloquece good grace, or learning. As Emperors, kings and princes haue in their handes authority to dignifie or disgrace their nobles, attendants, subiects and vassals: so Poets haue the whole power in their handes to make men either immortally famous for their valiant exploites and vertuous exercises, or perpetually infamous for their vicious liues. As God giueth life vnto man: so a Poet giueth ornament vnto it. As the Greeke and Latine Poets haue wonne immortall credit to their natiue speech, beeing encouraged and graced by liberall patrones and bountifull Benefactors: so our famous and learned Lawreat masters of Englad would entitle our English to far greater admired excellency, if either the Emperor Augustus , or Octauia his sister, or noble Mecoenas were aliue to rewarde and countenaunce them; or if our witty Comedians and stately Tragedians (the glorious and goodlie representers of all fine witte, glorified phrase and queint action) bee still supported and vphelde, by which meanes for lacke of Patrones ( o ingratefull and damned age) our Poets are soly or chiefly maintained, countenanced and patronized. In the infancy of Greece, they that handled in the audience of the people, graue & necessary matters, were called wise men or eloquent men, which they ment by Vates : so the rest, which sang of loue matters, or other lighter deuises alluring vnto pleasure and delight, were called Poetoe or makers. As the holy Prophets and sanctified Apostles could neuer haue foretold nor spoken of such supernaturall matters, vnlesse they had bin inspired of God: so Cicero in his Tusculane questions is of ye minde, that a Poet cannot expresse verses aboundantly, sufficiently, and fully, neither his eloquence can flow pleasantly, or his wordes sound well and plenteously, without celestiall instinction; which Poets themselues do very often and gladly witnes of themselues, as namely Ouid in 6, Fast. Est Deus in nobis agitate calescimus illo, &c And our famous English Poet Spenser , who in his Sheepeheards Calender lamenting the decay of Poetry at these dayes, faith most sweetly to the same. Then make thee wings of thine aspiring wit And whence thou camest fly backe to heauen apace. &c. As a long gowne maketh not an Aduocate, although a gowne be a fit ornament for him: so riming nor versing maketh a Poet, albeit the Senate of Poets hath chosen verse as their fittest rayment; but it is ye faining notable images of vertues, vices, or what else, with that delightfull teaching, which must bee the right describing note to knowe a Poet by, Sir Philip Sidney in his Apology for Poetry. and Italian Poets. Musoeus; and Italy , other three auncient Poets, Liuius Andronicus, Ennius & Plautus : so hath England three auncient Poets, Chaucer, Gower and Lydgate. As Homer is reputed the Prince of Greek Poets; and Petrarch of Italian Poets: so Chaucer is accounted the God of English Poets. As Homer was the first that adorned the Greek tongue with true quantity: so Piers Plowman was the first that obserued the true quantitie of our verse without the curiositie of Rime. Ouid writ a Chronicle from the beginning of the world to his own time, that is, to the raign of Augustus the Emperour: so hath Harding the Chronicler (after his maner of old harsh riming) from Adam to his time, that is, to the raigne of King Edward the fourth. As Sotades Maronites ye Iambicke Poet gaue himselfe wholy to write impure and lasciuious things: so Skelto (I know not for what great worthines, surnamed the Poet Laureat) applied his wit to scurrilities and ridiculous matters, such amog the Greeks were called Pantomimi , with vs Buffons. As Consaluo Periz that excellent learned man, and Secretary to King Philip of Spayne, in translating the Ulysses of Homer out of Greeke into Spanish, hath by good iudgement auoided the faulte of Ryming, although not fully hit perfect and true versifying: so hath Henrie Howarde that true and noble Earle of Surrey in translating the fourth book of Virgils Æneas , whom Michael Drayton in his Englands heroycall Epistles hath eternized for an Epistle to his faire Geraldine. As these Neoterickes Iouianus Pontanus, Politianus, Marullus Tarchaniota , the two Strozoe the father and the son, Palingenius Mantuanus, Philelphus, Quintianus Stoa and Germanus Brixius haue obtained renown and good place among the auncient Latine Poets: so also these English men being Latine Poets, Gualter Hadden, Nicholas Car, Gabriel Haruey, Christopher Ocland, Thomas Newton with his Leyland, Thomas Watson, Thomas Campion, Brunswerd & Willey , haue attained good report and honorable aduancement in the Latin Empyre. As the Greeke tongue is made famous and eloquent by Homer, Hesiod, Euripedes, Aeschilus, Sophocles, Pindarus, Phocylides and Aristophanes; and the Latine tongue by Virgill, Ouid, Horace, Silius Italicus, Lucanus, Lucretius, Ausonius and Claudianus : so the English tongue is mightily enriched, and gorgeouslie inuested in rare ornaments and resplendent abiliments by sir Philip Sidney, Spencer, Daniel, Drayton, Warner, Shakespeare, Marlow and Chapman. As Xenophon , who did imitate so excellently, as to giue vs effigiem iusti impery , the portraiture of a iust Empyre vnder ye name of Cyrus (as Cicero saieth of him) made therein an absolute heroicall Poem; and as Heliodorus writ in prose his sugred inuetio of that picture of Loue in Theagines and Cariclea , and yet both excellent admired Poets: so sir Philip Sidney writ his immortal Poem, The Countesse of Pembrookes Arcadia , in Prose, and yet our rarest Poet. As Sextus Propertius saide; Nescio quid magis nascitur Iliade : so I say of Spencers Fairy Queene , I knowe not what more excellent or exquisite Poem may be written. As Achilles had the aduantage of Hector , because it was his fortune to bee extolled and renowned by the heauenly verse of Homer : so Spensers Elisa the Fairy Queen hath the aduantage of all the Queenes in the worlde, to bee eternized by so diuine a Poet. As Theoeritus is famoused for his Idyllid in Greeke, and Virgill for his Eclogs in Latine: so Spencer their imitatour in his Shepheardes Calender , is renowned for the like argument, and honoured for fine Poeticall inuention, and most exquisit wit. As Parthenius Nicoeus excellently sung the praises of his Arete : so Daniel hath diuinely sonetted the matchlesse beauty of his Delia. As euery one mourneth, when hee heareth of the lamentable plangors of Thracian Orphous for his dearest Euridice : so euery one passionateth, when he readeth the afflicted death of Daniels distressed Rosamond. As Lucan hath mournefully depainted the ciuil wars of Pompey & Coesar : so hath Daniel the ciuill wars of Yorke and Lancaster; and Drayton the ciuill wars of Edward the second, and the Barons. As Virgil doth imitate Catullus in ye like matter of Ariadne for his story of Queene Dido: so Michael Drayton doth imitate Ouid in his Englands Heroical Epistles. As Sophocles was called a Bee for the sweetnes of his tongue: so in Charles Fitz-Iefferies Drake, Drayton is termed Golden-mouth'd , for the purity and pretiousnesse of his stile and phrase. As Accius, M. Attilius and Milithus were called Tragoediographi , because they writ Tragedies: so may wee truly terme Michael Drayton Tragoediographus , for his passionate penning the downfals of valiant Robert of Normandy , chast Matilda , and great Gaueston. As Ioan. Honterus in Latine verse writ 3. Bookes of Cosmography wt Geographicall tables: so Michael Drayton is now in penning in English verse a Poem called Polu-olbion Geographical and Hydrographicall of all the forests, woods, mountaines, fountaines, riuers, lakes, flouds, bathes and springs that be in England. As Aulus Persius Flaccus is reported among al writers to be of an honest life and vpright conuersation: so Michael Drayton (que toties honoris & amoris causa nomino ) among schollers, souldiours, Poets, and all sorts of people, is helde for a man of vertuous disposition, honest conuersation, and wel gouerned cariage, which is almost miraculous among good wits in these declining and corrupttimes, when there is nothing but rogery in villanous man, & whe cheating and crastines is counted the cleanest wit, and soundest wisedome. As Decius Ausonius Gallus in libris Fastorum , penned the occurrences of ye world from the first creation of it to his time, that is, to the raigne of the Emperor Gratian : so Warner in his absolute Albions Englande hath most admirably penned the historie of his own country from Noah to his time, that is, to the raigne of Queene Elizabeth; I haue heard him termd of the best wits of both our Vniuersities, our English Homer. As Euripedes is the most sententious among the Greek Poets: so is Warner amog our English Poets. As the soule of Euphorbus was thought to liue in Pythagoras : so the sweete wittie soule of Ouid liues in mellifluous  & honytongued Shakespeares , witnes his Venus and Adonis , his Lucrece , his sugred Sonnets among his priuate friends,  &c. As Plautus and Seneca are accounted the best for Comedy and Tragedy among the Latines: so Shakespeare among ye English is the most excellent in both kinds for the stage; for Comedy, witnes his Getleme of Verona , his Errors , his Loue labors lost , his Loue labours wonne , his Midsummers night dreame ,  & his Merchant of Venice : for Tragedy his Richard the 2. Richard the 3. Henry the 4. King Iohn, Titus Andronicus and his Romeo and Iuliet. As Epius Stolo said, that the Muses would speake with Plautus tongue, if they would speak Latin: so I say that the Muses would speak with Shakespeare fine filed phrase, if they would speake English. As Musoeus , who wrote the loue of Hero and Leander , had two excellent schollers, Thamaras & Hercules : so hath he in England two excellent Poets, imitators of him in the same argument and subiect, Christopher Marlow , and George Chapman. As Ouid faith of his worke; Iamgo opus extgi, quod nec Iouis ira, nec ignis, Nec poterit ferrum, nec edax abolere vetustas. And as Horave saith of his; Exegi monumentu are perennius; Regaliq; situ pyramidu altius; Quod non imber edax; Non Aquilo impotens possit diruere; aut innumerabilis annorum series & fug a temporum : so say I seuerally of sir Philip Sidneys, Spencers Daniels, Draytons, Shakespeares , and Warners workes; Non Iouis ira: imbres: Mars: ferrum: flamma, senectus , Hoc opus vnda: lues: turbo: venena ruent. Et quanquam adplucherrimum hoc opus euertendum tres illt Dij conspirabut, Cronus, Vulcanus, & pater ipse gentis; Non tamen annorum series, non flamma, nec ensis , Æ ternum potuit hoc abolere Decus. As Italy had Dante, Boccace, Petrarch, Tasso, Celiano and Ariosto : so England had Mathew Roydon, Thomas Atchelow, Thomas Watson, Thomas Kid, Robert Greene & George Peele. As there are eight famous and chiefe languages, Hebrew, Greek, Latine, Syriack, Arabicke, Italian, Spanish and French : so there are eight notable seuerall kindes of Poets, Heroick, Lyricke, Tragicke, Comicke, Satiricke, Iambicke, Elegiacke & Pastoral. As Homer and Virgil among the Greeks and Latines are the chiefe Heroick Poets: so Spencer and Warner be our chiefe heroicall Makers. As Pindarus, Anacreon and Callimachus among the Greekes; and Horace and Catullus among the Latines are the best Lyrick Poets: so in this faculty the best amog our Poets are Spencer (who excelleth in all kinds) Daniel, Drayton, Shakespeare, Bretto As these Tragicke Poets flourished in Greece, Aeschylus, Euripedes, Sophocles, Alexander Aetolus, Achoeus Erithrioeus, Astydamas Atheniesis, Apollodorus Tarsensis, Nicomachus Phrygius, Thespis Atticus , and Timon Apolloniates; and these among the Latines, Accius, M. Attilius, Pomponius Secundus and Seneca : so these are our best for Tragedie, the Lorde Buckhurst , Doctor Leg of Cambridge, Doctor Edes of Oxforde, maister [ ] Ferris , the Authour of the Mirrour for Magistrates, Marlow, Peele, Watson, Kid, Shakespeare, Drayton, Chapman, Decker , and Beniamin Iohnson. As M. Anneus Lucanus writ two excellent Tragedies, one called Medea , the other de Incendio Troioe cum Priami calamitate : so Doctor Leg hath penned two famous tragedies, ye one of Richard the 3. the other of the destruction of Ierusalem. The best Poets for Comedy among the Greeks are these, Menander, Aristophanes, Eupolis Atheniensis, Alexis Terius, Nicostratus, Amipsias Atheniensis, Anaxadrides Rhodius, Aristonymus, Archippus Atheniesis and Callias Atheniensis; and among the Latines, Plautus, Terence, Noeuius, Sext. Turpilius, Licinius Imbrex , and Virgilius Romanus : so the best for Comedy amongst vs bee, Edward Earle of Oxforde, Doctor Gager of Oxforde, Maister Rowley once a rare Scholler of learned Pembrooke Hall in Cambridge, Maister Edwardes one of her Maiesties Chappell, eloquent and wittie Iohn Lilly, Lodge, Gascoyne, Greene, Shakespeare, Thomas Nash, Thomas Heywood, Anthony Mundye our best plotter, Chapman, Porter, Wilson, Hathway , and Henry Chettle. As Horace, Lucilius, Iuuenall, Persius & Lucullus are the best for Satyre among the Latines: so with vs in the same faculty these are chiefe, Piers Plowman, Lodge, Hall of Imanuel Colledge in Cambridge; the Authour of Pigmalions Image, and certaine Satyrs; the Author of Skialetheia. Among the Greekes I wil name but two for Iambicks, Archilochus Parius , and Hipponax Ephesius : so amongst vs I name but two Iambical Poets, Gabriel Haruey , and Richard Stanyhurst , bicause I haue seene no mo in this kind. As these are famous among the Greeks for Elegie, Melanthus, Mymnerus Colophonius, Olympius Mysius, Parthenius Nicoeus, Philetas Cous, Theogenes Megarensis , and Pigres Halicarnassoeus; and these among the Latines, Mecoenas, Ouid, Tibullus, Propertius, T. Valgius, Cassius Seuerus & Clodius Sabinus : so these are the most passionate among vs to bewaile and bemoane the perplexities of Loue, Henrie Howard Earle of Surrey, sir Thomas Wyat the elder, sir Francis Brian , sir Philip Sidney , sir Walter Rawley , sir Edward Dyer, Spencer, Daniel, Drayton, Shakespeare, Whetstone, Gascoyne, Samuell Page sometimes fellowe of Corpus Christi Colledge in Oxford, Churchyard, Bretton. As Theocritus in Greeke, Virgil and Mantua in Latine, Sanazar in Italian, and the Authour of Amyntoe Gaudia and Walsinghams Meliboeus are the best for pastorall: so amongst vs the best in this kind are sir Philip Sidney , master Challener, Spencer, Stephen Gosson, Abraham Fraunce and Barnefield. These and many other Epigrammatists ye Latin tongue hath, Q. Catulus, Porcius Licinius, Quintus Cornificius, Martial, Cn. Getulicus , and wittie sir Thomas Moore : so in English we haue these, Heywood, Drate, Kendal, Bastard, Dauies. As noble Mecoenas that sprung from the Hetruscan Kinges not onely graced Poets by his bounty, but also by beeing a Poet himselfe; and as Iames the 6\. nowe king of Scotland is not only a fauorer of Poets, but a Poet, as my friend master Richard Barnefielde hath in this Disticke passing well recorded: The King of Scots now liuing is a Poet, As his Lepanto, and his furies show it : so Elizabeth our dread soueraign and gracious Queene is not only a liberal patrone vnto Poets, but an excellent Poet herself, whose learned, delicate and noble Muse surmounteth, be it in Ode, Elegy, Epigram , or in any other kind of Poem Heroicke , or Lyricke. Octauia sister vnto Augustus the Emperour was exceeding bountifull vnto Virgil , who gaue him for making 26. verses, 1137 pounds, to wit, tenne Sestertiaes for euerie verse, which amount to aboue 43. pounds for euery verse: so learned Mary , the honorable Countesse of Pembrook , the noble sister of immortall sir Philip Sidney , is very liberall vnto Poets; besides shee is a most delicate Poet, of whome I may say, as Antipater Sidonius writeth of Sappho: Dulcia Mnemosyne demirans earmina Sapphus, Quoesiuit decima Pieris unde foret. Among others in times past, Poets had these fauourers, Augustus, Mecoenas, Sophocles, Germanicus , an Emperour, a noble man, a Senatour, and a Captaine: so of later times Poets haue these patrones, Robert king of Sicil, the great king Frances of France, king Iames of Scotland,  & Queene Elizabeth of England. As in former times two great Cardinals, Bembus & Bicna , did countenance Poets: so of late yeares two great preachers haue giuen them their right hands in felowship, Beza and Melancthon. As the learned philosophers Fracastorius and Scaliger haue highly prized them: so haue the eloquent Orators Pontanus and Muretus very gloriously estimated them. As Georgius Buckananus Iephthe , amongst all moderne Tragedies is able to abide the touch of Aristotles precepts, and Euripedes examples: so is Bishop Watsons Absalon. As Terence for his translations out of Apollodorus & Menander , and Aquilius for his translation out of Menander , and C. Germanicus Augustus for his out of Aratus , and Ausonius for his translated Epigrams out of Greeke, and Doctor Iohnson for his Frogge-fight out of Homer , and Watson for his Antigone out of Sophocles , haue got good commendations: so these versifiers for their learned translations are of good note among vs, Phaer for Virgils Aencads, Golding for Ouids Metamorphosis, Harington for his Orlado Furioso , the translators of Senecaes Tragedies, Barnabe Googe for Palingenius, Turberuile for Ouids Epistles and Mantuan , and Chapman for his inchoate Homer. As the Latines haue these Emblematists, Andreas Alciatus, Reusnerus , and Sambucus : so we haue these, Geffrey Whitney, Andrew Willet , and Thomas Combe. As Nonnus Panapolyta writ the Gospell of saint Iohn in Greeke Hexameters: so Ieruis Markham hath written Salomons Canticles in English verse. As C. Plinius writ the life of Pomponius Secudus : so yong Charles Fitz- Ieffrey , that high touring Falcon, hath most gloriously penned the honourable life and death of worthy sir Francis 'Drake. As Hesiod writ learnedly of husbandry in Greeke: so hath Tusser very wittily and experimentally written of it in English. As Antipater Sidonius was famous for extemporall verse in Greeke, and Ouid for his Quicquid conabar dicere versus erat : so was our Tarleton , of whome Doctour Case that learned physitian thus speaketh in the seuenth Booke,  & seuenteenth chapter of his Politikes; Aristoteles suum Theodoretum laudauit quendam peritum Tragoediarum actorem; Cicero suum Roscium: nos Angli Tarletonum, in cuius voce & vultu omnes iocosi affectus, in cuius cerebroso capite lepidoe facetioe habitant . And so is now our wittie Wilson , who, for learning and excemporall witte in this facultie, is without compare or compeere, as to his great and eternall commendations he manifested in his chalenge at the Swanne on the Banke side. As Achilles tortured the deade bodie of Hector , and as Antonius , and his wife Fuluia tormented the liuelesse corps of Cicero : so Gabriell Haruey hath shewed the same inhumanitie to Greene that lies full low in his graue. As Eupolis of Athens vsed great libertie in taxing the vices of men: so dooth Thomas Nash , witnesse the broode of the Harueys. As Actoeon was wooried of his owne hounds: so is Tom Nash of his Ile of Dogs . Dogges were the death of Euripedes , but bee not disconsolate gallant young Iuuenall, Linus , the sonne of Apollo died the same death. Yet God forbid that so braue a witte should so basely perish, thine are but paper dogges, neither is thy banishment like Ouids , eternally to conuerse with the barbarous Getes . Therefore comfort thy selfe sweete Tom. with Ciceros glorious return to Rome,  & with the counsel Aeneas giues to his seabeaten soldiors, lib. 1. Aeneid. Pluck vp thine heart, & driue from thence both feare and care away: To thinke on this may pleasure be perhaps another day. Durato, & temet rebus seruato secundis. As Anacreon died by the pot: so George Peele by the pox. As Archesilaus Prytanoeus perished by wine at a drunken feast, as Hermippus testifieth in Diogenes : so Robert Greene died of a surfet taken at Pickeld Herrings,  & Rhenish wine, as witnesseth Thomas Nash , who was at the fatall banquet. As Iodelle , a French tragical poet beeing an Epicure, and an Atheist, made a pitifull end: so our tragicall poet Marlow for his Epicurisme and Atheisme had a tragicall death; you may read of this Marlow more at large in the Theatre of Gods iudgments , in the 25. chapter entreating of Epicures and Atheists. As the poet Lycophron was shot to death by a certain riual of his: so Christopher Marlow
