 if it consisted in my poore abilitie. Apollo giues Oracles, as well to the poore as to the rich. The most noblest minds, haue alwayes as well esteemed the intents of the well meaning, as the performace of the best able. Euen so, I trust your Honour, in whom the essence of true Nobilitie and vertue, are vnited, wil (vnder the protection of your wisdoms fauourable censure) regard my dutifull meaning herein. Which hath not beene satisfied with admiration, but long time desirous to bee one of the participants of your Honours most laudable dispositions, whervnto I do wholy submit my selfe. Resting in hopeful assurance, that notwithstanding, whatsoeuer wanteth in me, or the workes worthinesse, yet your Honor will daine to accept this small present, or rather therein my good will: which will yeeld to none in respect of dutiful deuotion, though vnable to compare with the least of the learned writers, that haue past their works vnder the title of your honorable patronage. Which fauor, I humbly desire your Honor, of your abundant liberalitie, to impart to my poor tallent, as of one that of dutie intermitteth not to sollicite the almighty, that he wold alwaies direct you in the commendable race of vertue, inrich you with all spirituall and temporall blessings, augment your Honors to the highest degree, and in the end, reward you with immortall felicitie. Yours Honors most bounden and obedient in all dutie: Emanuel Forde . foule weather launch into the deepe, and so bring his Shippe in daunger: So I, (courteous Readers) haue aduenturously thrust foorth this fancie, to abide your censure: which if kinde, care is past: If otherwise, to abide shipwracke by your discontent. But howsoeuer, I relie vppon your courtesie, that although the matter procure you not that delight my trauels did expect, yet you will allowe the writers good intent. And though the phrase bee not altogither agreeable to your fancie, yet you will fauourablie iudge thereof, as the first fruites of my labours. If my selfe were present to aunswere all obiections, those that are discontented, shoulde rest better satisfied. But in mine absence, I craue your kinde opinion, wishing no other shelter wherevnder to shrowde the defectes, then your courtesie. This Knight was long since bred in Bohemia: but in Thessalie hee wanne his title of honour: where first beganne his famons deedes, which if they please, my rewarde is sufficient: if not, yet pardon, and by your clemencie, adde life to the seconde part, whose beeing, resteth in your power. Expect not the high stile of a refined wit, but the plaine description of valiant Knights, and the constant trueth of loyall friends. Condemne not vnkindly, but censure fauourablie, and impute the defects to my want, not my will, that my desire may take wished effect, which is to please all, and giue offence to none: yet carelesse to satisfie the curious discontented, who contemne all things, but amend nothing. And thus for my recompence, let me haue your kinde wordes, and lawfull fauour, and I aske no more. Farewell. E. Forde. Parismus , the famous Prince of Bohemia , his noble Battailes fought against the Persians, his loue to Laurana , the Kings daughder of Thessaly : and his straunge Aduentures in the desolate Iland. How Parismus sonne and heire to the King of Bohemia , arriued in Thessaly , how he was entertained by Dionisius the King, who kept his Court at the Citie of Thebes , and of a straunge aduenture that befell to Osiris , one of Dionisius Knights. In the most rich and famous Countrey of Thessaly , raigned one Dionisius . whose discretion in gouernment, and singular wisedome in ruling so mightie a Nation, made the splendant fame of his renowne to spread it selfe to the vttermost confines of the world: and most Countries made continuall traffique thither, by reason of the good and equitable lawes he had instituted for the quiet of his Country. Amongst the rest of his externall blessings wherof he enioyed abundance, his Court was much renowmed by the exceeding bewtie, and vertuous gifts of Oliuia his Queene, by whome he had one onely daughter named Laurana , whose bewtie so farre excelled all other Ladies, that she was esteemed (in those parts of the world) the onely paragon for bewtie. Besides, the vertuous quallities, and pretious giftes of nature, wherewith her minde was abundantly adorned, did so much extoll her high commendations, that many Princes of farre Countries, did trauell thither to attaine her loue. Insomuch that by continuall accesse of many strange Knights, the Court of Dionisius daily increased in dignitie, who gaue most courteous entertainment to all, as fitted to their honour, and accorded with his most bounteous wisedome. Amongst the rest of the Knightes that came to bee eye witnesses of the bewtie of Laurana , it fortuned the young Prince Parismus , sonne and heire to the King of Bohemia , to arriue on the confines of Thessaly , being accompanied with diuers Nobles of his Fathers Court. Who hauing before heard of the fame of Dionisius , the courteous entertainment hee gaue to straungers, and the exceeding bewtie of his daughter Laurana , determined to trauaile thither to trie his fortune to winne her loue, as also to be partaker of his bountie, being thereto drawne by a vertuous inclination to imitate his honourable examples. And calling to him one of his Knights named Oristus , willed him to goe to Dionisius Court, and signifie vnto his Maiestie, that he was desirous to visite him, if it pleased him to accept him as a guest. Oristus making speede, soone arriued at the Citie of Thebes , where the King then kept his Court, and being admitted his presence, deliuered his message. Which when Dionisius vnderstood, hee tolde Oristus that he did verie willingly gratulate the Princes kindenesse, desiring him to certifie his Lord, that he should be most heartily welcome, wherewith Oristus departed. Dionisius willed his Noble men to be in readinesse the next day, for hee purposed to meete the Prince himselfe. In the meane time hee commaunded all preparation that might be deuised to be made, for his more honourable entertainment. Early the next morning, Dionisius attended by his noble men, rode foorth to meete the Prince some three myles from the Citie, whome he most louingly imbraced and welcommed with exceeding courtesie, Parismus maruelling at this vnexpected kindnesse in him, said: Most high and magnificent King, I being altogither vnwoorthie of this your exceeding fauour, most humbly intreate your pardon to my presumption, desiring you to impute my rashnesse to my youth, which hath attempted this boldnesse, without any hope in the least degree howe to deserue such kindnesse. Dionisius taking him by the hand, desired him to leaue off those speeches, for that he esteemed his Court and Countrey insufficient to entertaine him according as he desired, telling him that he was the most welcome guest to his Court that might be: wherewith they ioyfully departed towardes the Citie, but as they rode, they heard a most greeuous grone in the thicket of a wood harde by. Whereupon Dionisius commaunded his Knightes to beset the wood on euery side, himselfe, Parismus , and diuers Noble men, entered the thicket, where they founde an Armed Knight most greeuously wounded: At which pittifull spectacle, Dionisius alighted from his Horse, and viewing his face, knew him to bee his trustie Knight Osiris , whome he most dearely loued. Wherefore hee commaunded him to bee conueyed to the Court, that his owne Phisitians might looke to him and binde vp his woundes. In the meane time, the King, Parismus , and diuerse Knights, made diligent searche in the Woode, but coulde finde no creature there, and thereby no certaintie howe Osiris should be thus wounded: That departing discontented, the King was certified that there was great hope of his recouery, who speaking to Parismus , said most noble Prince, I hope this mischaunce hath not disquietted you, for I would be sorie you should conceiue any occasion of sadnesse thereat, but I trust by that time Osiris be recouered, we shall easily come to the knowledge hereof. My Lord, replied Parismus , I haue no cause to be greeued for my part, but to see your Maiestie hereby disquieted. Indeed said Dionisius , it somewhat greeueth me, because Osiris is one that I loue, being well worthie therof, for his vertues doo farre exceed many mens, of whose faith and fidelitie I haue had sufficient triall, that a more loyall Knight cannot be found. By this time they were come to the Pallace gate, where was ye Queen with all her traine of Ladies, to welcome Parismus , which was a most pleasing sight to behold, that the Prince with the suddaine view of their bewtie, was driuen into a deepe study, from which he was reuiued by the Queene, who most gratiously welcommed him, saying: In all kindnesse, I bid your honour welcome into Thessaly , where we will indeuour to requite your friendship in comming to vs. Most vertuous Queene (quoth he) for this your honorable fauour, both my selfe and all that is mine, shall be continually bound to do you dutiful seruice. The glory of the Pallace made Parismus maruaile, his honourable entertainment, the sumptuous banquets, the rare Musike, and gallant showes, too tedious to rehearse, made him thinke that Fame had altogither darkened the glorie of that place, that all his sences were replenisht with varietie of delights. At such time as Dionisius the Prince, entred the Court, Laurana hearing of the Princes comming, standing at her Chamber window, viewed them well, and knew, or at least thought that to be Parismus that came with her father, noting well his gallant & comely proportion, said to one of her maides named Leda , Is not yonder Knight that accompanieth my father, the Prince of Bohemia ? Yes (quoth Leda ) I thinke so, for a more gallanter Knight did I neuer behold. Wherewith the crimson colour in Lauranaes cheeke began to reuiue: which Leda perceiuing, said, it would become our Court well, to haue his presence continually, for it cannot chuse but a Knight of so faire proportion, must needs be endued with as excellent gifts. Why quoth Laurana , this Court cannot long containe such guests: wherewithall she went to dinner, feeling a kinde of alteration in all her parts, which seemed straunge to her, for euen then loue began to kindle in her tender heart, which yet shee did not well vnderstand, but afterwards grewe to a burning heate, as shall be declared. She vsed sildome to come abroad, but sometimes priuately for recreation, for such was her chaste resolue, that she delighted in nothing but vertuous meditations. To relate the conference the King and Parismus had, were tedious and impertinent to the Historie. But the Prince maruailed he could not see Laurana , so famous for her bewtie, being hereby drawn into many deep cogitations, by which thoughts and remembrance of the long iourney he had passed, onely to behold her person, and now could not be assured he had seene the bewtie he expected, was drawne into such a sad studie, that in a maner he neither heard what was spoken, nor regarded where he was. At last reuiuing his sences that were dulled with passion, he suddainly sight, and smiling said, fearing his heauinesse had bene noted) your Maiestie may peraduenture note my sadnesse, the remembrance of your Knights iniurie, maketh me studie how hee should be so greeuously wounded, and no man found that should act the same (which words hee onely spake to excuse himselfe). Surely answered the King, some man by secret trecherie hath wrought him that harme, which at more conuenient time we shall finde the truth thereof, which I would offre with all speed, but that I hope to be assertained by himselfe, whom my Phisitians say is in good estate of amendment. With these and many other speeches. Dinner was fully ended, and Dionisius, Parismus , and the Queene, walked into a most pleasant Gardein, where after a while he was entertained with a most costly and rare banquet, prouided in an arbour or banquetting house, adioyning to a groue fraught with many pleasant birds, whose sweete harmony much augmented the pleasure of the place, all thinges being most artificially contriued for delight: which when Parismus beheld, he then began to thinke with himselfe, now shall I see the Princesse Laurana , for whose sight I haue vndertaken this trauell, whose delightful presence shall refresh my tired sences, and expell those inward cares wherewith I am thus perplexed. But when he sawe none but the King and Queene, he was much troubled in his minde, to thinke what might be the cause, that she whose fame had long since come to his knowledge, was not to be seene, that by constrained mirth, he past away the time in such banquetting and other pastime as the King entertained him withall, which were such, as he much wondred at. And night being come, with all statelinesse that might be, he was by them conducted to his lodging, which was most sumptuously adorned with most precious and rich hangings, that the place seemed a new paradice, for there wanted nothing that might either delight the eare or eye. Lodgings for his Noble men, Knights & seruants, were placed in such manner, that they seemed by their scituation, to be gardiants to their Lordes person: hauing then taken his leaue of the King and Queene, he betooke himselfe to his rest. How Parismus hauing soiourned some daies in the Thessalian Court, being frustrated of seeing the Princesse Laurana , imparted his minde to Oristus one of his Knights, by whose meanes afterwards he came to a sight of her. And what befell afterwards. After Parismus was come to his Chamber, he called to him Oristus , the only man whom he trusted, and asked him how hee liked the Court of Dionisius ? My Lord (quoth he) the small continuance I haue had therein, might be sufficient to excuse me from censuring thereof, bat to satisfie your demaund, I doo esteeme and thinke of it, as a most renowmed and honourable place. But sayd Parismus , what if thy Lord shall here purchase that which shall be worse then death vnto him, vnlesse he haue remedie? what wouldest thou then thinke? I would my Lord said he, speake my opinion, if I knew whence the originall of that euil should proceed. From my selfe said Parismus , for thus it is: thou I am sure hast heard of the renowmed Laurana , and of the honourable report that is spread of her bewtie and vertues, which driueth me into manifold thoughts, because I cannot beholde that bewtie, therefore I impart my minde to thee, as to the only man I trust, that vnlesse I can by thy meanes haue some hope of comfort, I shall both curse the houre of my natiuitie, and remaine hereafter in continuall griefe: therefore counsaile me what I were best to doo herein. My Lord sayde Oristus , since it pleaseth your highnesse so much to fauour me, as to chuse me to be your aide herein, I wil most faithfully, and speedily, do my vttermost to accomplish your desire. I pray thee then doo it, said Parismus , with all speed, for my restlesse passions require counsaile. I haue said Oristus , some acquaintance with Lord Remus , who is greatly fauoured of the King, continuall Resident in the Court, and well beloued of all, by whose meanes I do not doubt, but both to haue some certain knowledge of the Princesse, as also soone to bring you to her speech, and according as you haue put me in trust, so I will vse all the meanes I can to purchase your content. Much part of the night being past, Parismus betooke himself to his rest, and Oristus to his lodging. In the morning Dionisius being early vp, vsed his accustomed maner to visit his guests, and comming to Parismus Chamber, he found him not there, but walking in a gallery thereto adioyning, and saluting him, said: Noble Prince, if you are not weary of your late iourney, I would request your company to goe on hunting this day, for that I haue appointed to meete a noble friend of mine at the Forrest of redde Deare (for so it was called for the abundance of those beasts that the Countrey breedeth,) where you shall see what pastime the Houndes can make. Which Parismus kindly accepted. Oristus he staied behind, to the ende to bring his purpose to effect, and walking into the Gardein, he chaunced according to his desire, to meete with Lord Remus , who hauing saluted him, said he was glad to finde him at leisure, to haue some conference with him about their acquaintance: so that walking into a solitary Arbour, talking of diuers matters, it chaunced, the Princesse Laurana thinking to recreate her selfe in the Gardeine, for that she thought all the Nobles had bene gone with the King her Father on hunting, to come accompanied with her mayden Leda , vnto the solitarie place, where Lord Remus and Oristus were then talking, and espying Lord Remus , who she presently knew. My Lord, quoth she, I had thought you had bene on hunting this day, but I see your minde is busied with some other exercises. Most noble Princesse quoth he, if I had gone on hunting, I should haue left this honorable Lord without company, so that I thought it my dutie to keepe him from better studies, with my homely talke, so she kindly saluting them, told Oristus he was welcome to her fathers court, and therewith departed. Quoth Oristus , my Lorde is this the Princesse Laurana , of whom I haue heard such rare commendations in Bohemia ? it is sayd, he the verie same, and the most vertuous and curteous Ladie that liueth this day, who verie seldome commeth abroad, but continually giueth her minde to practise excellent qualities, amongst other vertuous Ladies. During this there talke, they had walked about the Pallace, to the ende that Oristus might beholde the statelinesse thereof, who hauing seene all things, and knowing which was Lauranas lodging, was in some measure comforted by that knowledge. Thus the day being spent, and the king returned from hunting, Parismus came to Oristus , and required of him if he had heard of Laurana , and what comfort there was for him. My Lord (quoth he) I haue beheld her, and heard her heauenly voyce, which is able to astonish any man with her exceeding beautie, relating vnto him all the conference hee had with the Lord Remus , which did greatly reioice him to heare, and so betook himself to his rest, where he spent the most part of the night, in meditating how to come to talke, or haue a sight of her. Uerie earlie the next morning, taking a booke in his hand, he went into the garde that was vnder Lauranas chamber window, where hauing walked a while, he espied her looking out, that he stoode as one halfe amazed to behold her wonderfull beautie, for though he had neuer seene her before, yet his fancie perswaded him it was she: which shee perceyuing, stepping backe, called Leda vnto her, asking her if shee knew the knight that walked vnder her window, who certified her it was the Prince of Bohemia , where at Laurana blusht so exceedingly, that her heart seemed to leape within her, then secretly looking out, she diligently beheld him, taking such generall view of his comlinesse, that presently her fancie began to commend his person, feeling in her selfe a kinde of delight to beholde him: but Parismus seeing her gone, began to reproue himselfe of follie, that by his rashnesse had depriued himselfe of her sight. By that time he had walked there a short space, Oristus came to tell him that the King expected his comming into the great Chamber, which caused him depart, giuing a sadde looke to the window, as verie vnwilling to leaue the sight therof, recounting to Oristus how fortunately he had beheld Laurana . By this time they were come to the King, who saluting Parismus , desired his company to go visit Osiris , at their comming they found him very cheerfull, which reioyced Dionisius to see, and comming to him, told him, that he with the young Prince of Bohemia , was come to visit him, and to be assured of the occasion of his hurt. I yeelde my humble thankes said Osiris , to your Highnesse, and to that noble Prince, for the care you haue of my welfare, being sorie that by my misaduenture you haue bene at all disquieted. But to satisfie your Highnesse herein, thus it was. The same day that your excellencie found me so wounded, I being vp somewhat early, walking at the nether ende of my Orchard, espied an armed Knight haling and pulling a bewtiful yong mayden, in most rude and discurteous maner, and notwithstanding the manifold intreaties she vsed, would not leaue his crueltie, but vsed these speeches vnto her: content thy selfe to be thus vsed at my hands, and take it for a fauour that I vse thee not worse: for the iniury thy brother hath done me, will I reuenge on thee. Why saide shee, it was not my offence, nor procured by my knowledge, he is a Knight and beareth armes, reuenge your selfe on him, and do not attempt to dishonor me that am a mayden, but rather take my life, that thereby I may be rid from the shame you intend to my honor. Nay proud damsell quoth he, if thou thinkest the vsage I intend a shame, I will the rather doo it to vexe thee. I listned so long as I could to heare their talke, and marking which way they tooke, I went in, and with all speed I could, armed my self and followed after them, but could not ouertake them before they were gotten into ye wood, where by the cry of the damsell, I found him readie to accomplish his villany, threatning most greeuously to torment her, if she did not yeeld vnto him. Traytor said I, what moueth thee to vse this Lady thus discurteously? It ill beseemeth a gentleman and a knight as thou seemest to be, to vse such rygor to a distressed virgin. Sir begone, said he againe, or I will quickly send thee against thy wil, and then tell thee my reason. Wherewith the mayden desired me, I would pittie her estate, telling me yt she was daughter vnto a knight, belonging to the King of Salmatia , and was by this knight violently taken forth of her fathers garden, none being by to aide her, and brought vnto that poore estate, by the crueltie of that wicked homycide, who ment to dishonor her, desiring me if I were a knight and not bent to be inhumane, that I would release her from his tyrannie. Wherewithall (his mind being puft with villainy) he ran vpon me, and I defended my self, we had not continued long, but there issued forth of the wood two other in armor, being as it seemed, of the firsts acquaintance, and violently running vpon me, not speaking one word, left me in that estate you found me, but when the two last came foorth, the mayden fled away, and whether they found her againe or no I know not. This my soueraigne is the true occasion of my mischance. Parismus all this while stood very sadly musing, as hauing his mind more busied on his loue, then to listen to Osiris speech, being far inthralled to the bewtie of Laurana , on whom he placed all his felicitie, till that Dionisius wakened him from his dumps with this speech. My Lord said he, how was it possible that these men should escape our hands we comming so neare, and besetting the wood presently vpon the noyse, and I maruell howe the damesell could escape vnseen, we hauing so nearly searched the wood throughout. My Lord (quoth he,) either they haue some priuie Caue wherein they conuey themselues, or I cannot thinke how they should so secretly depart, not knowing that there was any at hand to rescue Osiris . Thus hauing conferred, and euery ones censure diuersly giuen, Dionisius said: My heart earnestly desireth to know how this is come to passe, and to find that poore distressed mayden. How Sicanus son to the king of Persia , the King and Queen of Hungaria , the Prince of Sparta , and the Ladie Isabella , arriued at Dionsius Court, and how Parismus in a maske (accompanied by Lord Remus , and diuerse other knights of Thessalie ) courted the Princesse Laurana , and how she became enamoured of him. When Dionisius and Parismus had visited Osiris , and returned to the Court, they heard the sound of most sweete recording Musicke, which made Dionisius woonder, but it was soone certified him, that there was come to his Court diuerse Ladies of great account, from forth of Hungaria , and Sparta in great mirth and royaltie, whom the Queene had entertained, not knowing what they were, because they concealed themselues, and that there were diuerse knights hunting in the Forrest, of red Deere, and intended that night to come to the Pallace, which made Dionisius , both admire what these newe come guests shoulde bee, and studie how to entertaine them on such a sodaine. Therefore leauing Parismus to bee accompanied with others of his nobles, hee gaue order for the intertaining that companie of straungers. When Parismus was alone, he got himselfe to his Chamber, and began to think that now there was such a componie of states that concealed themselues coming to the court, he being so infortunate, as not yet hauing made knowen his loue to Laurana , some of them might become his riuall, and make first sute vnto her and so be first accepted, and he disappoynted of his chiefest felicitie: therefore hee determined that euening to vse all possible meanes he might, to make knowne his affection, hauing spent most part of the afternoone in these and such like meditations, hee was certified by Oristus , the strange knights were come to the Court, and that he knewe them to bee Antenor , the young king of Hungaria , and the yong Queene, the kings sonne of Sparta named Turnus , and one yong knight thut concealed himselfe, who seemed to bee the greatest personage in the companie, and that the Ladies that came before, were the Queene of Hungeria , Ladie Isabella , sister to the Prince of Sparta , and with them diuerse Ladies of account, which made Parismus muse what that vnknowne knight should be, and began to bee iealous of that, which as yet he had no likelihood himselfe to obtaine. Being thus troubled in minde, shee resolued that night by a maske to honour Dionisius his guests, thereby to winne occasion if it might possible be, to court his Mistresse. Therefore hee willed Oristus to make some of the yong Nobles of the Court acquainted with his intent, and so to certifie Dionisius that hee was scarce well, and desired to keepe his Chamber, which when Dionisius heard, he desired Oliuia to see that he wanted nothing, for hee was the onely guest hee esteemed. The Queene comming to Parismus Chamber to visit him, founde him verie busie with the other knights about their maske, who espying her, beganne to be somewhat abashed, saying: Most noble Queene, I desire your pardon, hauing taken mee thus on a sudden. I did certifie his highnesse that I was not well, to the intent to bring our maske vnlooked for. Noble prince replied the Queene, I am glad that you are in this good estate of health, and thus readie to honour vs with your vertuous exercises promising you to keep your intent secret to my self. And if you want any furtherance, that I can pleasure you withall, it shall be readie at your commaund, wherewith she departed to Laurana , telling that shee intended to make the newe come states a banquet, and therefore willed her to giue order to haue the same performed, which newes reioyced Laurana to heare, for that she hoped there to see the Prince of Bohemia , to whom she bare an inward loue and desire of acquaintance, so that hasting all things to a readinesse, and adorning her selfe in most comely ornaments, she expected the wished time of their comming. When supper was ended, the Queene comanded a gentleman to inuite Dionisius , the king of Hungaria , the Prince of Sparta , and all the rest vnto a banket, in an exceeding stately Gallerie, where they were by the Queene most royally entertained, all in generall admiring the exceeding beautie, and comely statelinesse of the Princesse Laurana , that almost they fed theselues as much with her surpassing beautie, as with the dainties that were there prepared. Laurana on the other side, maruailed, that amongst all those knights she could not behold the prince of Bohemia , which draue her into manifold thoghts, only resting in hope to be afterwards assured of the truth. By that time the banket was ended, and all readie to depart, they were staied by the sound of most sweete musicke, which vnexpected noise, made Dionisius wonder: but to driue him fro those thoughts, the maskers entred in this sort: first entred two torch- bearers, apparelled in white satten, beset with spangles of gold, after whom followed two Eunuches apparelled all in greene, playing on two instruments, then came Parismus attired all in Carnation satten, most richly beset with precious stones, that the glittering reflection thereof, with the light of the candles did dazell the eies of ye beholders: next followed two other torch- bearers,  & Eunches apparelled as the former, and playing on seuerall instruments, when came two knights apparelled in tawnie, most richly adorned: next them followed two other torch-bearers and eunuches, apparelled as the first: after whom followed two other knights apparelled in tawnie as the other: and last came two torch-bearers, and two eunuches, apparelled, and playing on seuerall instruments: after whome folowed Lord Remus , apparelled in Carnation like Parismus , but not in such gorgeous maner, altogither marching thrise about the Gallery, whiles their musick sounded, all the assembly well liked this maske, especially, Dionisius wondred of whence they were, for that he was alttogither ignorant, nothing suspecting that they were of his owne Court, saying to the Prince of Sparta , there is a yong Prince in my Court, that is now sicke, otherwise I should thinke he had been chief amongst them: the eyes of the whole companie were busied with beholding their comely persons, and their ears delighted with the sweete sound of their musicke. Laurana aduisedly beheld those knights, thinking verily that Parismus was one in the companie: for shee knew not of the message he had sent the king her father. While she was in the midst of this meditation, Parismus came with great reuerence to take her by the hand to daunce, which shee courteously accepted: Lord Remus tooke the Princesse of Spartaes sister, Lord Oristus another ladie of Sparta , and likewise the rest. The first measure being ended, Parismus reuerently saluted Laurana with these speeches. Most vertuous Princesse, pardon me for presuming to trouble your sacred eares with my speeches, for the vertue of your beautie hath ouermaistred my affections, and my poore life is deuoted to your seruice, desiring you to accept me for your poore seruant, though altogether vnworthy. And though the small triall you haue of my truth, may discourage you to credit me: yet notwithstanding my vnworthinesse, I desire you to imploy me any way, therby to trie how willing I will be to merite your fauor. Sir, quoth Laurana , I thank you for your kindnes, neither ca I blame your speeches, if your meaning be good. But as I am vnworthy to entertaine such a seruant, so would I not willingly trust him I know not, but hereafter when your disguise is banished, as I shall see good I will entertaine you. Noble Lady, said Parismus , I haue take this habit only, thereby to be so happy, as to make manifest my affection to deserue your fauor, that if you wil vouchsafe to conceiue aright of my good meaning, you would say, he that profereth his seruice, woulde refuse to do it to any but to your most worthie selfe. Sir (qd. she) as I know you not, so I am ignorant of your meauin I, and therefore count mee not vnmannerly to make no more estimation of your proferred curtesie. Parismus being readie to speake, the second measure sounded which being ended, Lord Remns began to parlie with Ladie Isabella , sister to the Prince of Sparta , Courteous Ladie, I being vnknowne, profer my humble seruice vno your selfe vnto whose perfections I am so wholy bound, that vnlesse it pleaseth you to accept of my loyaltie, I shall consume my wearisome dayes in sorrow. Sir, quoth Isabella , your vndeserued kindnesse I know not how to requite, and I would be sorie that by my occasion you should be grieued, and I promise you as occasion serueth, hereafter I will intertaine you. All this while Parismus was talking with Laurana vsing these speeches: most worthie Princesse, because I am disguised, you may count my woordes to proceede, rather of course, then of true affection, but assure you, neuer did any with truer zeale vtter his fainting wordes, nor more abhorre vnfaithfulnesse, then my selfe doth: being also vnknowne to you, you may thinke my boldnesse to proceede of hope not to be knowne, but to acquaint you with my name, it is Parismus , who haue forsaken my Countrey, and friends, onely to serue your vertuous selfe, and do you seruice. But since my comming into your fathers Court, I could neuer be so happie vntill this happie houre, as to inioy your presence, which is the onely comfort wheron my happinesse dependeth, therefore vertuous Princesse, weigh my intent in the ballance of equitie, and let mee by your comfortable speech bee reuiued. My noble Lore, replied Laurana , I heartily thanke you for taking so much paines for my sake, being vnwoorthie thereof, and also vnable to bee sufficiently thankfull vnto you for the same, and for that you say your happinesse resteth in my power, if I can any way work your content, to the vttermost of my endeuour, I will do it. Parismus was so rauished with the heauenly voyce of Laurana , that hee could haue wisht no other happinesse, then to inioy her presence, and was by her kinde and modest answer so much comforted, that he resolued no miserie or calamitie whatsoeuer, should alter his affection. Laurana on the other side, whose minde was neuer before in thraldome, began nowe to bee so farre tied in the bonds of friendship, & good liking to Parismus , that she was altogither vnwilling to leaue his copanie: by this time the rest of the maskers hauing ended their speeches, the sound of the mnsicke made them remeber their third measure, which being ended, Parismus kissing the Princesse hand with a heauie sigh, left her in the place where he found her, and beeing ready to depart, Dionisius comming vnto them, said: Most courteous knights, I knowe not what intertainment to giue you, for that you are to me vnknowne, but request this at your handes, that you take a banquet my daughter hath prouided, which wordes caused Parismus to bee willing vnto, because it was the Princesse dooing, whose presence was ye sweete preseruatiue of his life. Your Maiestie (aunswered Parismus ) maketh vs so kinde a proffer, that we cannot (being bound at your commaund,) denie your request: so vnmasking himselfe, he came with great reuerence to Dionisius , who knowing him, imbracing him, sayd, he was glad he had no woorse sicknesse then that, and that hee was much indebted vnto him for honouring his Courts with his pastime. So saluting all the companie, the Knight that concealed himselfe, suddenly departed the presence, vpon occasion as shall hereafter bee declared. All the assembly greatly commended Parismus , beeing much delighted to beholde his vertuous behauiour, beeing indeede woorthie to be accounted the Prince of courtesie. The Queene then tolde him, she had beene his secret counsel keeper, and he humbly kissing her hand, thanked her, and being come to the place where the banket was prouided, Dionisius told them, he would leaue them to be welcommed by thy Queene and Laurana , whilest he went to accompanie his other guestes, which Parismus was very glad of, & Laurana both, who all this while had so surfetted with beholding his comly person, that the deep impression of loue was now fully sealed in her heart. But Parismus not forgetting to salute ye saint he serued, with reuerence kist her, thanking her that she vouchsafed to take such paines, to prepare entertainment for such vndeseruing guestes, vsing many other speeches which delighted her to heare, and him to vtter, that they were so farre delighted one in anothers companie, that it was death to them to part, shee not knowing that his loue was grounded vpon such firme resolue, nor hee thinking she would so kindly accept his proffered seruice. During the time of the banket, a simple iudging eye might discerne their loue by their lookes, that all the companie began to deeme that which afterward prooued true. Euerie one with kinde salutations being parted to their seuerall lodgings, Parismus told Oristus , what kinde and vndeserued fauour hee had receiued at Lauranaes handes, which Oristus was verie glad of, the verie recitall whereof, affected the Princes heart with an exceeding ioy. Laurana making all the haste she could to be rid from the companie of Isabella , and other Ladies that accompanied her, because her heart was desirous to meditate of her loue, went into her chamber, where beeing alone much troubled in her thoughts, she vttered these speeches. How vnhappie am I to be thus disquieted with the sight of Parismus , not knowing whether his wordes proceede of custome or affection, I that was earst at libertie, am now become captiue to mine owne affections, and inthralled to a stranger. What of tha? peraduenture he is in ye same mind I am, neither haue I any cause to doubt, but that his words proceed from ye good will he beareth me, and that the intent of his comming to my fathers court, was onely for my sake, as he saith, might I be happily assured of the truth of these doubts, then would my disquiet minde rest highly contented? and vntill that time I shall but spende my time in endlesse care, and heauinesse: if his words proceeded from the depth of true meaning, then will he still prosecute the suite hee hath begun? neither haue I any cause to suspect his honorable meaning. Well, I will content my selfe so well as I can, and seeke some meanes whereby to be assured, and rid my pensiue heart of these doubts. Early the next morning, she called Leda vnto her, saying: that she had a secret to impart vnto her, that did concerne her life and honour, and therefore willed her to be secret, telling her all that had passed betwixt Parismus and her: and how that vnlesse she might be certaine of his intent, she should but consume her selfe with care. Howe Parismus by meanes of Leda, Lauranaes wayting Maide, came to the speech of the Princesse, and how they met in an Arbor in the Garden. And howe Sicanus descried the loue betwixt Parismus , and the Princesse Laurana , and fearing to be disappointed, declared the cause of his comming to the King, and what ensued thereon. Dionisius was early vp as his custom was, to visit his guestes, and busie in entertayning them with all royaltie that might be, Parismus being as busy in his mind (more then anie knewe) got himselfe into the Garden, vnder the windowe of Lauranaes lodging, beeing frustrated of all other hope to see his beloued, where he had not long walked, but was soone espied of Laurana , who being delighted with his sight, called Leda , and willed her to make some excuse into the Garden, where hee was walking, to see if his comming into that place were for her sake, or no. Leda therefore taking a faire cloath in her hande, went into the Garden, as if shee intended to gather some hearbes, and had not seene him. When shee came neere the place where hee was sitting vnder an open Arbour, in deepe studie, hauing a sight of her, hee suddainely started, and knowing her to bee the seruaunt to Laurana , kindlie saluted her, saying: Fayre Damosell, quoth he, if I bee not deceyued, you are attendaunt on the Princesse Laurana ? Syr, aunswered Leda , I am. I pray you (sayth hee) howe fareth your Mistresse, for I am in doubt our last nights exercise disquieted her, which if I knew, I wold not hereafter attempt such boldnesse. Indeed (quoth Leda ) I know not, but I heard my Lady much commend the Prince of Bohemia , to be a gallant knight, and that she was much beholding vnto him, and vsed many gracious words in his commendation. Do you not (quoth he) know Parismus , if you saw him? no sir, said Leda : I am the man, said he,  & thou bringest me that comfort, by reporting that thy mistresse thinketh well of me, as if thou hadst saued my life, and I am to entreate a fauour at thy hands, which if thou grant, I shall rest bound vnto thee for the same. My lord (said Leda ) I humbly desire you to commaund me, and I will both faithfully and secretly accomplish your request. Then this is my request, quoth he, that thou wouldest commend me vnto thy Ladie, and deliuer vnto her this paper, certifying her, that I haue thus boldly presumed to trouble her, being therto compelled by her commanding courtesie, on which hope I fully relie for pardon: withall giuing her a rich Iewell, shee departed towards her mistresse, telling him that she would returne with an answere the next morning. Parismus being much quieted in minde with this hope of comfort, went into the great Hall, where he found the King and the rest of the Nobles, & hauing saluted them, he espied Sicanus , sonne to the king of Persia , betweene whom and his father the king of Bohemia , had beene long time continuall wars, but now lately apeace was concluded. This Sicanus was the knight that concealed himself, who the night before, seeng Parismus so much honoured, and beloued, could not indure to stay any longer, for that he enuied him as still an enemie. Parismus seeing him, & noting his last nights sudden departure, dissembling as though hee had not knowne him, spent the rest of that day in companie of Dionisius. Leda likewise being returned vnto her mistresse Laurana , told her al the speeches that Parismus had with her, and deliuered the letter he had sent: which when she had receiued, she went into her closet, & with great ioy opened the same, and found the contents to be these. content. vertuous selfe, thereby to ease my heart of the care wherewith it is perplexed, onely procured by your heauenly excellencies, that I here prostrate myselfe your thrall, desiring you of pittie to mittigate my martyrdome by your clemencie. I desire your gentle acceptaunce of my loue, which hath vowed constantly, to continue perfect to your selfe: which being grounded vpon the truest foundation of sincere affection, is not to be blemished with any dishonor, I cannot protest but performe the part of a faithfull seruant, my true heart, shall not harbour vntruth, but I rest yours, to preserue or destroy. If your excellencie would admit, that I might come to speake with you, then would I giue you further assurance of my fidelitie, which if you vouchsafe to grant, it shall be no way to your disparagement, and as from your selfe I first receiued my wound of disquiet, so let your clemencie salue my perplexed miserie. And thus committing with this poore paper my life, into your custodie, I cease. Yours euer, or his owne neuer. P. When Laurana had read this Letter, she began to meditate with her selfe how she should accomplish his request, in such sort, that it might no way blemish her honour, nor giue him cause to suspect that she were light, to be so easily perswaded, for she esteemed her credit more then her life, and his loue more then both: At last shee resolued to answere his Letter, and giue directions to Leda how he should come to talke with her, and no man priuie thereto but themselues: and calling Leda , tolde her that she should deliuer the answer to the Princes Letter, and withall this message, that if he would take the paines the next night, he should finde her in the Arbour at the farther end of the Gardein, that was vnder her window, about midnight, vpon condition that her mayd Leda might be with her, and that he should bring no man with him, for that hee might easily come thither without daunger. Leda being vp early, hyed her with all speede to Parismus Chamber, where being come, she deliuered the message Laurana gaue her in charge, which reioyced Parismus to heare, and withall the answere to his Letter, which when he had receiued, at the first he was vnwilling to teare the seale that her sweete hand had impressed: oft viewing the superscriptio, but hoping the contents within would bring more ease to his heart, then the outward view, he opened the same and read as followeth.  to my doubtful care. I was vnwilling to answer your Letter, yet the credit I repose in your vertues, makes me thus much digresse from my former resolution, that I could not chuse but congratulate your kindnesse, I yeeld to your request to speake with me, presuming that your princely mind cannot harbor any il meaning, and the rather, for that I find my heart yeelding without my consent: therfore I commit my selfe vnto your curtesie, my honour being vnblemisht, which I trust you will not any way violate, so relying vpon your vertuous disposition, and good opinion of my rash attempt, I cease. Yours as she may, Laurana .  Parismus was so rauisht with this curteous replie, that he esteemed himself the fortunatest man liuing, a thousand times kissing and reading those sweet lines, that in his fancie he neuer felft any ioy comparable to this his sweet meditation, shewing Oristus the sacred lines  & sweet message Laurana had sent, willing him to be readie to go with him to the place appointed, but vnseene, lest that the Princesse should blame him for not fulfilling her commaund. Thus spending the day which he thought to be longer then three daies, he again returned to his chamber, esteeming the time too long, and a thousand times wishing the approach of the appointed houre. Laurana in the meane time, being not vnmindful of her promise, onely with Leda was gon down into ye garden, by a doore that opened out of her lodgings, where being come, Scinth a was proud to giue light vnto her maiesticall presence, and by the clearnesse of her splendor, had any beheld her, she might haue bene esteemed to surpasse the comelinesse of Diana , walking in her chaste conceits. Parismus somewhat before the houre, was likewise gone forth in his night gowne, with his sword vnder his arme, and comming to the gate he was wont to goe in at into the Gardeine, found it shut, and hauing no other meanes, he gotte ouer the wall, and was gotten into a secret place to entertain loue with a surfetting delight: but when he behelde his diuine Goddesse enter into the Arbour, his heart was so surprised with ioy, with her presence, that at his comming to her, he could not vtter a word, but with great reuerence taking her tenderly by the soft hand, which he was afraide to touch without her leaue, at last he said, Most vertuous Ladie, since it hath pleased you to grant me this exceeding fauour, I here vowe, that I will not speake word, nor doo any thing that shall not accord with your minde. My Lord, said Laurana , had I not presumed vpon your vertue, I would not thus haue come hither. Which kinde speech, so much imboldned Parismus , that he imbraced her in his armes and kist her, and sitting downe togither, folded eache in the others armes. Parismus began to recount vnto her his loue, and how that his comming to Thessaly , was only to doo her seruice, vowing neuer to depart if she would not accept him for her poore seruant: with many other kind protestations proceeding from his vnfained affection, that Laurana being wounded with his intreaties, could not chuse but accept of his loue, vttering these speeches. My Lord, for that I am perswaded of the constancie of your loue, and for that you vouchsafe to profer such kindnesse to me, that haue not deserued the same, I will manifest that which rather I should conceale, for that you may suppose my yeelding so soone, might proceed of light bred affection: but my Lord, I assure you, that at such time as I sawe you comming first into this Court, my heart was then surprised, (procured as I think by the Destinies,) that euer since I haue vowed to rest yours, assured to commaund, so that you no way pretend my wrong: and therefore committing all that is mine to giue into your hands, I here giue you assurance of truth, and true constant loue. Thus they spent the night in kinde salutations and curteous imbracings, to the vnspeakable ioy and comfort of them both. Leda all this while walking about the gardein, and carefully looking about her, espied a light in Oliuias Chamber, whereof she gaue those two Louers intelligence. Parismus thought that newes vnwelcome, whereby being compelled to depart, which was done with much heauinesse, Parismus desired to know, when she would vouchsafe him her presence againe, which she told him should be at his appointment, for that she now was his to dispose of, so with many asweet imbracing, they parted. Laurana going into her Chamber sad, in that she had so soone lost his company, and could not tell what misfortune might befall him, and glad in heart to recount and thinke of his passed promise. Parismus quickly got ouer the wall, and was soone safely come to his Chamber, where he recounted to Oristus his happie successe in loue, asking his counsell how he might procure Dionisius good liking, to effect the marriage betwixt them, which first he thought to motion himselfe, then he thought that Dionisius would not like therof, without the consent of his father first had, and also might blame Laurana of vndutifulnesse, if he knew it were with her priuitie. Againe, he thought it best to send Oristus into Bohemia , to giue his Father knowledge thereof, and to intreate him to send Embassadours to that effect. Contrarily, he thought that in the meane time, some other of greater birth then himselfe, might demaund her in marriage of the King, and so haue the first grant, though he were sufficiently assured that Laurana would neuer yeelde her consent. Being in this perplexitie, he could not resolue vpon any thing, but walking into the gardein to ease his heart with some recreation, he met the King, with him were the King of Hungaria , the Prince of Sparta , and Sicanas , sonne to the king Persia , though vnknowne. The King for the more honourable entertainment of his guests, made one most royall banquet for all in generall, the Queene, and gallant traine of bewtifull Ladies, were there likewise, which was not accustomed amongst the rest: it fell so out, that Parismus was seated right opposite to the Princesse Laurana , which agreed to his hearts desire, whereby he had meanes to satisfie himselfe with beholding that inestimable Iewell, which as farre excelled all the rest of the Ladies, as the Sunne doth the Moone, or white his contrary: who with such comely modestie behaued her selfe, that her looke did rightly resemble a countenance full of milde vertuous pitie, able to rauish a multitude, being also not a little glad, that she had occasion to bestow a kinde looke on her Parismus. Sicanus more narrowly marked Lauranaes behauiour then any other, because his comming was onely to request her in marriage of her father, and though both the young Princes were verie circumspect, yet Sicanus curious eye, found, or at least suspected, that there was some loue betwixt them, which they full little thought of, hauing their hearts busied with more pleasant meditations: and euer after that, Sicanus inwardly maliced Parismus in his heart. Dinner being ended, the Knights spent some part of the afternoone in dauncing, which being ended, euery man betooke himselfe to what exercise liked him best. Parismus and Lord Remus , accompanied the Princesse Laurana , and the Ladie Isabella , to their lodgings, which made Sicanus to fret inwardly, to thinke that Parismus his onely enemy as he thought, had gotten such possession in Lauranaes loue, which might debarre him of his wished hope. Parismus seeing Lord Remus talking to Isabella , saluted Laurana with these speeches: My deare Ladie, although I confesse my selfe farre vnwoorthie that kindnesse you haue alreadie graunted me, yet I humbly request one further faueur at your hands, which is, that you would vouchsafe to meete me tomorrow night, in that happie place where I receiued the first assurance of your confortable kindnesse, for my passions are so extreame, that my life would perish, were it not onely maintained by enioying your loue, where I would impart a secret to you, that now I haue no time no vtter. My Lord said Laurana , you need not vse such intreaties to her that is not vnwilling, neither hath the power to deny your request. The Queen comming into the place where they were, caused Parismus with a heauie sigh to depart, and Lord Remus with him, betwixt whom, there began a firme league of friendship. Now Lord Remus bare great affection to the Ladie Isabella , and had oftentimes sollicited his sute vnto her, which she in a manner yeelded vnto, which made Parismus the rather chuse him for his companion, by keeping him company, to haue the oftner accesse vnto Laurana . The King of Hungaria , the Prince of Sparta , and Sicanus , were walked into the Gardein, where they were encountred by the king, vnto whom the king of Hungaria began to declare, how that the Prince of Sparta and himselfe had a matter to treate with his Maiestie, if hee would vouchsafe them audience, from the mightie king of Persia , who hauing a great desire to be allied to him, and hauing heard manifolde reportes of the vertuous Laurana , had sent them to intreats a marriage betwixt her and Sicanus his sonne and heire of Persia , who was there present with them, though vntil this time vnwilling to make himselfe knowne. Dionisius most kindly imbraced him, telling him, that he thought himself highly honored with his company, and that since it pleased his father to treat of alliance betwixt them, he would giue his consent willingly, so that he wold first get his daughters good wil, whom hee would not willingly match contrary to her liking, promising to vse his commandement vnto her for performance thereof. For which Sicanus thanked him. Thus hauing spent the day in this and such like talke, supper was readie: which being ended, they betooke themselues to their lodgings. How Dionisius sent for Laurana , and declared to her the the cause of Sicanus comming, which she sought occasion to make knowne to Parismus , and how she gaue him assurance of her loue. to him. Laurana maruelling at her Fathers suddaine sending for her, suspected that he had heard some newes of her loue to Parismus , otherwise she could not tell what the cause might be, but making her selfe readie, presently came to him: hauing reuerently done her dutie, he vsed these speeches vnto her. Laurana , my cheefest care is, to see thee married according to thy state, which hath made me send for thee, to know whether thou hast alreadie placed thy affection or no: otherwise there is come into this Country, a Knight of great estate and honourable parts, sonne and heire to the King of Persia , who concealed himselfe vntill yesternight in whose behalfe the King of Hungaria , and the Prince of Sparta , are come from his Father to craue thee in marriage. Now if thou canst fancie him, thou shalt highly honour thy selfe, haue an honorable husband, and reioyce my heart to see thee so well matched before my death, which will come verie shortly: I haue giuen my consent, so it be with thy liking: for so dearly I loue thee, that I would as well haue thy fancie pleased, as my owne minde satisfied, therefore let me know thy minde. Laurana answered, My dread Lord and Father, I humbly thanke you for the manifold benefits receiued by your fauour, bring yet at libertie from all, knowing it my dutie to haue your consent before I would presume to match my selfe, trusting that I shall so place my affection, as shall bee agreeable to your pleasure. Well, do so, then said her father and this was the cause I sent for you. Laurana departed with a heauie heart, wishing that the time of Parismus comming were at hand, that she might impart this newes vnto him, which grieued her, and she knewe would not please him, resoluing with her selfe neuer to giue her consent. After dinner, Laurana by the comaundement of Oliuia the Queene, accompanied the Ladie Isabella , by meanes whereof, Sicanus had occasion to court her, whom he found of so milde behauiour, and yet so farre differing from his minde, that he sawe no likelihoode of attaining her loue. His importunate demaunds (which he builded vpon her fathers promise, and his owne hope of assurance) she answered so wisely and curteously, that his loue therby encreased, but his hope was no whit augmeted, that seeing such a vertuous resolution, or in a maner absolute deniall to his sute, he was perswaded Parismus was the onely man that hindered his loue, which the rather vexed him, because hee sawe his vertues of euerie man commended, and himselfe by the beauty of his excellet gifts disgraced, yt euer after he sought all means he could to worke his harme. And fearing that he shoulde bee frustrated of his expectation, began verie narrowly to prie into the behauiour of Laurana towards Parismus , that they coulde at no time talke, if he were in companie, but he would still bee attentiue to their speeches, nor seldome were they at any time togither, but he would bee in their companie, dissembling a countenance of great friendship to Parismus , hauing the greater occasion to crosse their loues, because of the motion hee had made to Dionisius , and of the kings speech to Laurana . In this sort he continued his iealous behauiour, yet farre from the least hope of procuring Lauranaes fauour. The wished time of these two Princes appoynted meeting being come, Parismus secretly leaping the wall which parted him from his delight, found Leda all alone attending his comming, and asking her where her Mistresse was, she tolde him she stayed in her chamber for him which she thought to be the fittest place for their priuate conference, for that she was now fully assured of his honourable meaning, so directing him the way, he quickely found Laurana , who was come to the staires-head to meete him, whom he kindly saluted, and she as louingly welcomed him, spending their time in sweete greetings, but farre from anie thought of vnchastnesse, their imbracings being grounded vpon the most vertuous conditions that might bee: and sitting togither vpon the beds side, Laurana taking Parismus by the hand, the teares standing in her eyes, tolde him all the speeches her father had vsed vnto her, and of Sicanus loue, repeating to him all that had passed betwixt the, which extreamly greeued Parismus to heare, not that he doubted her change, but for that hee was thereby disappoynted of the first graunt from Dionisius , whom he was fully perswaded would haue giuen his consent. Deare Ladie (said Parismus ) since these mischances are vnfortunately happened, I know not howe to remedie them: but it resteth onely in your power, either by granting him loue,  & so to destroy me, or still continue your fauourable kindnes towards me, and therby purchase displeasure of your parents, which would bee more greeuous vnto mee then death. My Lord, replied Laurana , you need not vse these speeches, or any way trouble your mind, for I promise and protest, that the losse or displeasure of my friends, nor any other miserie or torment whatsoeuer, shall make me any way infringe that promise I haue made to you, for your loue is more dearer vnto me then my life: but I desire you to tell me how I may any way worke your content, and I will do it? More shee would haue spoken, but the Christall teares that fell from her eyes, and extreame hearts sorrow, to see Parismus so sad, stopt her speech, who likewise was drawne into such admiration to think of her kindnesse, that he could vse no words to comfort her, but with his cheekes wiped away the wet teares that bedewed her face, and bestowed sweete kisses on her corrall coloured lips. At last he said, deere Laurana , deere Laurana , I would desire you, not to thinke, that I any way call your loyaltie in question, but vsed those speeches only to assure you, that whatsoeuer pleaseth you, I count my greatest blisse: but since you vouchsafe to graunt me that fauour, to bee content to endure your parents displeasure for my sake, that am vnworthie of that kindnesse, I will hereafter so fully rest at your commaund, to do whatsoeuer lieth in my small power, that you shall say Parismus is not vnwilling, though vnable to be sufficiently thankfull. Thus thinking too much of their stolne time, spent about those vnpleasant newes, they began to vse wordes of more comfort, which were such as proceeded from the kindest friendship that might be. For so pleasantly sweete were their louely ioyes, and true hearted meanings, that it far surpassed the admirable kindnesse of Louers, but might be tearmed the true substance of perfect pleasure: wherein these two harmlesse soules continued the greatest part of the night, with such ioy, that had Sicanus , who most enuied Parismus , seene and behelde them, he would neuer haue attempted to part such kind friendship. Nowe the dismall houre of their parting being approached, by reason of the light that the Sunne began to giue into the Chamber, Parismus taking Laurana in his armes, drawing sweete breath from her lippes, told her, that now (to his greefe) he must leaue her to be courted by his enemie Sicanus , relating vnto her the long wars that had passed betwixt their fathers, and the late peace that was concluded, and how that he knew Sicanus at his first comming into Thessalie , desiring her to let him vnderstande such newes from her as did concerne their loue, which she promised him she would, and withal, that she would neuer yeeld to loue him that was an enemie to Parismus , but would hate her owne heart, if it shoulde but thinke a thought to wrong him. Thus a thousand times imbracing each other, they parted, he to his lodging, and she to her rest. Howe Sicanus hired three Tartarians to murther Parismus , and how hee was taken vp by certaine outlawes, and had his life preserued. What sorrow Laurana made for his losse, and what befell at Dionisius Court. The next morning, Sicanus sought all the means he could to solicite his loue againe, but Laurana vsed the matter in such sort, that shee kept her chamber three or foure dayes, to the ende hee should haue no occasion to speake to her, which made him almost mad, that seeing himselfe frustrated of his desire that way, his minde being apt for any impression, beganne to deuise how he might either finde out the cause of Lauranaes straungenesse, or reuenge himselfe on Parismus , whom hee thought was the onely man that hindered him in his loue. And studying how to bring that about, he began to weigh how greatly Parismus , was esteemed of Dionisius , and that his vertues made him so wel beloued of all, that to offer him abuse openly, euery one would condemne him, and thereby his honour should the more encrease, and hee himselfe be euill thought of by Dionisius , and contemned by Laurana ,  & yet nothing ye nearer his purposed determination. At length giuing his minde ouer vnto all wickednesse, and crueltie, he thought the best course he had, was to murther him by some treacherie: therefore calling vnto him three of his seruants being Tartanians, he vsed a long circumstance of kinde speeches vnto them, promising that if they would deuise some meanes howe to reuenge him on an enemie that had done him great inurrie, he would preferre them to great dignitie, when he returned into his owne Country, and in the meame time, he would giue them a thousand poundes amongest them, for their maintenance. These villaines being greedie of gaine and preferment, being poore and needie, sware that they would performe whatsoeuer he comanded them, so they might know the man. Sicanus therefore giuing them the mony, told them that it was Parismus , who had lately done him a monstrous iniurie: (at whose name the villaines began to stare one vpon on other, as though they had repeated them of their promise) and that when as his custome was, he rode forth on hawking, they might waite oportunitie vntill he was alone, and then accomplish their intended murther, without suspition. These villaines beeing fullie bent vpon their intended mischiefe, beeing heathens, therfore the more easily drawne with the hope of reward to any trecherie, awaited their conuenient time, with vnmooueable resolution. Parismus being all that day in companie of the King and other nobles, hauing giuen his minde to quietnesse, for that he was fully assured of Lauranaes fauour, nothing doubting the treason of Sicanus , tolde Dionisius that he intended to go on hawking, desiring him to vouchsafe to see his falcon flie, which Dionisius promised to do, for that his hawke was esteemed the best of all other. Likewise Sicanus , the King of Hungaria , and the Prince of Sparta , would beare him companie. The next morning verie earlie, King Dionisius, Parismus , and the rest of the companie, addressed themselues to that pastime, and hauing spent most part of the day, towardes the Euening, Parismus lost his Hawke, which hee loued exceedinglie well, beeing procured by a tempest that suddainlie arose, and thereby beeing wandered from the rest of the companie, chaunced to heare the noyse of her Belles, as hee thought, in the wood hard by, where he could not ride, and therefore alighted from his horse, and got in on foote, where hee was not entered farre, but those villaines that Sicanus had hired, hauing followed him all that day, and now thinking and finding this the fittest oportunitie to execute their purpose, were come into the wood, and hard at Parismus heeles, who espying them, looking with gastful coutenances as he thought, and with their weapons about them, (the villaines indeed being amazed with his very countenace) began to call to remembrance the late mischance that Osiris had receiued in the same place: but that thought was soone extinct, for that hee knewe them to bee Sicanus seruans: at last he asked them if they had not seen his hawke, they answered not a word: but one of them stared about, as if he had heard her neere hand, which caused Parismus to looke diligently the same way. And in the meane time one of them drawing his sworde, strook Parismus so violently vpon the head, that he being bare headed, by reason of the heate, the blow hauing nothing to mittigate the force therof, so grieuously wounded him, that he fell to the earth: and before he could recouer himselfe, and withall being disfurnished of his weapon (for otherwise those three could not haue withstoode his force) they had giuen him two or thee mortall wounds: and seeing that he was now not able to resist them, they began to consult what they should do with his bodiie. In the meane time, Parismus hauing gotten breath, began to intreat them to spare his life (for threates in such a case would not auaile) promising to reward them with great kindnesse, if they would not murther him: perswading them withall, that thus their deed would be knowne, for that such wickednesse is commonlie reuealed, and alwayes greeuously punished, and he that had set them about that villainie, would alwayes hate them in his heart, although outwardly he might pretend a shew of friendship, telling them that he was a Prince, and able to preferre & pleasure them, promising them that they should not neede to feare Sicanus displeasure, if they would saue his life, and all men woulde hate them for destroying him, & on the other side all men would commend them, for being so pitiful as to spare his life, that had neuer offended the. Al these perswasions could nothing preuail, but without making him any answer, thrust their swords into his body in diuers places, that now thinking him dead, they couered him with mosse, & leaues, thinking that some wild beast would come and deuour him: his horse they found tied without the wood, but him they vnbridled, and let go, to auoid suspition: their owne weapons they sunke in the bottom of a deep poole of water, that was by the woods side, and so departed. While they were striuing with Parismus in this sort, it chaced yt there was a knight, as he seemed, in armor, that heard the noise, & hasting by gesse so well as he could to the place, at last he came to the place where Parismus lay couered, and looking about, he could see no body, but might perceiue the earth trode, & all to be smeared with blood, and the mosse torne vp, and remooued from his naturall place, that looking attentiuely, he sawe the lumpe of mosse & leaues, wherevnder Parismus lay couered, which was the only preseruation of his life: for the mosse lying close about him, kept the aire from forth his wounds, otherwise he had perished. The knight remoouing the leaues, found the body of the goodliest man that euer he behelde, most greeuously wounded, and gasping forth his latest breath of life, which so molified the knights heart, that he vsed all ye means he could to recouer him, but laboring in vaine to bring him to his senses, yet he might perceiue the breath to steal forth by litle & litle out of his mouth, that he was perswaded he was not past helpe, therefore taking Parismus in his armes, he conueied him vnto the place of his abode, which was within those woods: now you must vnderstad that this knight was one of the copanie of those outlawes that kept in that wood, being driuen to liue in such obscure sort for feare of punishment, for diuerse outrages that they had comitted: and taking felicitie in that kind of life, cotinued a great fraternitie amongst them, being the very same that had wounded Osiris one of Dionisius knights (as is before rehearsed) amogst whom we wil leaue Parismus , to declare what hapned to Dionisius : who greatly maruelled that when the day was ended, Parismus was not returned, which made him & the rest ( Sicanus excepted) diuersly coniecture: most thinking that hee was gone astray, & being vnacquainted, might be gone to the palace not knowing which way to return to ye place where he left the. Sicanus likewise seemed as carefull as the rest. At last by the nights approach, they all departed towardes the Cittie: where when they were arriued, Dionisius enquiring verie earnestly for Parismus returne, could heare no newes therof. That hauing no other thought to be pacified withal, he was perswaded that he might be gone so farre in search of his Hawke, that hee could not attaine to the Cittie that night, and therefore might lodge by the way, and so come home the next morning. Thus with this hopefull perswasion, being perswaded for the time, they betooke theselues to their rest. Sicanus being gladded with the newes of Parismus want, called those three actors of his most desperate and wicked confederacie, vnto him, and inquired what they had done, who certified him of al their villainous exployt, being no way suspected of any such fact, to whom hee yeelded many dishonourable thankes, for so impious a deede. Thus all continued in good hope, vntill the next morning, which being come, and most of the day spent, there was no succesfull newes of Parismus returne, but all his men were come, and no man but himselfe alone missing that Dionisius beeing therewith wonderfully greeued, and vexed in his minde, speedily caused a hundred knights to make all diligent search and inquirie that might bee, to heare of him, who were all most willing, bearing an inward loue to the yong prince aboue al the knights that euer arriued in Thessaly . The Bohemian knights likewise made such lamentation for their lord, that it was soone blazed to the hearing of all the Court, and Citie, that Parismus was not returned from hawking, which at last came to the hearing of Laurana , who at the first newes therof, was so tormented in her thoughts, that shee could not containe her selfe from bewraying her loss, by extreame complaints, as also by the manifolde questions and enquiries shee made, with whome hee went, howe long they myst him, and where, when and howe they lost his companie: shewing an extraordinarie care of his welfare, that being driuen into a thousand sundrie doubts of her welfare, as also to thinke what should become of him, she could inioy no quiet nor cotent: but her greatest cofort was, that she still hoped she should heare some newes of his return, by such Knights as were gon in search of him: amongst whom were his owne Knights: whose care she thought would be greater then any others for his preseruation. Oristus likewise tooke his want in such heauinesse, that he seemed to be out of his wittes by extreame sorrow. Sicanus hauing now accomplished the thing he purposed, vsed oftentimes to visite Laurana , and earnestly prosecuted his former sute, wherewith Laurana was so much greeued (to remember any other loue then Parismus , or to thinke that any other should offer Parismus that wrong) that she shewed her selfe so vertuously disdainfull to the Persians sute, and seemed so litle to regard his words and protestations, that he began to dispaire of obtaining her good will: yet he was still comforted in this, that he had her parents consent, which might be a mean to procure her liking: besides, he thought the greatnesse of his birth might be a great helpe to his furtherance. Dionisius, Oliuia , and the rest, were diuersly greeued to thinke of Parismus losse, whom they all deemed to be fallen into some misaduenture, otherwise they could not imagine what might be the occasion of his staie, that the whole Court in generall was driuen into such sadnesse, that it seemed not like the same it was wont to be: especially the King and Queene tooke it so heauily, that their ioy was wholly turned to sorrow, and their pleasant countenances into sad lookes: but yet all continued in good hope to heare some newes of him by the return of such as were gone in search of him, who most of them returned within some three or foure daies. Oristus being yet behinde, at last returned, hauing by diligent inquiry, found the steed wheron Parismus rode, who was taken vp some twentie miles distant from the place where these villaines had left him: this augmented their griefe, when they sawe all that went in search of him returned with no good newes, and Oristus the last of their hope, in steed of ioyfull tydings, bringing further cause of sorrow, in that they were fully assured by finding the Horsse whereon he rode, and he by no meanes to be heard of, that he was fallen into the hands of such as had murthered him, or by some misaduenture might be deuoured by some wilde beast, that had seised on him vnawares, that in general, all made such sorrow for the losse of so vertuous a Prince, that it was to be wondred at, that a man in so short time of acquaintance, could behaue himselfe so vertuously, as to be so well beloued of all: Laurana exempting her self from all quiet, and banishing from her mind all mirth and ioy, withall, hearing the newes Oristus had brought, fell into such an extreame passion of griefe, that for a good space, she continued as one wholly depriued of life, and notwithstanding Leda and the rest of her maides, vsed all the skill they had, yet could by no meanes bring her againe, that with wringing their hands, tearing their haire, and with greeuous acclamations, they made such an outcrie, that the bruite thereof came to the hearing of the King and Queene, and all the rest, by which occasion, a new sorrow began, farre aboue compare: by that time the King and Queene were come into her Chamber, the Princesse beganne somewhat to come to her selfe, when heauily lifting vp her eyes, with a greeuous sigh looking vpon her father and mother, with such a pittifull countenance (that they could not refraine from teares,) still looking earnestly about her, to see if Parismus were yet returned: at last being fully recouered, Dionisius asked her what might be the cause of this her suddaine sicknesse, and if it laye in his power to comfort her, she might be fully assured he wold not deny her any thing. Laurana kneeling downe, thinking to haue spoken somewhat, was so ouercome with the remembraunce of her deare friends want, and extreame sorrow so fully possest her heart, that her speech was turned into teares, which abundantly fell from her eyes, which draue the King and Queene into such sorrow, that their hearts could not indure to see her heauinesse, and therefore left her with her maides. When all were departed and she alone with Leda , she began to lament in this manner. Unhappie wretch that I am, to what a miserable staie am I brought, that haue lost my greatest comfort, and the only maintainer of my blisse, without whose comfortable presence, I neither can nor will enioy my vnfortunate life. Noble and most vertuous Prince, what is become of you? what misaduenture hath befallen you? what Tyrant could be so barbarous as to do you iniurie? what creature so inhumane, as to wish your harme? or what minde so malicious, as not to wish your good? Wo is me for the losse of my Parismus , heauinesse is my delight, care and sorrow shall be welcome to me, till my Parismus returne: O no, my heart giues me, he will neuer return, he is surely dead by some vntimely accident, or he would not thus long haue beene absent from me. My deare Parismus , would I were with you, wheresoeuer you are, then would my heart be at quiet, then should I be happie, then should I be rid from feare, from griefe, care, sorrow, and paine, for in you onely is my comfort, ioy, pleasure, quiet, and delight. In these and such like plaints, she would haue continued still, but that Leda comforted her with all the perswasions that she could deuise, telling her that shee ought not to greeue so much, for that hee might safely returne againe, and that hee might absent himselfe for sundrie and speciall causes, not yet knowne to her: vsing many other deuises, to drawe her from that extremitie of sorrow, in which estate shee continually remained: but yet somewhat comforted with hope of his returne, being thereto perswaded by the speeches of Leda , who vsed the same onely to asswage her mistresse sorrow, though her selfe had no hope at all euer to see him againe. Parismus being all this while amongst the Out-lawes, (who kept themselues in a Caue, that they had secretly and artificially made, vnder the side of a hill in the middest of the wood, where they could hardly bee founde by anye, and therefore there they thought themselues very secure:) which were the same that had wounded the knight Osiris , and had with them Dina the virgin, in whose rescue Osiris was hurt: yet by Osiris meanes she was preserued from the outrage that was intended to her: for those Outlawes were without a captaine, and therefore thought themselues equalls, which happened well for the virgin, for one of them that came forth with the noise of Osiris and the others fight, tooke such liking of her, that he reproued the others crueltie, telling him, that it were a villainous act to defloure a virgine that had not offended him, by whose perswasions he desisted from further crueltie, and carried the maiden to their caue, where she was appointed to dresse such prouision as they brought in, which she willingly did, to defend her selfe from further iniurie. Parismus comely proportion, made him so well liked of all of them, who seemed to them to be a man of good account by his apparrell, and in time they thought might do them many pleasures: therefore they commaunded this virgin to vse all her skill and indeuours, to recouer him, and heale his wounds: who within two dayes by her diligent indeuour, had brought him to his sences, that he began to speake to them: which reioyced them to heare: who being thus well recouered, wondred into what place hee was brought, because it was darke, and in a caue, hauing in his presence a company of rude and shag-haired fellowes, and onely one woman, could not fully perswade himselfe but that he was metamorphosed: but being of a manly courage, he boldly demaunded of them, how he came to that place, and what they were that had thus preserued his life? At last he that had broght him thither told him, that walking into the wood, being directed by a noyse that he heard, he found him couered with mosse and leaues, almost past all hope of life, and pitying his distresse, he had brought him vnto that place, being all the habitation they had, for that they were such as wanted wealth, and were driuen to take that course of life, to maintaine themselues withall: and that hee was by the dilligent paines of that virgine, brought vnto the good estate he was in, and that their purpose was, to elect him for their Captaine, for that they thought very well of him. Parismus thanked him, telling them withall, that he was a Trauailer and had lost his way in these woods, and meeting with some of their company (as he thought) was by them left in the case they found him, without any cause of offence that he had don them. Thus ceasing to commune any farther with them, he beganne to meditate how fortunately God had ordained him to be preserued by them, (that had destroyed many) to liue in hope to be reuenged on Sicanus , that had so dishonourably pretended his ruine: that seeing himselfe in good estate of recouery, he vsed all kinde meanes he could to purchase the good opinion of all those Outlawes whom hee durst not trust, because their mindes were addicted to villainy, but most of all, he maruailed why so bewtifull a Damesell should frequent their company: On a time when Parismus sawe all the Outlawes gone out of the Caue, and hee left alone with Dina , he enquired of her of whence she was, and why she liued there, hauing also marked her behauiour towardes them, he did wonder at her vertues, wherewith she refelled the wicked behauiour of those rude people. She told him that she was daughter vnto a Knight of the prouince of Salmatia , whome one of those Outlawes had violently taken foorth of her fathers Orchard, in reuenge of a wrong he said her brother had done him: withall, she tolde him the whole manner of her comming thither. Whereby Parismus vnderstood, that she was the verie same in whose rescue Osiris was hurt. By this time the Outlawes were come in, whereby the virgine left off her speech, bringing in with them good store of money, which they had taken from honest passengers. Parismus lying very weake, yet marked wel their behauiour, which made him maruell that men could be so inhumane, as by their owne reports they seemed to be, wishing himselfe with Laurana , who he thought would accuse him of disloyaltie, or that he had made choyse of some other: if she did not so misdoubt him, then the sorrowe hee thought shee endured for his losse, which might some way come to her knowledge, so galled him to the heart, that his inward passions, would not suffer his outward phisicke to do him any good, and the continuall care he was in, did much hinder his health: being likewise as much tormented with remembrance of the graunt that Dionisius had made to Sicanus , concerning the marriage twixt him and Laurana , whom he thought might now be enforced to yeeld her consent, when she was out of hope of recouering him: this griefe farre exceeded all the rest, that all the whole company began to note his sorrow, for he was scarce able to containe himselfe within the bounds of reason. In these perplexities he continued by the space of three moneths, in all which time, he could not fully recouer his health. Where we will leaue him to speake of Dionisius , who by tract of time, hauing somewhat mittigated the remembrance of Parismus want, (most of his Knights being departed home into Bohemia (Oristus onely excepted) who by no means could be drawne to leaue. Thessaly , because there he had lost his Lord) beganne to conferre about the marriage of Laurana , being often importuned by Sicanus , who caused the King of Hungaria , and the Prince of Sparta , to be earnest sollicitors in in his behalfe, at whose instaunce, Dionisius promised to giue them answere the next day: therefore sending for Laurana , he demaunded of her how she fancied Lord Sicanus , who was a most honourable Gentleman, and one euery way worthie to be beloued, telling her, that he had giuen his full cosent, & therfore it stood not with her vertue to seem strange, or shew her selfe vndutiful. Laurana hearing hir fathers speeches, being much amazed stood stil and gaue no answer a good space, at last, kneeling downe, she began in this sort: I most humbly intreate your Maiestie, to vouchsafe to heare my words with patience, and not to impute any thing I shall desire at your highnesse hands, to vndutifulnesse: I cannot as yet fancie the Prince, though I confesse my selfe farre vnworthie the honour you proffer me, but haue presumed (vpon your fauourable promise, not to marrie me to any without my liking,) to refuse the offer Sicanus maketh, for that my fancie perswadeth me, he shal bring some sorrow to your highnesse, and all the rest of this Court and Country: as also for that I am vnwilling to match with my better, but would intreate your Maiestie (if your highnesse will needs haue me marrie) rather to bestow me on some honourable Gentleman of my degree, but most of all, my desire is, to continue this my happie single life, wherin I intend (with your gratious liking) to spend the length of my daies. Dionisius wondring to heare her answere, began to waxe somewhat angrie with her, and tolde her, that it was his pleasure she should marrie with him, and he would haue it so. My deare Lord and Father, quoth she (because I am yours wholly to dispose of) I humbly craue, that I may haue a monethes respit to aduise my selfe, and then I will accomplish your demaund: which he graunted, and so left her. Laurana being alone, began to wey in what estate she was, and how to auoyd this iniurie she should do to her selfe, for her honorable promise past to Parismus , and to him for his loue, that she determined rather to destroy her selfe, then yeelde to marry him, whom she accounted her deare loues enemy: and with this resolution, went to her lodging. Sicanus the next morning attended Dionisius answere, who told him, that his daughter had had giuen her consent, vpon condition he would graunt her a moneths respit to consider of her dutie therein: where withall hee was highly contented, being now fully assured (as he thought) of his desire, and began more boldly to visit Laurana , who litle esteemed his friendship, though she vsed him kindly, but farre from any shewe of loue, to the intent to breede no suspition in him, of that shee intendes. How Sicanus treason was discouered, who suddainly fled into his Countrey, and how Dionisius departed towards Bohemia , vnknowne to any, in the disguise of a Palmer, and what sorrow Oliuia the Queen made for his absence: who created Lord Remus Regent in the Kings absence. Whilest these things were acting, it happened (contrary to Sicanus expectation, who now thought all thinges so buried in forgetfulnesse, that his trecherie could by no meanes be reuealed) that the Tartarians which murthered Parismus , beganne to contend about the money Sicanus had giuen them, in so much, that one of them strooke the other such a blow on the head, that he had welneare slaine him, and would haue strooke him againe, but that by chaunce Oristus comming by, reprooued the other that had strooke his fellow, and defended him that was alreadie wounded, from further harme: and diuers other of Dionisius knights comming togither, they conueyed him that was hurt into a Chamber, and the other was caried before the King, to be examined vppon what occasion he did strike him: who answered Dionisius , that he would not be examined of any but his owne Prince, which made Dionisius the more earnest to know the cause: therfore willed Lord Remus to intreat Sicanus to come vnto him, to end a doubt, which none but he could decide. Sicanus maruelling what the cause should be, immediatly came, but seeing one of the Tartarians that he had hired to murther Parismus standing before the king, began to feare (according to the guiltinesse of his conscience) that his treason was bewrayed: notwithstanding, he demaunded why he had so wounded his fellow, the villaine being amazed to see his maister so readie to examine him, and not rather to excuse him, could not readilie tell what to say, but in that litle respit of deliberation, he answered, that he had done him wrong, and that was the cause he had strooke him: which wordes he vttered with great feare, staring on Sicanus , as if he should haue instructed him what to say.) Dionisius noting Sicanus countenance, and the villaines answere, whom Sicanus would examine no further, began to misdoubt some former mischiefe had bred this contention, commanded the other Tartarian that was wounded to be brought before him, who feeling himselfe almost past estate of life, confest the cause why they fell out, and how that they had the money of Sicanus , for murthering Parismus , whose want was procured by their meanes. Sicanus standing by, and hearing his speech, suddenly drew his dagger and stabbed him, before he could vtter any more of his treacherie. Which so amazed all the companie, that a good space they knew not what to say: at last Oristus (being filled with furie) boldly stept to Sicanus , and chalenged him as a villaine and traitor, for conspiring his maisters death, who being likewise mooued with rage, strooke at Oristus , to haue stabbed him likewise: but hee easily auoyded the blow, and with his fist strooke him with such violence, that the blood ran abundantly from his mouth, which his knights perceiuing, began to draw vpon Oristus , who had beene there slaine, but that many of Dionisius knights (deerly louing Parismus , and hearing the villaines confession) likewise drew, and assailed the Persian knights, so fiercely, that many of them were wounded, and Sicanus himselfe had there died, had hee not fled. And notwithstanding Dionisius laboured all that he could to pacifie this vprore, yet before he could do it, three of Sicanus knights were slaine, and the rest fled with there maister. After the tumult was appeased, Dionisius began to examine the matter more narrowly, and found by all circumstances the Tartarian had saide true. Sicanus with great hazards of his life, hauing escaped out of the Court, with some fortie in his companie, beeing ashamed (as knowing himselfe guiltie of the fact,) with all the haste that hee coulde, gotte to the harbour where his Shippe lay, and with all speede hoysed sayle, not once taking his leaue of the King, which was a sufficient perswasion to all, that Parismus by his meanes was murthered, the remembraunce whereof began their sorrow a fresh. The king of Hungaria , and Prince of Sparta , being much ashamed of Sicanus behauiour, in whose companie they came, desired Dionisius not to impute his impietie any way to their dishonour, for that they woulde for euer abhorre him for that monstrous act, and rest readie to defende him, if euer hee shoulde stande in neede of their ayde, to reuenge this iniurie: who determined to stay still with Dionisius if they could, to driue out of his minde, the remembrance of this mischaunce. Dionisius beeing most extreamely ouercome with rage, and greefe, beganne to take the murther of Parismus with such sorrowe, that hee determined to spende the rest of his dayes out of the companie of all men, and the next morning (giuing delay no scope to hinder his purpose) hauing disguised himselfe that hee coulde not bee knowne, in Palmers weedes, hee departed secretlie from the Court: and first tooke his course to trauaile into Bohemia , to heare whether Parismus father had knowledge of the death of his sonne, or no. Dinner time beeing come. Dionisius was wanting, which made the Queene maruaile, for that hee was not woont to be absent, but thinking he was gone alone by himselfe, to meditate, made no great inquirie: but after Dinner, going her selfe to seeke him, coulde by no meanes finde him, which made her make open inquirie, yet none coulde heare of him, that vppon the suddaine there beganne such an vprore (when they had searched all the Pallace, Gardens, Orchardes, walkes, and euerie place) such acclamations, such lamentations, and such outcries, that all seemed comfortlesse, yea, rather madde and lunatike: some running this way, some that way, euerie one carefull to doo his best, yet all to no effect, which both made the Queene, the King of Hungaria , the Prince of Sparta , and all the rest, in that miserable estate of misdoubt, that they neither could tell what to doo, nor what to coniecture of his absence, fearing least Sicanus had likewise by some villainie, procured his death. Diuerse knights went in search of him, but could not find him, and yet sawe him, but knew him not: for they often met with him in Palmers disguise, and asked him for himselfe, which made him oftentimes in minde to returne, but yet his former determination continued firme. These newes of Sicanus departure, and of Dionisius want, happened in two dayes, yet neither of them was come to the knowledge of Laurana , who absented her selfe from all companie, by reason of the extreame care shee endured for Parismus: Sicanus treason, and Parismus murther was concealed from her by Leda , who loued her dearely, and therefore would not suffer it to come to her hearing: but contrarie to Lauranaes thought, and Ledaes expectation, Oliuia the Queene came to her lodging, wringing her handes, and making great lamentation, and espying her sayd, O daughter, what shall betide vs, that villaine Sicanus , hauing murthered Parismus , hath likewise destroyed thy father. Laurana hearing her mothers speeches, stood as one amazed, not once stirring, speaking, or moouing her eie: at last thinking it was straunge newes to be true, said, deere mother, I trust these vnwelcom newes cannot be true, nor that your grace speaketh of proofe: wherevpon the Queene told her all that had hapned to Parismus , by Sicanus procurement, wherewith Laurana (not being able to heare the rest that her mother woulde haue vttered) immediatelie fell downe amongst the ladies dead, who so indeuored to recouer her, but were not able to bring her to life againe, by the space of halfe an houre, which began a new sorrowe amongst them, she seeming to be past all hope of recouerie: all being tired with extreame greefe, gaue their mindes no respite to cosider of the aduersitie they were in, but still continued making such lamentations, as the place seemed a desolate habitation of sorrow. Laurana at length comming to herselfe, could not yet vtter a woorde, for the extremitie of care had such full possesson in her heart, that shee could neither ease it by lamentation, nor teares, that all the whole companie were constrained to employ their best endeuours to remedie this present euill, the last of their hope: for if shee had perished, the heire of Thessalie had beene lost. Lorde Remus beeing a man of great wisedome and gouernment, began to weigh the fickle estate of the people and Countrey, who hauing beene a long time subiect vnto peace, therefore were not able to indure the brunt of warre, and that it was likely Sicanus would seeke to reuenge himselfe against them, and take if he could out of their hands the Princesse Laurana , heire apparant to the Crowne, and thereby get the kingdome into his possesson, which the Thessalians coulde not endure: reuoluing these thoughts in his mind, he came to the Queene,  & the rest of the Nobles, and requested her and them togither, to haue some regard of their Countrey, and not to shew themselues vnprouident to defend themselues from further mischiefe: whose counsell all liked well, especially Oliuia , who (with the consent of the rest of the peeres) made him Lord Regent of the Country. Upon which charge committed to him, hee presently gaue order for mustring of men, and fortifying of Castles, and places of defence, appoynting Captaines and gouernours, vnder whose charge he committed those places of defence, and within a short space brought all things to such perfection, that the Countrey was well fortifyed, and able to resist a great enemie. The Queene being diuersly tormented in thought, nowe was (by returne of such as were gone in search of the King) assertained that he was no where within the bounds of Thessalie aliue, and therefore assuredlie thought he was dead which so inwardly tormented her, that shee gaue her selfe onely to mourning, not giuing her minde one minutes respit of quiet, in which estate for a time we will leaue her. How Parismus in Palmers weedes found meanes to see the Princesse, vnto whom he would not discouer himselfe; hearing of Dionisius absence, and what befell to Dionisius in Bohemia . After that Parismus had well recouered himselfe, being able to walke vppe and downe, hee was desirous to heare some newes from Dionisius Court, but could not deuise how to bring the same to effect: but thus fortunately it fell out, those outlawes were so farre in loue with him, that they with one consent intreated him, that he would vouchsafe to continue amongest them, and bee their captaine, for that they were without a guide, and thought so well of him, as that aboue all men they were desirous he would bee the man, which hee beganne to refuse, alledging, that hee beeing a straunger in that Countrey, and vnacquainted with thier customes, was altogether vnfit, vsing manie reasons, as excuses: but considering with him himselfe, that it might much auaile him to his purpose, at theyr intreaties was contented, and so behaued himselfe, that within a verie short time, his woorde and counsaile was an Oracle amongest them, and by his wisedome hee kept them from dooing much harme, and yet seemed in theyr fancie to further them greatlie. Oftentimes he was in mind to go and make himselfe knowne at the court, and so enioy his mistresse sight, which greeued him to want, but being diuersly minded, at last this was his resolution: he fitted himselfe on a day in Palmers weedes, and disguised himselfe so artificially, that (by his disguise and long sicknesse, which had somewhat altered his complexion) none could any way know him: telling the Outlawes that he was determined to see the Court, which he had heard was so famous, and that he would returne at night. When he was somewhat neare the Cittie, he might see vpon a plaine hard by, great preparation of warre, which made him much maruaile, at last comming to the Kings Pallace, he got himselfe vnto the place where Laurana euerie morning vsually at her comming from Chappell gaue her almes, and put himselfe amongst the rest of the Palmers, and being taller then any of them, he was much noted of many, when the princesse came to giue her almes, (being in mourning attire) she called them all vnto her, and beganne to demaund of whence they were, what Countries they had trauailed, and whether they had heard any newes of Dionisius the King, who was missing: or whether they heard any in their trauaile, speake of the dead bodie of the Prince, which by chance might be found, being murthered by Sicanus of Persia : which words she vttered with such sorrow, that the teares ranne abundantly downe her cheekes. Parismus being rauished with the sight of his precious Iewell, and seeing her weeping for his losse, and withall hearing from her mouth that heauie newes of Dionisius want, could not (though he striued to the vttermost of his power) refraine from letting fall a fewe teares, which Laurana perceiuing, and viewing him withall, began to feele a suddaine alteration in all her parts, that she was not in quiet till she had found meanes to commune with him: and giuing all the rest their almes, they departed but to him she would giue nothing, to the intent he should staie, but he seeing the rest gone, was departing with them, til Leda (being by her Mistresse commanded) called him backe, whome he verie well knewe, and beeing returned, Laurana demaunded of him, what was the cause that he wept when hee heard her speake of Dionisius losse, and Parismus death? Parismus saide: Most vertuous Ladie, I wept not to heare Parismus named, but to heare of Dionisius losse, for Parismus I knowe is at this present liuing, and in good estate of health, with whome I had some talke within these three weekes, in the Countrey of Salmatia : which was the cause of my comming hither, being sent by him vnto a Ladie in this Court, whome I knowe not howe to speake withall, nor will not name to any. Laurana hearing the Palmers words, blushed exceedingly, and withall, intreated him to tell out his newes, for that it might be, she was the partie Lord Parismus meant, for I am Laurana quoth she, whom Parismus did thinke well of, with that shee wept againe. Parismus kneeling downe said, then to your highnesse I will doo my message, for vnto you I was sent. Lord Parismus , growing into some good liking of me, and hauing receiued my oath to be his faithfull messenger: willed me to giue your highnesse this Iewell, wherby you shuld be assured he was liuing, but constrained to absent himselfe, for causes that hereafter he will let you vnderstand, he desireth you to let him: (though vnwoorthie) enioy but the leaste of your vertuous promises, and hee shall euer hereafter account himselfe to haue receiued his life and libertie from you. Laurana seeing the Iewell which shee well knowe to be the same shee had before giuen him, and hearing the Palmer credibly report, that hee was in perfect health, and beeing fully assured of the truth of that message, by the certaine and firme protestations of the moste Noble Parismus himselfe, in the disguise of a Palmer: shee was so surprised with ioy, that she could not refraine from kissing the Iewell, saying: welcome sweete token from a faythfull friend: and calling Leda vnto her, tolde her the newes the Palmer had brought, reioycing with such vertuous kindnesse, that Parismus thought himselfe the happiest man liuing, to inioy the loue of so vertuous a Ladie. Laurana comming to him, tolde him, that shee was so much bound vnto him for bringing her those happie newes, that shee did not knowe which way sufficientlie to recompence him for his paines: and were it not (quoth she) but that I stande in some doubt hereof (as being too good to be true) I should rest in such happie content by thy newes, that no aduersitie whatsoeuer should cause my sorrow, but onely his absence, though my fathers losse doth neerly concerne my happinesse. The Palmer vsed such protestations, that Laurana could not chuse but beleeue him, as also by reason of the Iewell which she knew she had giuen Parismus . So taking a Iewell from forth her bosom, she gaue the same to him, which he willingly receiued, and kissing her hand departed. When he was out of sight, he began to meditate of the vertues of Laurana , and therein tooke such felicitie, that before he was aware he met with Oristus , who had beene walking solitarilie abroade, in such heauinesse, that it would haue caused any to pittie him. Parismus seeing him was in minde to haue reuealed himselfe vnto him onely: but beeing passed by him, hee caulde not chuse but turne and looke after him, his minde was touched with such kindnesse: but the remembraunce of Dionisius losse did so much greeue him, that wasting the time with those thoughts, vnawares in a heauie dumpe, hee was suddainlie arriued at the Caue, where hee was kindlie welcomed of of the Outlawes, who vsed such commendation of the Court, as it liked them to heare, and told vnto them how the king was missing, and no man could tell what was become of him, and that as he thought there was some preparation for warres, by the mustring of souldiers that he sawe before the Citie. When he was alone, he beganne to condemne himselfe of hard-heartednesse, that seeing the most vertuous Ladie liuing to mourne for his losse, yet he being safe and in her sight, would not make himselfe knowne to her, thereby to rid her from her griefe, but yet his comfort was great on the other side, that he sawe her loue so firme, being past all hope of euer seeing him againe, that he accounted himselfe farre vnworthie the fauour she shewed him, growing so farre in admiration of her constanstancie, that no thought was pleasant but the remembrance of her loue. Dionisius as before is said, hauing met with many of his Knightes that went in search of him, was almost through remembrance of the sorrow he knew would arise by his absence, altered from his former determination, yet remembring Parismus murther, which he knew could not chuse but come to the knowledge of his old friend the King of Bohemia , whereby his honour might be called in question (of which he was iealous) he therfore resolutely determined to trauell thither, and hauing iournied many daies, he arriued in Bohemia , where lighting into company with an auncient Palmar of that Countrey, he enquired of him what were the newes at the Bohemian court? who taking Dionisius to be but a Palmer, tolde him that the newes was chieflie of the Prince Parismus , who being in the Court of Dionisius king of Thessalie , was there murthered, or by some other treason destroyed, buc by whom, or howe, it it was not knowne: by meanes whereof there was such heauie lamentation in that Countrey, and especially in the Court, that he thought the like had neuer bene heard of in any place. Which report, caused Dionisius to greeue exceedingly, and was so much tormented in minde, that he resolued there to abide vnknowne to any, vntill he sawe how the King of Bohemia would disgest this griefe, and also to heare the general report would be giuen of him, for that hee did not reuenge the death of the Prince on Sicanus , when he had him in Thessaly : as also to see the euent of these stratagems: hauing good store of mony and Iewels, he gate him a lodging in an auncient Burgomaisters house, where for his money he was kindly vsed. His wonted custome was, euery day to go to the Kings house, where he heard nothing to comfort him withall, but sawe the King his old friend in most heauie plight for his sonnes death, all the ioy he had, was that he heard all men notwithstanding the death of their Prince, report verie honourably of him, that he continued (as he thought secure, being not knowne, or of any suspected, to be the man he was, but at the last, thus contrarily it hapned. The Burgomaister hauing diligently marked the behauiour of his guest, found him farre differing from all other Palmers, in person and qualities, and besides, seeing the daily charge he was at, began to suspect him, hauing such store of coyne to maintaine that charge, that when Dionisius went to his lodging, he would listen at his Chamber doore, to heare his speeches, and marke his behauiour, where he oftentimes heard Dionisius bewayling his estate in moste heauie plaints, naming himselfe, and oftentimes naming Parismus , and on a time declared the same to a Noble man of the Kings Court: who comming secretly to the Burgomaisters house, and hauing marked the Palmers behauiour, did suspect him to be some spie, apprehended him, and caused him to be cast in prison without any examination: which made Dionisius to wonder, fearing lest he shuld be known, but yet he thought that could not be, therefore with patience he endured this imprisonment: where he continued in the most vildest place amongst roagues and raskalls, being exempt from the cleare light of the Sunne to comfort him withall, by the space of some sixe daies, by reason that the noble man which laide him there, was gone about affaires of his owne, but at his returne, he certified the King of such a suspitious person that he had found. Wherefore Dionisius was sent for, who being examined told the king, that the occasion of his comming into that Countrey, was to no ill intent, but if it liked him to heare him priuately, he would declare vnto him the whole intent of his comming. The King hearing his speeches, commaunded all to depart, whereupon Dionisius disclosed himselfe. The King of Bohemia knowing him, being amazed at his straunge disguise, suddainly caught him in his armes and imbraced him with great kindnesse. Dionisius recounted vnto him the heauie losse of Parismus , and his owne suddain departure out of Thessalie , requesting him that he would ioyne with him against Sicanus , to reuenge the death of so noble a Prince: which the Bohemian King most willingly yeelded vnto: so with many other speeches that passed betwixt them, let vs leaue Dionisius to be entertained by the King of Bohemia . How the King of Persia at his sonnes intreatie, brought a mightie armie of Persians into Thessalie , and how Lord Remus slew a multitude of them, at their landing. And how Parismus wanne Horse and Armour from a Knight of Persia . As soone as Sicanus was returned into Persia , he fully resolued either to obtaine Laurana in marriage, or waste Thessalie with continuall warre, wherfore he came vnto his father and told him, that being in Dionisius Court, he was accused by two periured villaines, for the death of Parismus , sonne to the King of Bohemia : whereupon Dionisius hauing before promised him his daughter, both denied her vnto him, and also had he not escaped by flight, he had bene slaine in the presence of Dionisius , with three of his Knightes that were slaine in his rescue: and kneeling downe, moste humbly intreated his father to graunt him a bande of Persians, to reuenge the disgrace and wrong he had receiued. The King of Persia , by his countenance bewrayed the inward fire of his heart, that without giuing any consideration to the truth of his sonnes report, he presently vowed to redresse those wrongs, or else bring perpetuall infamie to his posteritie: and to that effect, commanded a mightie armie to be made in a readinesse, which was so innumerable (hauing called all his contributories togither) that it was the mightiest hoste that euer went out of Persia , and also prouided a mightie nauie of ships: which being soone in a readinesse, they with all the haste that might be, hauing winde and weather at will, hoysed sayle, and made for the Countrey of Thessaly . A poore Fisherman of Thessaly , that was abroad at sea, hauing espied such a mightie nauy of ships, with all speed brought word to the Court to Oliuia the Queene, who desired Lord Remus to defend the Countrey by his vttermost indeuours, because the trust thereof was wholly committed to his charge: who hauing some doubt (as before is rehearsed of such a mischiefe) of a suddaine had gathered togither 60000. footemen, and twentie thousand horsemen, being all expert souldiers, and got them to the Hauen secretly, where he knew the Persians would land, who thinking to finde no repulse, whereby they might land without contradiction, had set on shore some twenty thousand Persians which Lord Remus and Oristus perceiuing, suddainly issued out vpon them, and slue the greatest part of them, being disordered, and thereby vnable to resist the force of the Thessalians comming vnawares: which when the King of Persia sawe, being full of rage and furie, violently thrust all his ships into the harbour, and with all speed landed the whole armie, in which time of landing, the Thessalians had destroyed of the Persians to the number of thirtie thousand: that the colour of the waters were turned into purple, which so vexed the King of Persia , and his sonne Sicanus , that causing a trench to be made for the fortifying the place of their landing, without any further great impeach, they landed their whole armie: which was so huge, that the Lord Remus (though he were a man of inuincible courage and the Thessalians being but a handfull in respect of so mightie an hoste) began somewhat to discomfort themselues, and therefore returned to the Citie of Thebes , to defend that from the force of those Persians that were sufficiently prouoked to anger, by the slaughter the Thessalians had alreadie made amongst them, and fortified the same with all kinde of prouision, being inuincible, vnlesse it were destroyed with fafamine. The Queene seeing her selfe thus distressed, yet shewed such magnanimious courage, that the like hath not bene seene in a woman, which prouoked the hearts of all her subiects, to such resolution, that they resolued neuer to yeeld to the force of the Persians. The King of Persia hauing landed his armie, beganne to march into the Countrey, where they could scarce finde victualls to suffice such a multitude: the Countrey being large and full of desarts, forrests, and wildernesses, but at last, they came to the plaines of Pharsaly , where in times past were the thundring warres of Caesar & Pompey , being of such a huge length and breadth, that they are thought to exceede all plaines in the world for largenesse and bignesse: on the one side wherof, runneth the Riuer Peneus , which running downe from the foote of Olimpus , by meanes of the hilles bowing gently on both sides with wooddie bottoms, maketh the Thessalians Tempe : where the Persians incamped themselues, towards the farther end therof, being distant not aboue twelue myles from the Citie of Thebes , whether they might easily march, and soone returne, and therefore fortified that place for their carriage. Immediately Sicanus , with a hundreth thousand Persians, made towards the Citie, which the watchmen perceiuing, fired their Beacons, but Lorde Remus and Oristus , gaue present commandement, that there should be no signe or showe made in the Citie, whereby the enemy might know that they had any knowledge of their comming. Where we wil leaue them within the Citie, making all the preparation that might be, to withstand the enemy, and Sicanus at the walls begirting the same, to speake of Parismus , who all this while being in the Caue amongst the Outlawes, still deuised how he might haue further triall of Lauranaes constancie, and therefore determined still to conceale himselfe, vntill he might heare newes of Dionisius returne, and also to know wherefore there was such preparation for warres. And on a day he could endure no longer from beholding his mistresse, but disguising himselfe in his Palmers weeds, he wandred from the Caue towards the citie, with intent to haue seene her giuing her wonted almes, whether he was no sooner come, but he espied the band of Sicanus souldiers, which strooke such an amazement into his mind, that he stood like one without sence: being inraged with fury to see the Citie begirt wherein his deare Lady was, which strooke him so neare vnto the hart, that sitting downe vpon a mossy banke, he vttered these heauy plaints. Unhappie wretch yt I am, vnto what a distressed estate am I broght, that by my misdoubtful mind, haue so much wroged the constantest virgin liuing, and therby haue depriued my selfe of her sight, which I might haue enioyed, but now by my owne folly, am shut from it by a multitude of enemies that seeke the destruction of my beloued: what sufficient recompence may I make her for this my monstrous ingratitude? or how may I without shame call her my beloued, when I haue shewen my selfe so strange being in her sweet sight, and hearing the plaints she made for my absence, yet would not make my self manifest vnto her? thereby to driue away such passions, as I know shee endureth for my sake: well, since my vnluckie starres haue allotted me this harde fortune, I will either recompence this wrong I haue done her, and purchase her libertie, by chasing away these enemies which besiege my beloued, or loose my worthlesse life in her defence. In this sort he complained, vntill that he was wearied with vttring such heauy passions: at last starting vp as one new raised from a traunce, he ranne with all hast towards the Caue, purposing to get some armor and weapon, wherewith to defend himselfe, and by the way, he met a knight all in black armor, being mounted vpon a gallant black Courser, being a goodly proportioned man, with all furniture readily appointed for warre, making speed towards the Citie, whom Parismus supposed to be one of their company that besieged Thebes , and therefore boldly comming to him he said: Stay I pray you sir knight, and let a Palmer demand one question of thee. I may chuse said the knight, and so scornfully rode on. Wherwith Parismus was so inraged with furie, that catching vp a great stone, with all his might he flung it at this discurteous knight, and hit him with such violence on the backe, that it made the blood start out at his nose: the knight turning about, came backe towards Parismus , and alighting from his steed, pulled forth of his pocket a cord, wherewith he threatned to binde him, and so dragge him at his horse heeles: and laying hands on Parismus , (thinking easily to haue bound him, for that he tooke him to be a Palmer) who contrary to the Persians expectation, strooke the knight such a blow on the face with his fist, that he staggered as one amazed, and therwith catching hold on his sword, told him, that vnlesse he would declare vnto him of whence he was, and what armie that was that besieged the Citie of Thebes , he should their die by his owne weapon: which words the Persian tooke so disdainfully, being ashamed to be so ouermatched by a Pilgrim, that with his foote he strooke Parismus such a violent blow on the belly, that hee with much paine could scarce stand, which caused him to strike the knight so vehemently with the pommell of his sword, that he fell downe halfe dead, and seeing himselfe in that estate, desired Parismus to be contented, and he would declare the whole truth vnto him. I am quoth he of Persia , my name is Toledo , belonging to ye king of Persia , & am now come in this country with my Lord the Persian king, and his son Sicanus , and his cotributary kings, who are come hither to reuenge themselues on king Dionisius , who falsly accused Sicanus for murdering Parismus prince of Bohemia , who I think is run away fro his Court for some notorious fact he hath committed, and since they haue accused my Lorde for his death: as also he is come to fetch from hence, the Kings daughter by force of armes: and therefore my Lord is himselfe now before the walles of the Citie with a hundreth thousand armed Persians, and the rest of his forces haue incamped themselues heere hard by on the plaines of Pharsalia . Parismus being moued into extreame choller, could not containe himselfe, but his minde being ouercharged with furie, burst foorth into these speeches: Traytor that thou art (quoth he) though vnknowne to any but thy selfe, behold Parismus , whom thou hast so falsly belyed, and whom that Traytor Sicanus did intend to murther, though I was reserued by the almightie, to be the death of twentie thousand Persians: and since I see thy gracelesse minde so farre from pietie, that in this extreame perill of thy death, thou wilt scandalise that honourable King, of whome thy base tongue is not worthie to speake: thou art the first that shalt die by the hand of Parismus , wherewith drawing out the swoord, he soone ended his life. And pulling the armour from his dead corpes, armed himselfe therewith, and mounting his Horse, set his speare in his rest, and made towards the Citie. How Parismus slewe three of the Persian Knights, in three seuerall Combats. And how the Persians had taken him prisoner, if hee had not bene rescued by the Knights of Thessalie . All which was done in the sight of the Queene and the Princesse Laurana . When Parismus came to Sicanus Campe, he waued his speare aboue his head, therby challenging the Knightes in Sicanus company, wherewith one singling himselfe from the army, came with his speare readie coucht against Parismus , who setting spurres to his Horse, ranne at him with such force, that his speare passed quite through the Knights body, wherwith he fell downe dead: and catching with such nimblenesse (as it made the whole armie admire at him) the vanquished knights speare, he waued the same the second time aboue his head, at the sight whereof, an other Persian Knight ranne at him, whom Parismus likewise so valiantly incountred, that he ouerthrew both horse and man to the ground, in which fall, the knight burst his legge, whereof he died. Sicanus seeing two of his knights thus foyled, commaunded one Bruster a mightie huge proportioned man, and esteemed to be one of the best knights in Persia , (except his two brethren) to encounter that knight, who comming foorth on a mightie horse, met Parismus with such violence, that shiuering the spelles of their Launces into the aire, Parismus left one of his stirropes, and Bruster laie sencelesse backward vppon his horse rumpe, but with the springing of the horse, was raised into his saddle, and by that time he came to himselfe, he sawe Parismus flourishing his sword; which made him drawe also, and betwixt them, beganne so braue a combatte, that their Armour began to flie in peeces, and the blood by reason of their wounds issued out at many places: especially from the Persian knight, whome Parismus so fiercely assayled, that he draue him onely to warde such blowes as Parismus lent him: which Parismus espying, taking the aduauntage, strooke a forcible blowe at his arme, and parted the same quite from his bodie. The Persian seeing himselfe brought to that lowe estate, turned his Horse and fledde towardes Sicanus Campe, which so amazed Sicanus , that hee thought the blacke Knight (for so they called him) to bee some monster in the shape of a man, sent to torment them, who notwithstanding these their combattes, seemed to be as fresh as he was in the beginning, still attending if any durst make any further combat. The Queene of Thessaly, Laurana , the young Queene of Hungaria , Lord Remus, Oristus , and Osiris , hauing knowledge of the comming of these Persians to the Citie, were gotten to the toppe of a Tower to behold their Camp, and at their first comming they beheld the arriuall of Parismus in the black armour, and the three noble combattes he had fought with the Persian knights, which made them maruell greatly who that knight might be, that had so valiantly slaine three of their enemies. While they were in this meditation, Laurana hauing well markt the black knight, began to suppose that it might be Parismus , but againe, she thought that was impossible, at last shee sawe a great troupe of Knights assayle him all at once, which made her call and crie, helpe, helpe, her sences being so farre drawne with feare and remembrance of Parismus , that shee neyther thought of the place where she was, nor in whose company. Lorde Remus and Oristus , seeing this braue and worthie knight in such distresse, issued foorth of the Cittie with twentie thousande horsemen, and commaunded fortie thousande of his best souldiers to come out an other way on the backe of the Persians, vnder the conduct of another braue Noble man: but all this while the blacke Knight so brauely and couragiouslie defended himselfe, that before the Thessalians were come to his rescue, he had slaine aboue fortie Persians : but beeing vnable to striue with so manie, hee was constrayned to loose his weapon. Contralily- Lorde Remus suddaine issuing out, so amazed the Persians, and made such slaughter amongest them, that they quickely set the blacke knight at libertie: who hauing recouered his horse, beeing cheared with the comfortable sight of Lorde Remus , and his trustie knight Oristus , with his Sworde, made such hauocke amongest the Persians, that none durst abide his comming, but wheresoeuer he went, he made a large lane for the rest to followe him. The Persians by this time hauing ioyned all their forces together, thronged by such multitudes vpon the Thessalians, that they were constrayned somewhat to retire, but in their retreat, the blacke knight sent the ghosts of many Persians to hell, and behaued himselfe with such magnanimitie, that all the whole armie were amazed at his valour. By this time the Thessalian footmen assaulted the Persians on the other side, which draue them into such a feare, that thousands of them were determined to flie: but seeing no hope of safetie by flight, were so amazed, that their force was quite turned into cowardise, which the Thessalians perceiuing, assailed them with such furie, that they had destroied in a short space, a great number of them, that all the earth was stained with their blood. The blacke knight still followed his enemies with such furie, that (by the death of many Persians) he was gotten into the middest of the whole armie, where he found Sicanus incouraging his Souldiours, and knowing him by the richnesse of his armour, ran at him with such force, that with a mightie blowe hee beate him quite from his horse, and had not it bin for the two brethren of Brustor , who attended on him, he had beene troden to death. The black knight still rushing amongst the thickest of the Persians, came, where Oristus was vnhorsed, & assailed grieuously, who seeing him in yt distresse, laid on his blows with such swiftnes & furie, that happie was he that could get him farthest from him: by which meanes Oristus recouered his horse. Thus all the day the battell continued, to the terrour of the Persians, comfort of the Thessalians, and honour of the blacke Knight: who behaued himselfe with such magnanimitie, that both the Persians and Thessalians, admired his valore. Likewise the queen and Laurana , (who all this while beheld the battell) could not otherwise iudge, but the blacke Knight to be the most valiant Knight in the world. Thus the day being spent, the Thessalians sounded retreat, which the Persians were glad of, onely the black knight went away discontent, for that he thought he had not yet sufficiently recompensed his kinde loues fauours: but secretly conueyed himselfe (vnseene of any) vnto the wood wherein was his Caue. Where we leaue him to be entertained of ye Outlawes, and to be cured of the wounds by the virgine that I spake of before. Lord Remus and Oristus (hauing retired their men into the Citie) sought for the blacke Knight, but could not find him, which made them maruell what should become of him, whose behauiour had bene such, as it made him knowne to all the whole armie: but seeing themselues frustrated of seeing him, they gaue order for such as were maymed, and hauing viewed their whole troupes, founde but a thousande Thessalians missing, and with great ioy went to the Pallace: where they were ioyfully receiued by the Queene and Laurana , and relating the whole circumstance of their exployt, their chiefest talke was of the worthie fortitude of the blacke Knight. Sicanus on the other side, seeing himselfe so bruzed with the fall he receiued, and also his Persians so weakened, and such a multitude of them slaine, departed towards the Campe, on the plaines of Pharsalia , being not able to lodge before the Cittie walles, by reason the ground was so wet with the blood of his Persians, who laie vpon such heapes: that had not the Thessalians the next day conueyed their bodies into a deepe pitte, the stench of them would haue annoyed the whole Citie. How the King of Persia remoued his Camp from the plains of Pharsalia , and besieged the Citie of Thebes . How Dionisius , the King of Bohemia , the Prince of Sparta , and the King of Hungaria , landed in Thessalie , with a mightie armie of souldiers. And what afterwards befell to Parismus called the blacke Knight, and the battell fought betwixt the Persians and Thessalians. The King of Persia seeing his sonne thus foyled and so sore hurt, and such a number of his Persians slaine, and by so small a company of Thessalians (his men being three to one) was so inwardly vexed and inraged, that he gaue commandement to remoue all his forces vnto the citie, which was so innumerable, that within three or foure daies all the Citie was round begirt with souldiers. The King of Persia himselfe laie vpon a hill hard by the Cittie, in a Tent most richly and rarely contriued: and all the Tentes of his contributories round about him: which made such a show, as though a whole multitude of nations had bene gathered togither to destroy the whole earth: which when the Thessalians beheld, they coniectured, that vnlesse God should raise some extraordinary succour to aide them, it were impossible for them long to withstand this mightie force: but yet some hope they had in the King of Hungaria , and Prince of Sparta , who were gone into their countries to prepare souldiers to aid the Queen and Laurana , and the time of their promised return was almost come. The King of Bohemia likewise hauing knowledge of the Persians being in Thessaly , being vrged with hope to reuenge his sons death, mustred vp all his forces,  & gathered out of them, a mightie bande of expert souldiers: who were most desirous to deale with the Persians, because of all nations, they hated them most: the one halfe marched vnder the conduct of Dionisius : and the other fiftie thousand, hee led himselfe: and hauing all things in a readinesse, within a short space, they arriued on the coaste of Thessalie. Dionisius by his spies, hauing knowledge where the Persian Campe laye, conueyed his men secretly into the woode, where Parismus Caue was: and the King of Bohemia , with his fiftie thousand, marched ouer the Plaines of Pharsalia : and incamped themselues neere vnto the Cittie, and hard by the Persians: but soone the King of Persia hadde knowledge of the King of Bohemia . The same day the Prince of Sparta hadde landed three scoore thousand men at armes, all vnder his owne conduct, and encamped on the other side of the Persians. The King of Hungaria likewise, with fiftie thousand souldiours, had pitched his Campe on the backe of the Persians: so that they were inuironed rounde with Bohemians, Hungarians, and Spartans, and before them, the Cittie. Which much amazed the Persians, but yet by reason of theyr multitudes, they thought themselues secure. Oliuia, Laurana and the Thessalian Lordes, seeing such a multitude of Souldiers encamped so neere to the Persian, thought them likewise, to bee enemies: and beeing much disquieted, sent out a messenger to enquire the truth thereof: who returning with ioye certified them, that onely the blewe Tents, were Persians, the red Tents, the Bohemians, the white Tents the Spartans, and the greene Tents the Hungarians forces: Which newes so comforted the Queene, that she could not tell how to containe her selfe from exceeding reioycing, had not Dionisius beene wanting. Laurana especially hearing that Parismus Father was come to defend her, and reuenge his sonnes wrong, (whome all men thought to haue beene dead, continually praysed God and prayed for the preseruation of that worthy King, and oftentimes, her petitions proceeded from such kinde vertue, that togither with the remembrance of his kindenesse, her Fathers losse, and Parismus absence, the Christall teares ran with aboundance downe her Crimson cheekes, like droppes of Pearle: at last the Queen called one of her Gentlemen, to go with a message of thankes, vnto the Campes of her freendes, but Oristus desired that hee might be the messenger, whome the Queene well liked off: who departed out of the Cittie vnto the King of Bohemia , beeing his Lord, and kneeling downe did his message from the Queene: the King knowing him, and withall remembring that he was the onely man, whome Parismus most esteemed, most kindely welcommed him, the teares for greefe trickling downe his white bearde, and not able to speake one word with extreame care for the death of his sonne. Oristus likewise was so mooued to see his King so kinde, that he could vse no woordes but sorrowfull sadnesse, and hauing saluted the King of Hungaria , and the Prince of Sparta , returned vnto the Queene. Dionisius had so secretly lodged his troupes in the woods, that the Persians had no knowledge of his beeing there, but would oftentimes disguise himselfe into his Pallmers weedes, and so beholde the Cittie, how it was incompassed with souldiers, which strooke such sorrowe to his heart, to see his Countrey ready to bee wasted, his subiects in distresse, his Queene and daughter readie to bee surprised by the Enemies and such a multitude of bloodie minded Persians, vnto whom hee neuer did wrong, ready to destroy all things, that hee coulde not refraine from exclayming against fortune and his owne destenies, that hadde allotted him such mischaunce, and hauing diligentlye viewed the Campe, hee espied the Tents of the Hungarian King, and of the Prince of Sparta , who had giuen him their faithfull promise to ayde him against the Persians: therefore hee was somewhat, comforted with theyr presence. At last he espied Osiris comming towards the Citie, who had prepared in a readinesse twelue thousand Thessalian horsmen, and had lodged them some twelue miles from the cittie, and knowing him to be a man of most rare curtesie, he saide vnto him, Worthie Knight, might I be so bold as aske this one question, wherefore such a multitude of souldiers haue begirt this citie? Osiris most curteously answered, father, those with the blewe Tents are the Persians, who without any iust quarrell are come to destroy this Countrey. Those with the red Tents are vnder the King of Bohemia , come in reuenge of his sonnes death against the Persians. The greene and white Tents are the King of Hungaria and Prince of Sparta , who are come to aide the Thessalians. Indeed we are but a handfull in respect of the Persians, but the greatest hope we haue, is in God, and we are also much comforted by the aide of a black knight (for so we call him, for that he is vnknowne) whose valour is able to discomfort a multitude of Persians, who haue alreadie tasted of his inuincible force: for first he slewe three of the stoutest Persians in three single combattes, and at last, he defended himselfe against a multitude of them, that like cowards came running vpon him, but at last he was ayded by Lord Remus and Oristus , who seeing his person indaungered by so vnequall a company, issued out of the citie with their power (but before they could come to him, he had slaine fortie Persians) at which time by the assistance of that worthie knight, there died of Persians almost fiftie thousand: amongst the rest, this blacke knight incountred Sicanus of Persia , and at one blowe, ouerthrew both horse and man, that had he not bene taken vp, he had then bene troden to death: but this is our care, that we know not what is become of him, for he priuily got himselfe from forth of the field. Whilest Osiris was telling this newes vnto the Palmer, diuers were gathered about him to heare his talke, by which meanes the report of the blacke knight came to the knowledge of the king of Bohemia , the king of Hungaria , and the Prince of Sparta , so that all the whole multitude were desirous to see that valiant knight. Dionisius hearing this newes, was so comforted therewith, that he went vnto his souldiers, and sent a messenger vnto the Bohemian king, that hee woulde haue conference with the king of Hungaria , and the Prince of Sparta , to giue a suddaine onset on the Persians (who were mightily inraged, when they heard that the king of Hungaria , and Prince of Sparta , were come agaynst them.) The Messenger returned aunswere, that they were determined to giue the onset the next morning. Parismus by this time had fullie recouered his health: therefore being still desirous to reuenge himselfe on Sicanus , as also to be assured in what state his beloued Laurana was, thinking himselfe too slacke in performing his promised vowe, armed himselfe in the blacke armour, and hasted towardes the Citie: where he was no sooner come, but seeing such an alteration, he was so perplexed to see such a multitude of enemies, incompassing the person of his beloued, that without any further aduise, he determined to assault the whole multitude, and so die amongst his enemies. At last calling to minde the former passed loue betwixt him and Laurana , hee thought it an vndutifull part to destroy himselfe whome shee so tenderly loued: and taking to himselfe a more staide resolution, he came into the Persians campe, and viewed the same, next, he espied the greene Tents, and thether he went: and comming to one of the souldiers, demaunded whose Tent that was, who tolde him, that it was the kings of Hungaria , and from thence he went vnto the white Tents, and asked of a souldier whose that was, who answered that it was the princes of Sparta : at last he espied the red Tents, which hee well knewe to be his fathers, which caused an extreame feare in him, least his father should be also come agaynst the Thessalians, and comming thither, he met with one of his fathers knights, of whom he demaunded the cause of the comming of the Bohemian king into Thessalie? The knight presentlie thought that he was the blacke knight, of whom such generall commendation had beene giuen, and therefore tolde him the whole course of their comming, and withall, that the Hungarians, & Spartans, were on their sides: which news so reuiued the blacke Knight, that his ioy exceeded. The Persians all this while viewed the behauiour of the blacke knight, and likewise the knowledge of his comming, was come to the hearing of the whole field, which caused many thousads to forsake their tents to behold him, which he no sooner beheld, but getting himself into the middest of the plain, which was betwixt the camps, and wauing his speare aboue his crest, challenged the Persians, who beholding their terror come again to torment the, stood staring on one another, at last one Brant a mightie strong knight, belonging to the Bosphore of Thrace , one of the cotributories, buckled on his Armor, and mounting himselfe came out to meet the black knight, who no sooner espied him, but setting his spurs to his horse, encountred the Persian with such furie, that with the blow of his speare which hit him full in the sight of his beuer, & shiuering into small peeces, stroke into his brain, wherwith he tumbled fro his horse dead, which the Persians seeing, none of them would come foorth at that time, that the blacke Knight departed greatly discontented, that hee could make no further proofe of his valour, leauing thousands praysing him, some commending his person, some his comlinesse, some his curtesie, & all his prowes: and as he was going towards ye caue, he espied the troupe of souldiers that lay hidden in those woods, which made him wonder greatly but wold not enquire of any, because he knew the to be his subiects by their flags: so priuily getting into the caue, he declared to the outlawes what a multitude of souldiers were come into the countrey. Whilste he was in this discourse, one of the outlawes came in, and beganne to tell that there was an host of men in the wood, and withall, affirming that Dionisius the King was amongst them, which hee prooued by so many likelyhoods, that Parismus could not choose but beleeue him, being now stroken with such an inward ioy, that hee shewed himselfe so pleasant and merrie, that the outlawes wondered at this sodain alteration, hauing neuer before in al the time of his being amongst them, seen him merie. Uerie early the next morning, the Bohemians, Hungarians, & Spartans, by the sounde of a drumme which they heard within the Citie, had knowledge that al were in readines therfore they marched all at once to the Persians, beeing halfe a mile asunder, vpo a goodly plain, where they were no sooner met with their armies, but there began the cruellest fight that euer was seene, but all their force did nothing preuaile against the Persians (though they assailed them in three seuerall places) who kept themselues so strongly together (beeing fiue to one, that the Bohemians, Spartans, and Hungarians, had the worst. By this time the Thessalians were issued out of the Citie, and so furiously inuaded the Persians, that thousands of ghosts were sent to Eliseum : the fight continued for the space of two houres, in all which time neyther partie had aduantage of other, but stil the Persians kept such a head, that the aduerse partie could not breake their ranks. Also by this time Dionisius was come neare the battell, which when the Persians saw, they could not tell what to think: likewise the Thessalians wodered at the Hungarians & Spartas, also fearing least they had bin Persians: at last Dionisius (being in his youth a most braue & gallant souldier) setting spurs to his horse, ran furiously against a Persian knight, and with his Launce stroke him through the body, wherwith his forces ioyned with the Bohemians, which somewhat discomforted the Persisins, when began such shiuering of launces, clattering of Armour, sounding of Trumpets, noyse of Drums, neighing of horses, that all the Citie was filled with the noyse thereof: wherewith Oliuia, Laurana , & the rest of the Thessalian Ladies, were come to the top of a tower to behold them at which very instant they espied the blacke knight comming with all speede towards the campe, who hearing the noyse of the battell, was come to saciate himselfe with the bloud of the Persians, rushing in amongest the thickest. The first that hee mette, hee ran quite through the bodie, anothers head he cut off, that the Persians began to throng about him by multitudes, whose inuincible force they were not able to withstande: for hee layde such blowes vpon them that hee that was next him, or within compasse of his sworde, died. The newes of his comming was soone knowne, which so encouraged those on the Thessalians partie, that euerie one was resolutely determined to die, or conquer. The blacke knight hauing continued an houre and more in this cruell fight, hauing slaughtered many of the Persians, waued his sworde aboue his head: which the Thessalian horsemen perceyuing, made a head after him, and by his valour disrankt the Persians, and was gotten into the midst of the Persian battaile, and with him the King of Hungaria. Oristus , and the Prince of Sparta , whom he verie well knewe, where thousands of the Persians died, by the vnconquerable force of thse worthie knights. At last they foure encountred with foure of the contributaries, two of them being the brethren of Bruster , two of the valiantest knights that euer were in Persia , exceeding the ordinarie stature of men, the one named Brandor , the other named Ramon . The blacke knight encountred Brandor , the king of Hungaria encountred Ramon , and the Prince of Sparta , and Oristus , the other two: betweene whom began such a cruel battell, that the earth was all stained with the blood that issued from them. In this cruell maner they continued by the space of halfe an houre, wherewith the blacke knight was so inraged, seeing himselfe resisted by one Persian, that all his senses were turned into furie, that taking his sworde in both his handes, he stroke such a blowe at Brandor , that with the force thereof his sword brast, and the lesser ende thereof in the rebound, strooke his horse that hee fell downe vnder him, and Brandor fell downe from his horse as one dead: which the blacke knight espying, snatched his sword from him, and mounted Brandors horse, and girding his spurs into his sides, ran at Ramon with such furie, that had hee not auoided his blow, he had split him in peeces, and so he left him. The Prince of Sparta , the king of Hungaria , and Oristus , still keeping togither. Thrise afteewardes did the blacke knight rescue Dionisius from the Persians: and thrise did he mount his father, hauing his horse slaine vnder him: such noble acts, and valiant exploits did hee there performe, that my dulled penne is not able to expresse the same, that the Persians lay slaughtered vpon hepes, and the earth was died into red with their blood. When it grewe towardes night, Osiris came in with his twentie thousand horses, which fresh supplie made such a slaughter amongest the Persians, that they were constrained to vse all their skill howe to defende, and not to offend, which gaue such encouragement to the Thessalian partie, that they seemed no more discomforted, then at the beginning. The blacke knight all this while raunged vppe and downe amongest the Persians, being driuen hither and thither with the throng of the souldiers: at last he came vnto the place where the Persian king was, who ranne at the blacke knight with his Speare, and burst the same, but the blacke knight would not strike at him, but bowed his bodie in reuerence of him which made him wonder: also he met with Sicanus , with whom he could not meete before, and beeing glad he had gotten a sight of him, hee determined nowe either to ende his life, or die himselfe in pursute thereof: therefore brandishing his Sworde, hee stroke at Sicanus with such furie, that hee made the fire start out of his eyes. Sicanus likewise gaue such a violent thrust at the blacke knight, that lighting neare the buckle of his Armour, it pearced into his side, wherewith the blacke knight beeing closed with Sicanus , caught holde of his Beuer with his left hande, and with the pummell of his Sworde stroke him so violently, that the buckles brast, and his Beuer and Helmet fell from his head, and the blowe hauing passage by the weaknesse of his armor, brused his face, that he fell from his horse, and had not Brandor and Ramon beene by, with other of the contributories, he had the seconde time dyed by the blacke knights handes, which so inraged the blacke knight, that like a madde man hee furiouslie floong vppe and downe, slaughtering infinite numbers of Persians, destroying all that hee met, that his horse and armour was all to be stayned with the Persians blood, and would haue continued longer to the terrour of the Persians, but that the day was ended, whereof the Persians were glad, and sounded retreate, hauing lost so many of their men, that all the earth was couered with dead bodies. The Persians hauing recouered their tents, in heauinesse began to curse the blacke knight, who had made such slaughter, that all the armie was almost discomforted with the remembrance of him. Dionisius because it was night, conueyed his souldiours vnto the wood againe. The Bohemians, Hungarians, and Spartains, being gone to their tents, the Thessalians to the Citie, & Osiris backe to the place from whence he came: where I will leaue them, to speake of the Queene, and Laurana , who all this while had viewed the whole campe, being amazed to see the slaughter that was made amongst the Persians, but especially by the blacke knight: they also maruelled what force that shoulde be, that came fro the wood, but most of all they wondered that the blacke knight concealed himselfe: which made Laurana so desirous to knowe, that shee sent out a Page to marke his going from he campe, to tell him that shee entreated him to lodge within the Cittie, that the Queene and shee might yeelde him some part of amendes for his kindnesse, for comming to ayde them. The Page diligently attending his businesse, espied the blacke knight, hasting from the fielde, and calling vnto him, tolde him that the Princes Laurana had sent vnto him, to request him to lodge within the Citie, that they might shew some thankfulnesse vnto him, for the paines he had taken to defende them. The blacke knight willed him to render all dutifull thanks vnto his Mistres, whose request he wold most willinglie fulfill, but that he was bound to the contrarie by a solemne vowe, but within a short time hee woulde most diligentlie attend her pleasure: for that he had dedicated his life to be spent in her defence, which he would not desist to hazard, whilest she had an enemie liuing: wherewith rewarding the Page verie bountifully, he departed: and by the way he began to consider, that if he should now manifest himselfe, all men woulde thinke that Sicanus had beene wrongfully accused, and his owne honour called in question: therefore he once more resolued not to manifest himselfe, vntill Sicanus had confest the fact that was layde to his charge, and with this resolution went to the Caue. Laurana expected the returne of her Page, with such desire, that shee could not bee quiet vntill hee was come, who deliuered his message according, as Parismus had willed him, which draue her into a thousand sundrie imaginations: one while shee thought that it was some straunge Knight that sought her loue by his valour, an other while shee thought it was Parismus , but that cogitation was soone extinguished by a thousand doubts, that with extremitie of passion she burst foorth into these laments. What terrour is this that I endure by want of my deere Parismus , who I can not suppose is liuing, because he is thus long absent, who, I knowe woulde not bee out of my companie, if hee might enioy the same: but my destenies by his want doo intende to woorke my ouerthrowe, were I but assured he were liuing, then should my heart bee at quiet, for I know he would preserue his life for my sake: or were I but assured that hee were deade, then woulde I soone resolue to followe him, that my fainting Ghost might enioy his companine: knewe hee but howe dearely I loued him, then I ame sure that hee woulde soone returne, but hee hath heretofore mette with some false Cressed , and therefore hee absenteth himselfe, to make triall of my trueth, were I but sure that this were the onelie cause of his absence, then would I rest inquiet, but my lucklesse stars boade me no such good fortune. And to my griefe I feare mee, hee poore soule is destroyed by the trecherie of that wicked homicide Sicanus , who is not contented with his tragidie, but also seeketh my destruction. Well, with what patience I may, I will liue in hope once agayne, to see my Lord, for I do not doubt but the Palmers newes were true, or else how should he come to possesse that Iewell, which my deere Parismus sent mee? In these, and such like complaints shee spent all that night, refusing to be comforted, that the pure Christall teares ranne from her eyes aboundantly, that it would haue forced a stonie heart to relent at her dolefull lamentation. Howe Dionisius discouered himselfe to the Queene, and of the ioy was made in the Citie, howe Parismus determining to see Laurana in his Palmers disguise, lighted vpon a prettie aduenture, at the first daungerous, but in the ende pleasant: and what battailes hee afterwardes fought with the Persians. Persians came marching with his troupes (of whom verie few were missing) towards the Citie, from whence he found the Persians remoued further by halfe a mile: for they hauing viewed their forces, found them so much weakned, by the last dayes infinite slaughter, that they thought themselues scarce able to resist such an other assault, and therfore began to intrench themselues, by which means those of the Thessalian partie had free accesse to the Citie, and by the appointment of Dionisius , al the souldiers were conueied into the same, euery band lodged seueraly by themselues, all things being ordered for a sudden assault (if need should require.) The Bohemian king, requested the king of Hungaria , and prince of Sparta , to go with him to the pallace, to visite the Queene, amongest whome was Dionisius , not yet knowne to any but the Bohemian King, they marched in their armour with Drummes and Trumpets. The Queene hauing knowledge of their comming, came to meete them in mourning attire, and with her Laurana , and the Thessalian Ladies, the faire young Queene of Hungaria , and the Ladie Isabella (who had all this while remained with Oliuia ) and all the Thessalian Lords, shewing by their outward habit, their inward sorrow, for want of him that was amongst them: by this time they were met, and most kindly saluted each other, the Queene giuing them most hartie thankes for their friendship, and they protesting neuer to forsake her in time of neede. Oliuia maruailed who that might be that concealed himselfe, which both Laurana and all the rest, diligently marked, and being drawne by that meanes into heauie cogitations of her lost Lord, she vttered these speeches: Most worthie King of Bohemia , I am sorie that the king of Thessaly is wanting, to giue honour to your simple entertainment, whose absence is most greeuous vnto vs, being our onely defence & comfort, by which meanes we cannot giue you such a ioyfull welcome, as we should if our sunne were not darkened, but are compelled by our plaints, to make you partakers of our woe: as also ye death of that noble Prince your valiant sonne (being vnfortunately acted in our Court) hath so ouerwhelmed vs with care, that you cannot expect ought from vs but sighs and mourning, that all the entertainment we can giue, is to bid you welcome to a feast of sorrow: wherwith she and the vertuous Laurana , shewing a countenance full of mild pitie, stood weeping and lamenting, that all the whole company were greeued to see their sorrow, which strooke such a deepe impression of pitie into Dionisius heart, that with the teares standing in his eyes, he vnbraced his helmet, and comming suddainly to Oliuia , said. Deare Queene, behold one salue to cure your sorrow: the Queene and Laurana were so amazed, that they could not tell whether they might giue credit to their eyes or no, but at last with such vnspeakable ioy, Oliuia imbraced him, that it delighted all to behold their kinde reioycings. Laurana kneeling downe did her humble dutie, and Dionisius seeing her kneeling, and with blubred cheeks as he thought bewailing his absence, most louingly tooke her vp and kissed her, which he had neuer before done, since she was a childe: which so rauished Lauranaes passionate heart, that her ioy for his returne, and griefe for Parismus want, might be compared to two mightie forces striuing to ouermaister each other. The Lords of Thessaly , were so reuiued with the presence of their King, that twentie thousand hostes of Persians could not dant their vndanted hearts, such mirth and reioycing was throughout the whole Cittie, that for euer after they continually kept that as a holy and festiuall day: so exceeding was the Citizens ioy, that the belles rung, the Drummes and Trumpets sounded, and they made bone-fires and tryumphes throughout the whole Citie: the noyse whereof, made the Persians wonder, and astonished, to see them in such mirth, and so litle to regarde their forces, which doubts were soone ended by the newes of Dionisius returne, whom we leaue now in his owne Court in great ioy, welcomming the straungers, and himselfe welcommed by his subiects. Parismus the same day was come out of his Caue in Palmers weedes, because he knew he should not haue occasion to vse his armes, and comming to the Citie, he founde the Persians dislodged, and all the rest within the walles, and hearing the ioy that was made, he maruailed what should be the cause, and easily got into the Citie (because vnder that habit he was not mistrusted) and soone had knowledge of Dionisius his rereturne, which he had heard of before. He beganne then to thinke with himselfe: how vnkinde am I that will not manifest my selfe vnto my deare and vertuous Laurana , who I know endureth much sorrow for my sake? she will keepe my being aliue, secret from all men, and why then may I not comfort her and my selfe, by hauing some priuate conference with her? And with this resolution he went vnto the Patlace, and there walked vp and downe, not hauing a sight of Laurana , nor Leda her maide, all the day, nor possibly knowing how to come to giue her knowledge of his being there without suspition. Thus he staied vntill it beganne to be darke, and hauing no other meanes, he lept ouer a mightie high stone wall into the Gardeine, where diuerse times hee had enioyed the sweete presence of his beloued: and there hid himselfe in a little groue that was by Art made for pleasure, whereunto sildome anie came, in which groue he was constrained to staie most part of the night, by reason that the King of Bohemia and the rest, lodged in the Pallace, it was verie late before all were at rest. Yet neuerthelesse, when there was none to hinder him, he was without any hope to see his Mistresse, and all things being silent, he espied a light burning in her window, vnder which he got himselfe so neare as hee could, and to his comfort heard Laurana sing this song to her Lute. As vex my mind with sorrowes pinchings smart: Which wast my life with watry eye swolne sobs, And breed sad cares that sticke full neare my heart. Sorrow's my foode, and griefe my whole delight, Care fills my heart, sad thoughts possesse my minde: Each obiect sweet, that countervewes my sight, Soone turnes to sower, all pleasure proues vnkinde. The cheerfull day, renewes my endlesse cryes, And Phaebus beames, are shadowed with my teares: The silent night, that lendeth rest to eyes, Yeelds me no ease, but hearts consuming care. Thus am I rackt, nor rest to smart can finde, The smallest time, to paine yeelds no reliefe: No fortune sweete, will my ill fate vnbinde, But worse to worse, and care I adde to griefe. My Loue is lost, by dismall lucklesse fate, My chiefest ioy, hath felt the sting of death: The bad suruiue, to worke me more debate, And vertue sweet, can draw no longer breath. Fraude conquereth Fame, and vertu's thrall to vice, Faith stands exilde, and treason rules in place: The good proues bad, and trust, as brittle yee, Inconstant deeds, do constant loue deface. My Sunne shines dim, and darkened by despight, Spight suckes my blood, yet sueth for my loue: Valour lyes thrall, dispoyled of his might, Vaine Flattery, doth constancie remoue. Base-minded Lust, hath Loyaltie betraide, False Trecherie, doth sue and seeke for grace: Fraude by his force, hath Honestie dismaide, And forced wrong, doth right with might displace. All this and more, by proofe I finde too true, By hard mischance and absence of my Knight: Whose lucklesse death, my sorrowing sobbes renue, Whose presence pure, did breed my sweete delight. He valour was, whom fraude hath brought to death, He honour was, where vertue shinde most cleare: In his kinde brest true loyaltie drew breath, Fame in his lookes, and glorie did appeare. Hope speakes me faire, and tels me fame doth liue, Which addes more doubts vnto my troubled head: The Iewell sweet the Palmer did me giue, Breeds firme beliefe that valour is not dead. My friendly foe, that sueth for my grace, Hath hemd me in, with strict besiege of warre. And seekes by force, my vertue to deface, And from my soule all comfort doth debarre. Had I my Loue, here folded in mine armes, Or might I once enioy his pleasing sight: I would him guard, from force of Persian harmes, And loue should quell, fraile fortunes cankred spight. But dismall woes, expell such blisfull ioyes, My lucklesse starres, such pleasures do detaine: Carking distresse, and sorrowes me annoyes, No ease to care, nor end I finde in paine. Thus am I tost, with endlesse miserie, Care is my bed, exceeding paine my rest: Sorrow's my sleepe, my ease aduersitie, And thousand griefes, still tumble in my head. Affliction giues me foode, dispaire reliefe, Daunger hems me in, death standeth still in sight: Each day and night, each thing renues my griefe, And grisly warre, my sences doth affright. What resteth then for me to put in vre, But welcome cares, in absence of my friend: Who for my sake, such torments doth endure, As hath or will, soone bring his life to end. Parismus hearing the contents of this heauenly harmony, and knowing the voice to be the vertuous Lauranaes , was so contentedly pleased with the same, that his spirits were drawn into a diuine contemplation of her perfections, wherein he continued a great space, at length, when he heard that sweete delighting harmony to cease, he cast vp his eye to the windowe to see if hee coulde haue a sight of his beloued through the Glasse, whereof he was disappointed, by reason the candle was suddainly extinct, which draue him into into sundrie cogitations, how hee might giue any instance vnto her of his beeing there, but sawe no possible meanes, being a thousand times in minde to knocke at the staire dore that came into that garden, from which hee was discouraged by as many contrarie doubtes, least he shoulde put her in some suddaine feare, by such vnwoonted noyse: Againe hee knewe not who might bee in her companie, which might bee a meanes to bring her name in question, if he should be seene there. Whilst he continued in these doubtfull thoughts, the night was farre spent, and the cleare day bega to appeare, which draue him into another study which way to get out of that place againe, for he was loth to lie there all the next day, and so by misfortune be discouered. At last being driuen to take any shift for currant, he got to the top of the backe wall, which incompassed the Pallace, and thought that was the best way to escape without suspition, for if hee hadde attempted to haue gone backe by the same waye hee came in, hee coulde by no meanes escape vnespied, so aduenturouslie leaping from the wall; by misfortune (the same beeing farre higher then hee thought) he had a greeuous fall, and by the noyse awaked two mightie fierce Mastifes, which were kept for to defende that place, where a Riche Cittizen continuallye layde great store of Marchaundize, which no sooner espyed him falne, but they ranne vppon him with open mouth (the dogges in Thessalie beeing so strong and fierce by nature that they feare not to encounter the mightiest Lyons) which draue Parismus to his vttermost shifts, hauing no weapon to defend himselfe withall, but a little pocket dagger, drewe backe vnto the corner of the walle, by which meanes the Dogges could not come behinde him, that with ease he slewe them both, and hauing escaped this daunger, being bitten in diuers places before he could kil them, he knocked at the marchants doore, thinking to make some excuse to passe by that way, through which he must needs goe, for there was no other way for him to get out: the marchants daughter hearing one knocke, looked out at the windowe, and taking Parismus for an other, came running downe to the doore, and kindly taking him in, locked the doore againe, and being in the darke entrie clasping her ten- armes about his necke, Sweete friend (quoth she) how could you escape the Dogges, that you ventured to come in on this side of the house, but as I wonder, so I am gladde you haue escaped them, and moste louingly kissed him a hundreth times. Parismus maruailed at this kindnesse, and willingly dissembled as if he had bene the man shee tooke him to be: for her tender and kinde imbracings were sufficient inticements to procure his consent. That night shee had appointed a young Gentleman (vnto whom shee bore affection without the consent of her parents) to come to her, and with the ioy of his comming, shee made no doubt howe hee could come in on that side, whiche caused him to vse the like kinde salutation to her: reioycing in his minde, to see howe suddainly hee was fallen into such a sweete laborinth of loue, hauing so lately escaped a mischiefe. The marchaunts daughter thinking verily it had beene her accustomed friende, vsed all courteous and most kinde welcomes that might be, with wonderfull protestations of her loue, being such indeed, as proceeded from deep grounded affection, which made Parismus vse the like curteous imbracings, and thankfull gratulations, finding by her speeches and by many other lykelihoods, that shee was none of the basest, but might be of better parentage then he tooke her to be, which somewhat intised his minde to a wandring delight in her kindnesse, that he determined with her to taste what loue was. By that time they had continued their kindnesse a good space, shee desired him to come vp into her Chamber, whither she ledde him in the darke, she poore soule hauing no other intent but chaste and vertuous, and nothing suspecting him to be a stranger, which Parismus well perceiued by her behauiour. Assoone as they were come thither, she kindly desired him to sit downe on the beddes side, whilest she went to light a candle, as well to be delighted with beholding his person, as otherwise. Shee was no sooner gone, but Parismus secretly stepped to the doore, with purpose to beholde if her bewtie and person were agreeable to her other conditions, and sawe her to be a most gallant and bewtifull Damosell, which sight so intised his minde, that assoone as she was comming to him with the candle, he blewe the same out, and tolde her that a light fitted not at that time, for it might be a meanes to bewray their secret meeting, which she allowed for a sufficient excuse: wherewith Parismus beganne to entertaine her with such kinde dalliance as earst she neuer tasted, kindly reproouing his behauiour, yet had no power to resist: at which time (to both their delights) he depriued her of the Iewell she was vnwilling to loose, but with his pithie perswasions yeelded vnto: he vsing such a sweet attractiue vertue as was able to conquer the chastest. Parismus reaped such sweete content from this virgins pure delightfull bodie, that he was altogither vnwilling to leaue her pleasant imbracings, but at last, remembring his estate, told her that he would worke such meanes for sauegard of her honour, as she should well like of, she poore soule with weeping eyes and hartie sighes, badde him adieu. Kindly kissing at the parting, he gaue her a rich Iewell, which he desired her to weare for his sake, and tooke from her finger a Ring, which he promised he would euerlastingly weare as her fauour. Assoone as he was foorth of doores, comes the appointed Louer, who hauing staied somewhat long, feared some displeasure, but yet knockt, which made Violetta (for so was she called) open the doore again, maruelling that he should be so soone returned: but he at his comming saluted her, with a fresh salutation, and kissed her, excusing himselfe for his long tariance, which draue her into such a perplexitie, that she could not tell what to say, nor what to think: at last she said, what need you vse such excuses, when you were so lately with me? Deare loue (quoth hee) account you it so lately, when (I protest) I thought these three dayes since I sawe you, to bee longer then three yeeres: by which speeches she perceiued that another had ouerheard their appointment, and by that meanes deceiued her, which made her grow so much in loathing of her present suter, that euer after she shunned his companie, and bent her minde wholie to meditate how to knowe him that had reapt her loue, vowing neuer to loue any but him, and resoluing neuer to inioy any quiet, vntill she had knowledge what he was. Parismus was no sooner come foorth of the Marchants doores, reioycing at his last pleasant banquet: but presently hee hasted to his Caue, where he found the Outlawes sadly expecting his returne, of whom beeing kindly welcomed, he betooke himselfe to his rest, and cotented meditations of the marchants daughter, that had the remembranc of Lauanaes vertues, somewhat restrained his affection, hee had falne to a loose and dissolute conceite. But calling to mind her perfections, and his vnconstant act, hee tormented himselfe with greefe that he had done her that wrong: but yet it troubled his minde the lesse, because hee knewe it was not reuealed to any but to himselfe, and likewise somewhat it vrged his minde of vngratitude, if he should altogither forsake Violetta , from whom hee had taken the best Iewell she had: in which diuersitie of thoughts he spent that mornings repose. The king of Persia calling his contributaries togither, by the aduice of all, concluded to send into Persia for more forces, as also to request diuerse of his alliaunce, to ayd him, in reuenge of such iniurious wrongs, as he alledged. he and his sonne Sicanus had sustained at Dionisius handes This message being so secretly dispatched, that the Thessalians had no knowledge thereof, by which meanes they continued in great securitie and ioy for the great victorie, they with the ayde of the blacke knight, had made against the Persians: yea so secure would they haue beene (had not the remembrance of Parismus death somewhat calmed their exceeding ioy) that the Persians might many times haue surprised them, but the blacke knight was still such a lette vnto them, that their enemies could attempt nothing but he would discouer it, by which meanes the Thessanians hadde knowledge thereof. Manie dayes continued the Persians before the walles of Th aebes , neuer giuing any assault, nor once comming foorth of theyr trenches, which caused the Thessalians to count them halfe vanquished. During which time Parismus (knowne by the name of the blacke knight) did fight many braue combats with the Persians, by which meanes the Court of Dionisius was filled with the resounding ecchos of exceeding praises made in commendation of his prowes and vnconquered chiualrie, but most of all they wondered at his strangenesse to be knowne, and the rather, for that none could learne where hee made his abode, knowing that it could not bee farre from the Citie. The Persian messenger made such expedition in performing his message, that in short space there were gathered together of sundrie nations, another mightie Armie: first came the King of Natolia beeing nearely allied to the Persian, with a great armie of Natolians, the king of Libia , with thirtie thousand Libians, and the King Licia with fortie thousande men at armes, and of Phrigia twentie thousand, and to repaire the decayed campe of the King of Persia , came fiftie thousand. This last armie soone landed in Thessaly , and pitched theyr tents on the plaine of Pharsalia , of whose approach both the Persians and Thessalians hadde knowledge, to the comfort of the one, and to the discomfort and terror of the other, by meanes whereof the Thessalians beeing before in mirth, beganne to waxe carefull of theyr estate, and therefore sent twentie thousand horsemen out of the Cittie, to the ende, that at all times they might succour them with a fresh supplie, for that they knew they should neede all the helpe they could possibly make, who beeing abroade, soone tooke such order, that the Persians in theyr rodes could scarcely finde any cattell or other victuals. These newe forces beeing all ioyned together with the Persians, beset the Citie anew with trenches and fortifications, that there could none passe in nor out, which caused Dionisius and the Bohemian king, to consider that there was not prouision inough within the Cittie for such a number of souldiours for one moneth, making account that it was the onely course, eyther valiantly to driue backe the enemie, or ignominiously to abide theyr mercie, and therefore determined the next day to issue out vppon them, which they in pollicie did, not with hope to vanquish such an Armie, but to lette the Persians knowe, that they were not discouraged with theyr huge multitudes, which purpose of theyrs was thus furthered by the blacke knight, who earlie in the next morning hadde buckled on his Armour, and was come before the Tentes of the Persians, and espying such a multitude of newe-come Souldiours, that hadde vnited theyr forces to the Persians, by enquirie, he soone learned who they were, and therefore resolued to vse his woonted manner of challenge, which when the Persian King behelde, hee related vnto the King of Natolia , what valiant acts the blacke knight hadde doone, entering so farre in commendation of him, that the King of Licia standing by, beeing of a haughtie and proude dispositon, began to disdaine to heare him so highly commended, thinking himselfe able to conquer and ouercome any, for hee was esteemed one of the best knightes in the worlde. Which made him replie vnto the King of Persia , that hee would soone prooue that there was no knight in Thessalie , able to combatte the king of Licia , therefore arming himselfe he went forth to meete the blacke knight, who no sooner sawe him, but he set spurres to his horse, and ran at him with such force, that he ouerthrew both horse and man to the ground: the King of Licia seeing himselfe thus foyled, soone got vp and drewe his sworde, but the blacke knight disdaining to cope any further with him, whom he had alreadie conquered, turned his horse, and rode from him, which so vexed the king of Licia , being enraged to see his owne shame, and with anguish of the bruise he receyued in the fall, that would haue murthered himselfe, but that his knights hindered him. Howe Parismus met with Polipus of Phrygia , and knowing the deuise in his armour, refused to combate with him: and how a peace with certaine conditions was concluded, betwixt the king of Persia and Thessalie . Phrigia two knights, esteemed the onely men in the world for valour, one whereof had before time serued the Persian king, in his warres agaynst Bohemia , whose name was Polipus , the other named Zoylus , whose match or equall in armes he had neuer met withall, being withall so vnmercifull and tyrannous, that by his trecherie in fight, he had subdued many thousand knights in his trauels. This Polipus was desirous to trie his force agaynst the blacke knight, and soone mounted himselfe, being a most gallant proportioned,  & comely knight. The blacke knight being still ready for any incounter, met Polipus with such force, that both their staues were shiuered in peeces, the blacke knight not once moouing in his Saddle, but Polipus with the force of his blow lost one of his stirrops. The blacke knight, not once moouing in his saddle, but Polipus with the force of the blow lost one of his stirrops, the blacke knight hauing drawne his sword, readie to combat Polipus , espied vppon his Armour the deuise of three falcons, and sodainely put vp his sword againe, which when Polipus perceiuing, he maruailed thereat, & asked him the combat, the blacke knight said, pardon me woorthy sir, for I am bound not to combat any that weareth that armour, and without any more wordes departed. Polipus wondering thereat, at last remembred, that when he was with the Persian King, besieging Bohemia , he made a couenant with Parismus , neuer to combat any, that had the deuise of the branch of Roses vpon his armor, which was Parismus armor, & Parismus likewise promised him the like, therfore he thought that the black Knight was either Parismus himself, or some knight who Parismus had boud by the like oath. The occasion of which vow passed betwixt Parismus & Polipus , was growne through the exceeding loue and kindnes that had passed betwixt then from their youth, being brought vp together in the vniuersitie. Wherfore Polipus studying what he might be, and reioycing that he had so worthie a knight to his friend, rode back to the Persians tent, who stood gazing to see the euent of his combatte, but maruailed that they parted so friendly. Polipus beeing returned, tolde the Kings of Persia and Natolia , that hee refused the combat, the reason was as hee thought, the blacke Knight knewe him, otherwise hee knewe not what might bee the cause. Dionisius , the King of Bohemia, Oliuia, Laurana , and the rest, all this while wondered at the blacke Knights behauiour, but most of all to see him parte so friendly with the Phrigian Knight. Whilst they were in this admiration, they behelde the most valiant Zoylus readie to encounter the blacke Knight, the Persians nowe thinking to see the blacke Knights downefall, for that Zoylus hadde vowed neuer to parte vntill hee had destroyed him: with whome the blacke Knight mette with such aduantage, that maugre the force of Zoylus he ouerthrew him to the ground, and himself had lost both his stirrops. Zoylus soone recouered his horse, and with furious rage they both mette with their swoords drawne, when began a most terrible and cruell battell, that all that behelde the same, were amazed at the valour of both the knights, in which cruell maner they continued for two houres space, both beeing greeuously hurt, but neither wearie nor willing to leaue off: at last the blacke knight seemed wearie and onely warded the furious strokes that Zoylus gaue him, Zoylus thinking indeede, that he had fainted, layde on such blowes with such swiftnesse and force, that all the whole companie of the beholders deemed the blacke Knight almoste vanquished. Zoylus still pursued him with forcible blowes, and the blacke Knight still warded: so long they continued in this manner, that the Phrygian beganne to waxe wearie, and also to suspect the blacke knights pollicie, therefore staying his hande, hee sayde: Knight, I giue thee leaue to aske pardon for thy life, or else bee sure thou art but dead. The blacke knight casting his eyes towardes the Tower, where his beloued Laurana stoode beholding the combatte, and wauing his swoorde most couragiouslie about his head, aunswered: No dastarde Phrygian, (quoth hee,) I scorne thy proffer: with which wordes hee so freshly assaulted the Phrygian, that in short space hee draue him to deuise how to saue his life: for he had mangled and cut his bodie in manie places, that has Steede was all coloured with the blood that ranne from his woundes, which caused the Phrygian to thrust at the blacke Knight, with such force and furie, that hee wounded him most greeuouslie on the left side, which wounde, and withall the remembraunce the blacke knight had, who behelde the combatte, caused him with both his handes to strike such a deadly blowe at the Phrygian, that lighting full on his Beuer, the force and vigour thereof, both vnbuckled the same, and the sword cut off his right eare, and wounded him in the face that hee fell on his Horsse necke sencelesse, the blacke Knight strooke another blowe at him with such a maine force, that had not the Phrigians Horse started with sight of the swoorde comming, hee had there parted his head from his shoulders, and the Horse ranne about the fielde, at last the Phrigian beganne to recouer himselfe, and looking about him, espied Parismus with his swoord put vp, and himselfe without weapon, that what with shame and furie, hee was almost madde. These Combattants were no sooner parted, but the Thessalian horsemen by a priuie watch word from out the Cittie, rushed vppon the Persians, who expected no such matter, and had their mindes otherwise busied, that before they could defende themselues, the Thessalians had made a great slaughter amongst them, which the blacke Knight perceiuing, though hee were greeuously wounded, made such hauocke amongst the Persians, that all men deemed him rather to be a diuell then a mortall creature, with whom Polipus met, but would not once offer to offend him. Dionisius , the Bohemian King, the King of Hungaria , the Prince of Sparta , Lord Remus, Osiris , and Oristus , likewise issued out vpon the Persian Forces, in seuerall troupes, which so amazed the Natolians, Phrigians, and the rest, that they maruailed whence the Thessalians could haue such aide, but their comming amongst them on such a suddaine, made such a mightie slaughter, that by that time the daye was ended, they had slaine of the Persians fiftie thousand, which caused them euer after to bee more circumspect and wary. All the souldiers being retired into their places, the black Knight likewise withdrew himselfe towardes the wood, Polipus hauing all this day verie diligently followed him, being almost come vnto the woods side, set spurres to his horse and ouertooke the blacke Knight, who espying him, staied his coming, and knowing him to be the knight with whom he had combatted that day, by the three falcons on his Armour, most kindely saluted him, and demaunded the cause of his comming to him. Most woorthie Knight (quoth hee) my humble sute vnto you, is, that you would vouchsafe mee the fauour, as to lette mee vnderstand the cause you refused the combatte with me this day. Gentle knight (quoth Parismus ) you must needes pardon mee for that, vntill I knowe whether you are the woorthie Polipus of Phrigia , whome I iudge you to bee by those Armes. Indeede (quoth hee) I am the same Polipus , and the cheefest cause of my comming vnto you, is, to bee acquainted with you, though vnworthie, for that I know you could not come to the knowledge of me, but by the vertuous Parismus , who is now dead, in whose defence if you beare armes, I will with you, doo my endeuour to reuenge his death against mine own country, for that I am thereto bound. Worthy knight (quoth he) if you wil vouchsafe to take such simple entertainment as my poore lodging doth afford, I will make knowne vnto you your whole desire, which Polipus willingly accepted, & being come to ye caue, Polipus maruailed to see so worthie a knight liue in such an obscure place, but being come in, he was soone vnarmed, and then Parismus knewe him to be his friend, and taking him by the hand, led him aside, & then made himselfe knrwne vnto him, whereat Polipus wondered, & with exceeding ioy, most louingly embraced him, & after supper was ended (which was prouided by the outlawes and cleanley drest by the damsell) Parismus declared vnto him the whole circumstance of his tragedie, wherewith Polipus was so inwardly vexed, to heare of Sicanus falshood, that hee vowed for euer to remaine his professed Enemie, they continued in the caue all that night, the one recounting vnto the other their forepassed friendship, at last it was concluded betwixt them, that Polipus should still continue there, and therfore prouided him other Armour, that thereby hee might not be knowne. It was some three weekes space before Parismus could recouer his wouuds, during which time the Thessalians had receiued much dammage by their enimies, growing into feare of famin, for that theyr victualls began to wax scant, their courage beeing likewise somewhat abased, for that they saw not the black Knight in all that time, come into the fielde, as his woonted manner was: therefore they concluded by a generall consent, to Parley with the King of Persia , and appointed Lord Remus to be the messenger: who comming to the Persian King, tolde him, that Dionisius King of Thessalie , did desire to parly with his highnesse, whome he knew not yt he had any way offended. Whose message, the Persian King kindely accepted, and vppon his Kinglie promise protested to continue a truce for yt day, appointing the place of meeting, to bee on the greene before the west gate of the Citie: whether hee came with the Kings that were with him, and Sicanus his sonn: whither also Dionisius , and the King of Bohemia , and the rest of the potentates, on the Thessalian partie, likewise came. Many things, beeing alleaged on both sides, the one in accusation of Sicanus , the other in defence of his innocencie, at last by consent of all, a peace was concluded for twentie daies, and on the twentieth daye it was concluded that this cotrouersie should be decided by battaile, the conditions were these. That if Dionisius coulde not bring three Knights, to combat with three of the Persians, that then hee shoulde acknowledge himselfe subiect to the Persian King, and also should deliuer vnto Sicanus , his daughter Laurana to be at his disposition, and Sicanus to enioye the Crowne after his death, and if the Thessalians shoulde conquer the Persian knights, then immediatelye the Persian should remooue his forces, and Sicanus should acknowledge the truth of the fact, vpon which conditions the peace was concluded, and firmely ratified, by the generall othes, of the kings of Persia , and Thessalia . During which time of peace, Parismus and Polipus would vsually come abroade, both armed in white armour, with plumes of white feathers, and white steedes gallantly attired, and behold the Persians and Thessalians continually, euery day combatting, for tryall of their manhood, but still the Phrigian Zoylus , & the two Parisians, Brandor and Ramon , bore away the victorie, that the Thessalians would no more encounter them: which droue Dionisius into such a deep studie, what knights to prouide against the appointed day of combat, all together dispairing of the blacke knight, for that hee hadde not beene seene a long time amongst them, and also for that Oristus and Osiris were so greeuously hurt, that it was impossible for them to recouer their health by the time appoynted. Parismus hearing of this conclusion, told Polipus , that if he would accompanie him to be one of Lauranaes Champions, he should be for euer bounde to requite that curtesie, which gentle request Polipus kindly accepted. The third, that Parismus hadde appoynted, was one of the outlawes that preserued his life, whose valour exceeded most of the knights in Thessaly , though he endured some secret disgraces. Laurana maruailed that during the time of these warres (being so famous, as they could not choose but bee spread through most part of the world) she could heare no newes of Parismus , iudging him nowe for a truth to be dead, for otherwise shee thought it could not be, for she knew if the least report of those wars were but come to his hearing, hee would returne to aid her from Sicanus , who she so much abhorred, that it was a greefe to her to heare him named: with all, remembring in what perill, both her father, her countrey, & her selfe, were brought by his tiranny, & that this miserie exceeding all the rest, was now fallen vpon her, that she must finde champions to defend her, or else she must be thrall to him, which was more greeuous vnto her then tenne thousand deaths, the remembrance of which extremities, caused her to burst foroth into these exclamations. Most vnhappie and accursed wretch that I am, howe can I sufficiently exclaime against my hard destinies, that haue brought mee in daunger of him I mortally hate, whose verie name is odious in my hearing, who by his trecherie hath robbed mee of my hearts delight, and continually workes my endlesse torment, had my vnluckie starres allotted me to some vntimelie death, or otherwise wrought me miserie, then could I haue indured this marterdome with patience, and quietly haue suffered the extreamest calamitie, but my euill destenie farre exceedeth all miserie, and hath shut mee from all hope of comfort in this my affection, by the death of my vertuous Lord, and deere friende Parismus , whose ghost is busied with diuine contemplations, and not tormented as I am with temporall vexations. I would willingly follow him to Elizium , there to attaine the fruition of his heauenly comcompanie, but my destinies likewise haue allotted mee a cowards heart, not daring to execute my will vppon my selfe: my froward minde likewise disswadeth me by many impossible perswasions, that in this extremitie, I knowe not whose aide to implore: my Parismus is deade, my Fathers Knights mangled for my sake, and all things so contrarie to good successe, that vnlesse I be deliuered from this tyrant Sicanus , by some admirable and strange meanes, I must of necessitie fall into his loathsome power, whose serpentine breath doth infect my heart with deadly fear. With these and such like exclamations, Laurana tormented her selfe continually: At last the appointed day of Combat was come, against which time (by the appointment of Dionisius ) there were statelie scaffolds erected for the beholders, one for the King of Persia , at the one ende, and the other for Dionisius and the Thessalian Peeres. How Parismus , and Polipus , and one of the outlawes, sent Dina the virgin to the Court at Thebes with a message, and how they fought a battel against three of the Persians according to the peace, concluded. And how Sicanus refused to performe the condition of the peace, wheruppon Parismus vnknowne, challenged him the Combat. The night before the combattants shuld meete, Parismus with the counsell of Polipus Attired Dina the virgin like a forrest nimphe, in most rich apparell, and sent her vnto the Courte of Dionisius with these Uerses written. In time of neede do not dispaire: distressed wrong shall conquest haue: Though yet vnknowne, the Knight is by, that gainst thy foes doth combat craue. Treasons reward is open shame, the lost, from death may be preserued: With patience beare thy crossed state, this Knights good, will hath trust deserued The damsell being instructed of Parismus what she should do, made all haste vnto the Pallace, where she was no sooner come, but she was conducted into the great Hall, where was Dionisius, Oliuia , the King of Bohemia , and the King of Hungaria , with his faire Queene Armida , the Prince of Sparta , and the Lady Issabella his sister, with a number of other Lordes, and gallant Ladies. Who beholding the damsell maruailed with what message shee came, who beeing before the king, humblie reuerencing her selfe vpon her knee, tolde him, that shee had a message to deliuer vnto the Princesse Laurana , who beeing sent for, the Damosell presented vnto her a scutchion, wherein was portrayted a knight wounded by three slaues, and a discription howe they couered his bodie as deade, with Mosse, and vnderneath, how the same knight was founde by another knight, and carried to a Caue, which was done in most exquisite manner. Laurana hauing a while viewed the same, and read the verses written vnderneath, deliuered the same vnto the King: who hauing likewise read the verses, most kindely thanked the Damosell for her paines, referring the aunswere to his daughter, who willed the Damosell to signifie vnto the Knight that sent her, that she did most willingly accept him for her Champion, willing her to deliuer vnto him a rich imbroydred scarffe, which shee requested hee would weare for her sake. The Damosell hauing receyued her message, and rich rewarde, departed. Assoone as shee was gone, all the Court was comforted by this Message, and prepared to attyre themselues in their stateliest robes the next day, the more to discourage the enemie. The Damosell soone returned to Parismus , and deliuered the message Laurana had sent him, and the scarfe which shee requested him to weare as her fauour, which he kist and rekist, because it came from the most vertuous mistresse of his affection. The next day, the Thessalian King, the King, of Bohemia , the King of Hungaria , and the rest seated themselues on the scaffolde, likewise Oliuia the Queene, the Queene of Hungaria , and the beautifull Laurana , whose splendor so darkened the beautie of the rest, that shee appeared like golden Scinthia amongst the twinkling Starres, the crimson colour shining so fresh in her christall cheekes, and as clarret wine and milke mixt together, beeing so comely, fayre, so vertuous and chaste, so courteous and constant, so milde and mercifull, as shee was no way to bee equalled, and yet bearing a minde so farre from pride, that shee disdained not the meanest person in Thessaly , whose royall personage seemed an ornament to all the whole assemblie. The king of Persia , the Natolian King, the king of Licia and Libia were seated on one scaffold, and next vnder them the Persian contributories, which when the Thessalians behelde, they supposed one part of the worlde was come to destroy them. The Persian knights came into the lists, the first beeing the valiant Zoylus , attyred all in redde, with most rich caparisons of beaten golde, with a plume of redde feathers bespangled with Golde, next came the valiant Brandor , and Ramon , attired in most rich colours of blewe, nothing differing, because they were Brethren, who gallantly mannaged theyr steedes with such feature, that one would haue iudged, three comlier knights could not haue beene founde, and raunging three or foure times about the listes, but seeing no enemie aproching, they stared and gazed as if they thought scorne to staye the Thessalians comming, but stare, gaze, and stay they might, for the Thessalian Champions came not an houre after that, which draue Dionisius into such an agonie, that hee could haue torne his haire from his head, fearing least the message the daunsell brought, might bee deuised by the Persians to delude him withall, that hee and all the rest were driuen into such an extasie, that they sate like men amazed, not knowing howe or which way to saue themselues from dishonour. Laurana likewise seeing her expectation crossed, and doubting nowe the worst, waxed faint with inward greefe, and the liuely redde beganne to vade out of her cheekes, that shee had fallen from the place where shee sate, hadde shee not beene reuiued with a sodaine shout the people made, who espied the three Champions come galloping along the plaines, which so reuiued the rebated hearts of the Thessalians, that they seemed like men newly raysed from death to life. This sodaine reioycing somewhat daunted the Persians, because they were before perswaded they should haue the conquest without battell, and also they feared least the blacke knight might be one of them that were the combattants. By this time Parismus, Polipus , and the Outlaw were come to the listes, theyr armour being siluered all ouer, theyr apparrell, plumes, and steedes, all white, theyr staues, caparisons, and furniture all alike, nothing differing in all theyr ornaments, but that Parismus wore on his right arme, the scarfe Laurana had sent him, and Pollipus in his crest a fresh branch of bloomed Palme, and hauing in most gallant manner marched twise or thrise about the lists, they came back to their races end, and there attended to know Dionisius pleasure. Parismus still hauing his eyes seated on the vertuous Laurana , at last Dionisius came downe from his seate of State, and kindly saluted him, telling them since it was theyr pleasure so much to honour him, as to become his Combattants, hee would (if it pleased God to graunt them the victorie) not bee vnmindfull of theyr courtesie, nor vngratefull for their paines. No sooner was Dionisius seated againe, but the trumpet beganne to summon these Champions to the battell, Parismus , looking backe vppon Laurana (as if from thence he had fetcht his beeing) waued his launce aboue his head, and the Champions mette with such furie, that shiuering theyr Launces into a thousande peeces, they passed by without any harme at all, then drawing theyr Swordes, Parismus encountred Zoylus, Polipus Brandor , and the Outlawe Ramon , betweene whome beganne a most terrible and cruell battell, that in short space their armour flew in peeces, and the bloud ran downe aboundantly, on either partie, in which most cruell sight they continued by the space of two houres, neither partie seeming so yeelde. At last Parismus beeing inraged at the valour of his enemie, and knowing that it was now no time of dalliance, because hee sawe the outwlawe beginne to faint, assayled the valiant Zoylus so fiercely, that he could scarcely withstand his furie, and soone had dyed by the vnconquered arme of Parismus , but that the Outlaw had receyued such a wound by the hand of Ramon , that he fel downe dead vnder his horse, which somewhat refreshed Zoylus , for that Ramon taking the aduauntage, also assailed Parismus , which draue him to his vttermost shifts. At last he espied a peece of armour broken from Ramon arme, in which place hee gaue him such a wound, that hee let his horse reynes fall, and his steede beeing at libertie, beganne to wander disorderly about the lists. Zoylus in the meane time, beeing well refreshed with this ayde of Ramon , strooke such a forcible blowe at Parismus , that it pearced his armour, on his left arme, and lighted so full on his Thigh, that hee was greeuouslie wounded, which blow, turned Parismus sences into that extreame furie, that with all his force, striking with both his handes at Zoylus , hee smote him on the head with such furie, that he fell downe from his horse: at which blow, all the whole fielde showted, and Parismus sworde burst. During which time, the other two Champions continued their combatte most brauely, but greatlie to the disaduauntage of Brandor , who was a mightie, strong, and bigge boned knight, and strooke his blowes with such force, that had not Polipus nimblie auoyded them, hee could not haue indured his sight. At last Polipus hauing espyed aduauntage, thrust at Brandor with such might, that the sword lighting full on a broken place in his armour, ranne quite thorow his bodie, and he fell downe dead: by which time, Ramon had recouered his sences, and seeing Parismus to haue vanquished Zoylus , assayled him (weaponlesse as he was) and wounded him in two or three places, but soone Parismus got within him, & clasped him in his arms, & with main force threw hym forth of his saddle, and in the fall, burst his shoulder, wherof he died wherwith ye whole assembly gaue such another shout that the earth seemed to shake with theyr voices: presently the whole states on the Thessalian partie, conducted the combattants, with all solemnitie, vnto a most rich pauillion erected for the same purpose: where they were no sooner arriued, but Dionisius most louingly embraced them in his armes, and with infinit courtesies, thanked them for their paines, desiring them to vnarme themselues, that his Phisitions might search their wounds, which they refused to do, vntil the conditions and couenants of the combat were performed by the King of Persia : who hearing their iust request (could not in that honourable assembly, so much dishonour himselfe, as to breake his woord) presently gaue order that all his forces shoulde bee dismist. And also calling Sicanus vnto him, commaunded him vppon the dutie and reuerence he bare to him, to confesse indeed whether he, or any by is procurement, had slaine Parismus . My Lord, and Father (quoth he) by the reuerence I owe to your Maiestie and the rest of the Kings in this Assemblie, I am constrained to refraine from vttering what I would, but vnder your honourable corrections, I denounce him for a villaine, and a Traytor, that accuseth me for Parismus murder. In the like reuerence, to this most honourable assemblie (quoth Parismus ) I returne that villaine and Trator to thy selfe, Sicanus , for that thou liest, for thou hyredst three of thy Tartarians with promises of great preferment, who the same day that Parismus was missing, murdered him treacherouslye in the woodde hereby, myselfe founde his bodie, and heere I stand to prooue against thee, that like a villaine and a Traytor thou didst this deede: in whose behalfe, I dare thee to the combat, and for that thou thinkest Parismus hath no freendes to maintaine his quarrell, I charge thee as thou art a Knight, and honourest armes, not to refuse this combat: which challenge Sicanus in a great rage excepted, and presently went to arme himselfe, thinking that he might easily be ouercome, for that hee was already greeuously wounded. Did what Dionisius , and the King of Bohemia could, Parismus still demaunded the combat, whose constancie and resolution, they maruailed at, and the whole assembly were so desirous of his conquest, that with applaudes and commendations, they extolled his honourable resolution. And Laurana seeing her Champion readie to vndertake a fresh battell, came to him, and with hartie thankes for his honourable paines taken in her behalfe, desired him to desist from that Combat, for that it might much endaunger his person. Parismus lighting from his horse, reuerently kissed her hand, the verie touch whereof, reuiued his spirits with ioy, and tolde her, that if it were her pleasure Parismus wronges should go vnreuenged, he would soone desist, otherwise being vowed her poore Knight, he would either at that instant make Sicanus confesse his treason, or spend his latest breath in pursute of that quarrell: and therefore he most humbly craued her pardon. Laurana with a curious eye marked him whilest that hee talked with her, and though he were much altered, and changed his voyce as cunningly as might be, yet shee deemed it like the voyce of her deare Parismus , which shee was the rather induced vnto, for that shee sawe a Ring on his finger that she had before giuen to Parismus , which draue her into such an agonie betweene hope and dispaire, that had not her father and many others bene by, shee had there resolued her selfe of that doubt: wherewith, and with the sight of the blood that issued out of his woundes, shee endured such an inward affliction and torment of minde, that her sences were ouermaistred with a pittifull regard of his estate. But presently came Sicanus mounted on his Courser, so Parismus humbly taking his leaue of Laurana , mounted his steede, and comming toward Sicanus , beganne to vnbuckle his white armour, which was so artificially made, that it was but a case to his armour vnderneath, which was no sooner off, but he was presently knowne to be the blacke Knight, that had fought so valiantly in the behalfe of Thessaly , and had slaine in seuerall Combats an incredible number of Persians, which so daunted the hearts of the Persians, that they allotted him the conquest, before euer that hee beganne the Combat. The blacke knight at the first encounter, burst two of the Combattants ribbes, and in short time, with forcible blowes, beate him from his Horse, and allighted to haue parted his head from his shoulders, but the king of Persia seeing his sonne in that perill, ranne to the place, and desired the blacke knight to spare his life, which hee obtained, and vnlacing his Helmet to giue him breath, founde that it was not Sicanus , but another knight that hee had hyred in his steede, for that himselfe durst not meete so valiant a knight hand to hand: which Parismus seeing, in a great rage, woulde haue slaine him, but hee was disswaded by Polipus . This cowardly Iest was so odious, that euer after Sicanus was accounted the most recreant knight liuing, but being of a shamelesse disposition, he nothing regarded the same. How Parismus and Polipus , were conducted to the Court in tryumphant manner, and how Parismus discouered himselfe. And of the ioy Laurana made for his returne. And how Oristus was the occasion of his owne death. The blacke knight hauing ended this combat to his vnspeakeable commendation, was with Pollipus in moste braue and tryumphant manner conducted vnto the Pallace, with the noyse of Drummes, Trumpettes, and ringing of Belles, by the Kings of Thessalie and Bohemia , and by the Persian kings, who so well liked the black knights behauiour, that they resolued to stay some dayes there, as well to be acquainted with this valiant knight, as also to do him all the honour they could, though by his valour they had lost the victorie. The streetes where they passed, were by the Citizens strowed with flowers, the windows,  & doores, and house tops, were filled with aboundance of people, (that they seemed like stages) that came to behold these conquerours. Some presented them with garlands of Bayes, in token of victorie, some with roses, some with gifts, some with commendation, euerie one with exceeding prayses of their valour, that it were a tedious toyle to rehearse the manifolde honours that were done them as they passed along the streetes: and as they passed by the Marchants house, where Parismus had lately escaped the danger of the dogs, he espied Violetta standing in her fathers doore, attended by three or foure maides, verie neately apparrelled, who presented Parismus with a most rich embroidered scarfe, so artificially wrought, that it excelled all the most curious workes in Thessaly : wherein shee had most exquisitely drawne out the whole manner of Parismus aduenture with her in her fathers house, which gift hee most kindly accepted, being by that time hee had vewed the same, come to the Pallace, where they were welcommed by the Queene and her Daughter Laurana , with sounds of musicke and exceeding ioy: after the Queene had vsed some speeches, Laurana most heartily thanked, him that he vouchsafed to be her Champion, but her countenance bewraied her inward care, and her sadde behauiour, her mournefull thoughts, her minde being drawne to the extremest limits of respit, hadde giuen ouer it selfe to the most bitter pangs of sorrowfull meditations, that Parismus maruailed to see her constant resolution, that could be altered by no meanes of ioy, nor once forgette him that had beene so long missing. Dionisius likewise welcommed thither the king of Persia , and the rest of the kings in his companie, whose royall entertainment was maruailously liked and commended of all. The Champions (according as the custome was) were seated at a table ordained for the same purpose, with great state, and Dionisius and the king of Bohemia came vnto them (as the manner was with them) to disarme them for their more honourable entertainment. But Parismus seeing his Father comming to do an office of dutie to him, rose from his seate, and kneeling downe requested a boone at his hands, the King of Bohemia , seeing him kneele, willed him to aske what hee would, my lord said he, my sute is, that you wold forgiue Parismus enemies, the king of Bohemia (little thinking that would haue beene his request) woondred what reason he had to aske pardon for his sonnes enemies, and said vnto him. Syr knight I would gladly knowe why you aske pardon for them that haue murdered my sonne. My Lord aunswered hee, because Parismus is liuing, wherewith he pulled of his Helmet and the King his father knew him, and caught him in his armes with such exceeding ioye, that the teares ran downe his white bearde in aboundance. Dionisius and Oliuia likewise espying him: embraced him, with a thousand heartie welcomes, and the whole Court was filled with exceeding ioy for his returne. The king of Persia and all the rest of his partie likewise, came vnto him, and desired him to remit all discontent, that had passed betwixt them, for that now they did repent them of the iniurie they had done to him, the like honour was done to the Phrigian Polipus , all admiring the wonderfull vertues of Parismus : and recounting the famous acts he had done, seemed to be rauished in minde with ioy that it was he, that had so honourablie defended himselfe against all knights that did combat with him. Presently, they were all seated at a most royall feast: Where Parismus before the king of Persia , and all the kings present rehearsed the whole truth of Sicanus conspiracie against him, and how he was preserued, and how that he had liued euer since in the caue amongst the outlawes, and how he came by the blacke armor, which discourse did so much disgrace Sicanus , and extoll his owne commendations, that euery one reioyced at his good fortune, and contemned Sicanus falshood. Parismus hauing ended his discourse, maruailed that hee could not see Laurana to welcome him, but shee being nothing delighted with any newes, but of his returne, and nothing at all thinking hee had beene her Champion all that while, absented her self from their company, for that her facies were otherwise busied, & had withdrawne her self to her chamber, onely accompanied with Leda her maide. Dionisius seeing that Laurana was not there, willed one of his gentlemen in the hearing of Parismus to signifie vnto her, yt her champion staied for her welcome, Parismus hearing his speeches, desired him the fauor that he might go & visit her himselfe, wherwith Dionisius was wel contented, & he and Polipus with him being vnarmed, went to Lauranaes lodging, which they found fast shut, but Parismus longing to behold her perfections, whereby his life was maintained, knockt at ye dore, and Leda came & opened the same, who seeing him, was so surprised with ioy, that she ran in again without speaking a word, and told her Mistresse that Parismus was at the dore. At which word, Laurana started, saying: I pray thee do not torment me, with these newes of ioye, for I knowe they cannot be true, for full often thou hast kindely deceiued my expectation. Deere mistresse said she, beleeue me it is most true, & againe ran to the dore, telling Parismus that her mistresse would be very glad to see him. Parismus entred the Chamber, and with such feruencie delighted himselfe to behold her presence, that his wits were rauished with a heauen of ioye, and Laurana hauing espied him, was so surprised with vertuous amazement to behold his person, that the teares ran from her eyes, and her heart lept in her breast. Who being met, most louingly kist each other, so much surfetting with delight each of others presence, that theyr speeche was turned into a delightfull embracing of heartie content: not to be expressed: Which being ended: Laurana came to Pollipus and welcommed him, with so sweete a kisse, that had she not beene the beloued of Parismus , he would haue vowed himselfe her continuall seruant. At last Laurana being rauished with beholding her deere Parismus , taking him by the hand: vttered these words. Most vertuous Prince, your presence and preseruation, hath brought vnto me, that content, that I am not able to express: your welcome, is a maidens humble and heartie thankes for your paines taken in my behalfe, which is all the reward that I can make you: I acknowledge my selfe so farre bounde vnto your vertues, as I shall endeuour during my life, to requite your kindenesse to my power. I account my selfe to haue receiued my life at your hands, the preseruation of my Parents, and well fare of my Countrey, that all that may be ascribed vnto happinesse, is mine onely by your vertuous power, that I protest, wherein so euer I may be in any degree, thankefull vnto you, I heere offer to be readie at your disposition. I had entertained sorrowe but you haue banished the same from my heart, & brought me that happie content, that I account my selfe so farre indebted vnto you for the same, as I shal neuer be able to requite, which words she sealed vpon his lips, with a many kisses. Parismus answered, my deere Lady, whatsoeuer I haue done I account as nothing, in respect of that my willing heart would haue attempted for your sake, and my deserts nothing woorthy the thankes you render to me for the same, beeing so farre bounde to you in the bonds of perfect dutie, as I account my life and all that I haue, vnwoorthy to be spent, in recompence of the least of your fauors, humblie thanking you for retaining so good opinion of my vnwoorthinesse. Laurana knowing that her father and the King of Bohemia , staied for Parismus returne, with a ioyfull countenauuce accompanyed them downe into the Hall, and beeing come to the King: My Lord and father quoth shee, I desire your Maiestie, that these woorthie knights maye bee committed to my charge, to haue theyr woundes cured, which they haue receiued in my behalfe. Daughter said Dionisius , I commend the regarde thou hast of theyr health, and commit them into thy handes, beeing a charge of high account, praying thee to vse them in the kindest sort, for they haue woorthily deserued to bee well esteemed, and my Lorde Parismus (quoth hee) since it is my Daughters request, I hope you are contented to bee her guest, my Lorde said Parismus , else I shoulde shewe my selfe much ingratefull. Laurana presently coducted them vnto two most rich adorned chambers, which she had most sumptuously bewtified with iewels, & costly furnitures, wrought of the most richest worke in the world, all of greene and crimson sattin, bordred with Gold, and azure, his bed was framed most curiously, standing in manner of a Pauillion, the postes that bare it, were of Iuorie beset with rubies, the cardes of greene silke, the couer of the rich Arabian silke, beset with Pearle, the curtaines of the same, the Chambers adorned with most beutifull Pictures to delight the eye, the statelinesse of this lodging seemed in richnesse nothing inferiour to the monument of Mausolus , beeing one of the worldes woonders, they hadde not there remained long, admyring the beutie of the place, but there eares were delighted with the sounde of most pleasant musicke, vnto which hauing a while listened, Laurana desired Parismus to accept of this for his lodging, telling him, that Polipus lodging was likewise adioyning vnto his, that at theyr pleasures, they might enioye eache others companie, whether Polipus was honourable directed. Parismus most kindely thanked her, whose heart was exceedingly delighted, with beholding her beautie, the kings phisitions were by this time come, which caused Laurana with a kind farewel, to bid Parismus adieu, for that night, whose heart bega to wax sad at her departure, ye phisitians had soon drest his wounds, which were many, but none mortall, & being wearied with this daies exercise, these too worthy knights willingly gaue themselues to rest, where for that night we leaue them. Oristus hearing that Parismus his Lorde was returned, beeing then in the extreemest danger of his life, by reason his wounds were fresh, coulde by no meanes bee perswaded but that hee would go to see him, and therefore the next morning verie early, without the knowledge of any, stole downe, to go to his maisters lodging, being weake and feeble but he receiued a fall which made a rupture of his woundes in such extreame sort, that they fell againe to fresh bleeding, but hauing a strong heart, he againe recouered his feete, and with much adoo got to Parismus lodging, by which time the Physician that attended him myst him, and suspecting the truth, followed him by the tract of blood, to the Princes Chamber, where maugre the skill of all the Kings Physicians, his blood could not be staunched, that there he died in his Lordes armes, whose death stroke such a passionate sadnesse to Parismus heart, that in manie dayes hee could not banish the remembraunce thereof out of his minde. This newes was soone come to the knowledge of the king of Bohemia , and all the rest, who generally lamented his death, for that he was a knight of good and honourable qualities. Parismus continued many dayes in this heauenly Paradice, where he wanted nothing that might bring comfort to his disquiet heart, beeing so diligently tended by the vertuous Laurana , that hee had fullie recouered his health: During which time he often inioyed the Princesse presence, and recounted vnto her the whole truth of that hee had passed since his departure from the court, (onelye leauing out the Marchants Daughter) which reioyced kinde Laurana to heare: with kinde kisses, blaming him for that he would not make himselfe knowne to her in his Palmers weedes, with many other kinde conferences. Of Sicanus death. Howe Parismus wedded the Princesse Laurana , and of a generall triumph that was helde for seuen dayes. Many dayes continued the King of Persia , with the rest of the kinges of his partie, in Dionisius Court, in which time manie were intrapped in the snares of Lauranaes beautie, which was such, as would dazzell the eyes of the beholders, and astonish the hearts of no simple iudgements, with a diuine conceite, that the King of Natolia was determined to require her in marriage, of her father, had hee not beene kept backe by Sicanus , who caused his father the Persian King , earnestlie to sollicite Dionisius to that effect: whose aunswere was, that his promise relyed vpon his Daughters choyse, though indeede hee neuer meant shee should marrie the Persian, for that his behauiour and treacherie had made him hated and odious in all mens sight. Parismus nowe likewise determined to worke both his owne and Lauranaes contentment: and therfore on a time walking verie solitarilie in the kings Garden, studying howe so mooue his fathers good will to this match, in the middest of his dumpes, hee was encountred by the Princesse Laurana , who onely attended by Leda , was come downe to take the ayre, who awaking Parismus from his dumpes, with a courteous greeting vttered these speeches. My deare Parismus , (quoth shee) may I be so bolde as beare you companie in this your solitarinesse, or woulde you but vouchsafe to impart the cause of your sadnesse vnto mee, that I might bee partaker of your sorrowe, then should you soone perceyue that whatsoeuer can procure your disquiet, shal likewise purchase my discontent: Parismus most reuerently taking her by the hande, sayde: Most vertuous Ladie, I acknowledge my selfe so farre bounde vnto you for manie woorthie fauours vndeseruedlie bestowed vppon mee, that I knowe not which way to yeelde you sufficient thankes for the least of them, much lesse to requite them, and if I shoulde denie to fulfill your request herein, vnto whome I am perpetuallye bounde, I shoulde shewe my selfe altogither voyde of manners: therefore knowe moste vertuous Ladie, that my supposed discontentment, was a pleasaunt and delightfull meditation. And calling to remembraunce your manifolde vertues, and vndeserued fauourable assuraunce you haue giuen mee of your affection, that I was nowe determining to speake to the King my father to request, a consummation of our happinesse at the King your fathers handes, so it stande with your good liking. My Lorde (sayde Laurana ) I wholie commit the matter to your wisdome, whome I am bounde to obey, by the choise I haue made of you to bee my Lorde and husband, therefore I desire you to vse that prerogatiue ouer me, that by right belongeth vnto you. In these and such like kinde conferences they continued talking in the Garden, to both theyr vnspeakeable ioyes, beeing so vnited in the bonds of perfect amitie, that it was impossible to remooue theyr setled friendshippe. But Dinner time beeing come, they departed to theyr seuerall wayes, beeing both highlie contented with the others faithfull promise. Parismus no sooner found oportunitie, but he made his loue to Laurana knowne to his father, who was glad of his sonnes vertuous choise, and promised him to motion the same to Dionisius , which he presently did by this occasion. As hee was walking alone, he was incountred by Dionisius , and Oliuia the Queene, not accompanied by anie: and hauing kindelie saluted eache other, Dionisius beganne to talke of the woorthinesse of Parismus , and telling him that he esteemed him the most fortunate man liuing, to be the father of so vertuous a child, entering so farre into commendation of him, that the King of Bohemia thought hee could haue no fitter time to motion the marriage then that, and therefore answered. My Lord, I thanke you for entring into such good liking of my sonne, whom I cannot discommend, for that hee hath well deserued honor, but I haue an humble sute vnto you and the Queene here present, in his behalfe, which if you will vouchsafe to graunt, both he and I shall be bound vnto you for the same. Dionisius and Oliuia earnestly requested him to manifest the same, my sonne (saith hee) intreated me to request your honourable fauour, to contract a marriage betwixt him and your most vertuous daughter, vnto whom hee hath wholly dedicated his affectios, that I am now become an humble sutor in this behalfe. Dionisius and the Queene hearing his request, were so exceeding gladde thereof (beeing the onelie thing they desired) that taking the King of Bohemia by the hand, they told him they were highly contented it should be so. Thus all things falling out to their contentments, they parted for that time, Dionisius the next day assembled all his counsell and noble men together, and there motioned this contract vnto them, who most willingly consented thereto, by meanes wherof the news of this marriage was soone published, that it came to the hearing of Sicanus , who being inraged with greefe and shame, abandoned the companie of all knights, and in short time grew to such a desperate conceit of his impaired honour, that with greefe thereof he dyed, which brought some heauinesse to the king of Persia and the rest: but his death was soone forgotten, for that his father esteemed him not worthie the name and estimation of a king, and had lately growne into great dislike of him, and altogether fauoured his next sonne Lennilus who farre excelled his brother Sicanus in vertuous qualities. The solemnisation of Parismus marriage was appoynted to beginne within fortie dayes, to the vnspeakeable ioy of Thessaly , but especially of the two young Princes in which time Dionisius sent messengers to inuite thither many Kings and Potenttaes, by meanes whereof, the fame of these nuptialls was spredde in most places of the worlde, and many hundreth knightes determined to meete there to do honour to Dionisius , whose vertues by report, had bene made knowne vnto them. To this marriage came the famous Emperour of Constantinople with many other worthie knights. The Emperours sonne of Greece named Siches , with many valiant knights, Ptolomie the kings sonne of Egipt , the king of Fuze , famous for Chiualrie, and the most famous Champion of the world, Guido of Thrace : with many others too tedious to rehearse, who all vpon the appointed day, were totally entertained by Dionisius . Parismus and Laurana were with all solemnitie brought vnto the Temple of Diana , where the rights were performed with admirable pompe, the bridegroome being accompanied with aboue eight kings, and the bride bring ledde by two Emperours, and attended by Queenes and many Ladies of great account: the rights and solemnities being performed with such dignitie, that it excelled the statelinesse of Hecuba , Queene of Troy . Thus all things being ended for that day, the night approached, most part whereof, was spent in Maskes and many other courtly pastimes, needlesse to rehearse: and at last, the bride was conducted to her Bride-chamber by the Queene of Hungaria , and the Queene of Sparta . Where we leeue her to her exceeding content, to entertaine her beloued Parismus who behaued himselfe so kindly that night, that Lauranaes fortresse of virginitie was battered downe, and he had the scaling of that sweete Fort and spotlesse puritie, and of a vertuous virgine she became a chaste wife, and that night he made her the happie mother of a goodly boy, as shall hereafter be declared. Dionisius for the more royall entertainment of the states there assembled, caused a most stately Tilt to be erected on a goodly greene before the Pallace gate, the stages being most cunningly made, by expert workemen, and proclaimed a tryumphe to be helde there for seauen daies, against all commers. The first dayes tryumph, the Prince of Sparta and his knights helde, as chiefe challengers, who appeared before the whole assemblie of states, who were seated vppon the Scaffolds, in such royall manner, that the glory of them seemed to excell the stately pompe of the mightie monarch Allexander . Amongst the rest, Laurana was seated in a Chayre of state, crowned with an emperiall Diademe: as Ladie of the Reuels, who had prepared seuerall giftes for the conquerours, shining like golden Phaebus, and her eyes twinkling like two bright shining starres, that her beautie made the whole assemblie of straunge Knights admire her excellencie. The Prince of Sparta had his Tents pitcht, at the first entring into the listes, beeing white as milke, shewing his single estate, on the toppe whereof, was artificially framed a golden sunne, which with his splendour beutified the listes. This daies tryumph was performed by the prince of Sparta , and his knights, with exceeding valour, himselfe hauing vnhorsed aboue fortie Knights of straunge Countries, and had giuen to him by the Bride a paire of siluer Gloues, made by the cunningest workman in the world. Thus in great royaltie, to the exceeding pleasure of the beholders, was the first day spent, till the darke euening caused the Knights to giue ouer, and betake themselues to theyr nights repose. Earlie the next morning the Knights were summoned to the listes by the sounde of trumpets, the chiefe Champion for that day, was Lord Remus of Thessaly : richlie mounted vppon a Thessalian steede of yron graye, his Tent pitcht neere vnto the other, being of the colour of the rainebowe, on the top whereof was artificially framed a swift running heart, whereby the countrey of Thessaly was famous: before him, went fowre Pages richly attyred, carrying foure seueral scutchions: on the first, was portraited his Mistresse picture: on the second, three siluer doues, signifying his innocencie, far fro vaine ostentation: on the third, a bleeding hart: and on the last, a man seeming desperate: who behaued himselfe with no lesse valor, then the Prince of Sparta , to the great ioye of his Lady Isabella . The third day the woorthy knight Pollipus was chief challenger, who had his tent richly pitcht ouer against ye stage, being of the colour of blood, on the top whereof, stoode a Lyon, Rampant, his steede furnished with costly abilaments of beaten Golde, his armour after the Phrigian manner whose matchlesse chiualrie vnhorsed that daye an hundred Knights, and woon the prise from all the Knights that encountred him. The fourth day, Lord Osiris of Thessaly , was chiefe challenger, whose tent was pitcht in manner of a hollowe tree, from whence he issued, so artificially ouer spread with Mosse, that hee seemed to bee nothing but a lump thereof, running vppe and downe rhe Fielde, but so honourablie hee behaued himselfe, that hee was allotted that dayes conquest. The fift day Prince Lemulus sonne to the King of Persia , was chiefe challenger, whose tent, was of the colour of the Skie, his abilaments beeing of the colour of Azure, beset with starres of Golde, who behaued himselfe with great honour, most part of that day: but at last he was encountred by the valiant king of Frize , by whom he was vnhorsed, by reason that his Steed stumbled, and so the conquest returned to the aduerse partie. The King of Frize vnhorsed afterwardes manie woorthie Knights, to his exceeding commendation. The sixt day the King of Frize was Challenger ouer the aduerse partie, who had not continued long, but he was vnhorsed by the king of Libia , who most part of that daye bare away the prize, vntill he was encountred by Guido of Thrace and by him vnhorsed: Guido for that day bare awaye the Prize, hauing vnhorsed many hundred knights, and was likely to atchiue the chiefest honour of the Tournament. The seuenth day, Guido of Thrace came with great triumphe into the Listes, hauing his tent pitcht in full viewe of the whole assembly, being of the colour of the brightest gold, supported by foure Elephants, himselfe mounted vpon a sable coloured steed, most richly behung with abilaments of beaten golde, who behaued himselfe most part of that day to the shame of the Thessalian and Persian knights, that the whole assembly admired his valiantnesse. Which Pollipus seeing, notwithstanding his dayes tryumph was past, yet he armed himselfe, and encountred Guido most brauely. The first cariere they met and broke their staues onely: likewise they had some fiue or sixe courses more, in which maugre all the force Guido vsed, he could not once moue or disaduantage Pollipus. Pollipus likewise was extreamely vexed, that he could not vnhorse Guido , that each of them being sufficiently stirred to wrath, addressed themselues for an other encounter, when they met with such furie, that they were both vnhorsed, which Guido seeing, forgetting where he was, and disdaining to be incountred by Pollipus any longer, drew his sword, and Pollipus did the like, when they began to Combat, which Dionisius espying, commaunded his Herallds to part them, and being both mounted again, readie to make farther triall for the victorie. The Iudges considering the mischiefe that might arise (for that there beganne to be a tumult in the field) sought to appease the Champions, and diswade them to giue ouer, and so let the honour of those tryumphes rest, to both of them, which Guido in a great disdaine refused, without hearing what answere Pollipus would make. Laurana by the aduise of Parismus , sent a messenger to Pollipus , to request him for her sake, to giue Guido leaue to ende that daies challenge, for that he himself had sufficiently shewne his knightly chiualry, withall, she sent him one of her gloues. Whose command Pollipus presently obeyed, being a knight of exceeding curtesie, whereby he wan more honour then Guido could atchiue by the conquest. The rest of that day, Guido vnhorsed many knightes, and was lyke to carrie away the honour of the tryumph, maugre all the knightes that afterwards encountred him, which greeued Parismus to beholde. Withall noting his pride, he secretly stole from the stage, and presently armed himselfe in armor which he had caused to be made of purpose, seeming to be old, torne and rustie, but yet as good proofe as might bee, beeing made of the purest Lidian, steel, his abiliments and furniture, seemed to be such as had lien vp vnused seuen winters, and all to bee eaten with Moathes, his steede he made to trot like a countrey Cart-horse, and his plume was of russet feathers: & accompanied with some thirtie of his knights, attired like rude Country fellowes, with bats and staues on their necks, and in a maner in the midst of the Thracians victories, hee entreth suddainlie and rudely into the lists, seeming indeed to be a very naturall Country peasant, elected by a companie of rude fellowes to make pastime, and being espied of the people, hee was welcomed with exceeding showts and laughters, that now the eyes of all the beholders were bent vpon him: being come to the lists, he offred to run, but Guido disdained to cope with one so base, to whom Parismus knights came and told him, that their maister came to runne with none but himselfe, and therefore hee shoulde either breake a Launce, or else they woulde beate him out of the field. Wherewith Guido (with a scornefull laughter) tooke a staffe and ranne at this rusticke knight, who notwithanding his outwards show, encountred Guido so valiantly, that had he not beene an approued good knight, hee had measured his length on the ground, which so vexed the Thracian, that he ranne the seconde time, thinking then verilie to ouerthrowe him: but it fell out contrarie to his expectation, for hee coulde not with all his power moue this Countrey champion in his saddle: but at the third course, he was himselfe vnhorsed, with such violence, that both horse and man lay tumbling on the ground. Guido hauing receiued this exceeding foyle, in a great rage departed the field, and none of the contrarie partie encountred this knight, but they were foyled and ouerthrowne, that at last there was none woulde runne agaynst him any more: which he perceiuing, lighted from his horse, and went vp the scaffold where the Bride sate, and rudly offered to haue kissed her, but she courteouslie reproued his boldnesse, with that all beganne to laugh at his rude behauiour, and some beganne to thrust him backe: at last hee discouered himselfe, and Laurana knowing him, wondred to see him armed. Thus the whole honour of the triumph redounded to Parismus , as most worthie of the same, whose behauiour was so highly commended, that all men applauded this his last deuise: and Guido knowing him, was not greatly discontented to be foyled by so worthie a knight, by this time the nightes blacke mantell began to ouerspead the whole earth, that Dionisius with the rest of the kings, conducting Laurana in triumphant maner, hasted to the Pallace, where after supper was ended, they continued a good part of the night in dauncing, and other courtly pastimes, their intertainment beeing so honourable, that they all admired the exceeding royaltie of Dionisius Court: where they afterwardes continued many dayes, spending the time in many heriocall exercises. Howe Parismus rewarded the Outlawes that preserued his life. Howe Pollipus was in loue with Violetta : and howe Violetta forsooke her fathers house in the disguise of a page, and was entertained of Parismus , and of the care Pollipus tooke for her absence. Long time the Outlawes continued in great pensifenesse, for the want of theyr Captaine, much maruelling what should be become of him, and the other two that went with him: but at last they were eased of that care, for Parismus remembring the benefite hee had receyued by their meanes, desired Dionisius to remitte theyr offences, who willingly graunted his request, and therefore Parismus sent for them, who hauing knowledge that hee was the man whom they had preserued, willingly came, and at his hands receiued their pardon, with large and bountifull rewards. The Damosell likewise came amongst them, whom Parismus caused to bee worthily vsed, reporting verie honourably of her vertues. The Emperours and Kings of Persia and Natolia , being present at the comming of these outlawes, greatly praysed Parismus for the honourable care hee hadde of these poore people. Amongst the number of Knights there assembled, the Father of the Damosell chaunced to bee present, who verie diligently beheld his daughter, but knew her not, for that shee was mightily altered: but at last, hearing Dionisius make recitall of her tragedie, and howe that Osiris was hurt in her rescue, by circumstance, comparing the time of her departure with the same, knewe her to bee his owne Daughter, and in the presence of them all, with weeping eyes for ioy, embraced her, and she with great delight was glad of his presence. Parismus euer after vsed her father most kindly, and much esteemed her, for that she had taken great paines to cure his wounds. During the time of Parismus abode in the countrey of Thessaly (after that the two Emperours of Constantinople , and Greece were departed, with the rest of the knights that came to the solemnization of his wedding, and likewise the King of Persia , and the rest of the famous Potentates on his partie hadde solemnely taken theyr leaue, Pollipus excepted) the cheefest Gouernours of the Cittie of Th aebes inuited their King and Queen, the King of Bohemia , the two new married Princes, the Prince of Sparta , and the King of Hungaria , and his Queen, the Lady Isabella , Lord Remus, Polipus , & many other knights, vnto a solempne feast which they prepared in their great Hal called the counsellhouse: whose gentle courtesie was kindly accepted, and at the appoynted day they all went thither in great royaltie, where they were so heartily welcommed, and so honourably entertained by the Cittizens, as it were a tedious toyle to rehearse. Such pageants, such delightfull shewes, such musicke, and such generall triumphing and reioycing, such giftes and commendations, giuen to the two yong Princes, as the like was neuer presented to any Prince by his subiects before in those regions. Amongst the rest of the Citizens, the father of Violetta (the Damosell whome Parismus had kindly deceiued, as before is mentioned) was one of the cheefest that had ordained this banket, with whome likewise was his daughter, whom assoone as Parismus espied, a ruddie blush beganne to ouerspread his Cheekes, beeing touched with the remembrance of the iniurie he had done her. The Damosell Violetta behaued her selfe with such modestie in this princely assembly, that she was generally noted, and well liked of al. Insomuch that Laurana hauing precisely viewed hir comlinesse, beganne greatly to commend her vnto the Queene her mother, who espying occasion, called Violetta vnto her, demaunding of her whose daughter shee was, who humbly reuerencing her selfe vpon her knees, answered that she was the daughter of Sinior Andrugio a Citizen. Whilse she kneeled before the Queen, Polipus tooke such view of her perfections, that he was sodainely stroken with Cupids firie dart of loue, and beganne vehemently to affect her beautie and person, that his heart was intangled in the intricate laborinth of her perfections, but seeing her depart, he thought therewith his vitall spirits had begunne to decay, and with a heauie sigh he breathed out his longing desire to be acquainted with her. Parismus likewise stood in a studie, deuising how he might make some amends to Violetta , and therefore seeing her talking with the Queene and Laurana , hee came vnto them, and asked what Damosell that was that talked with them, my Lorde quoth Laurana , it is a Marchants Daughter, whose behauiour so well pleaseth mee, that I could wish her to spende her time in some honourable place to her preferment. Quoth he, if you please, I will speake to her father, that shee might attend your selfe: wherewith he came to Pollipus , who stoode like one with a flea in his eare, and desired him to enquire which was the Father of that Damsell, and that he would request him to come to speake with him. Pollipus being glad of such an oportunitie soone found out violetta, and greeting her with a a kinde kisse, tolde her, that he was sent by the Prince Parismus to intreate her father to come and speake with him. She tolde him, that her father was hard by, and that she would presently let him vnderstand his pleasure: who hauing knowledge thereof, immediately went vnto the Prince, who vsed such intreaties that (although very vnwillingly) he yeelded to his request, and comming backe, tolde his daughter to what effect he was sent for, which she was glad off, though outwardlie she made a shawe of vnwillingnesse. Pollipus hauing vnderstoode the cause why Parismus sent for her father, ( Parismus louing him so dearely, that he would not conceale any thing from him) reuealed vnto Parismus the loue he bare to Violetta , who promised to further him in what he coulde: by this time, the banquet was ended, and the King departed to the Pallace with great ioy and exceeding tryumphe, and soone tooke order to haue Violetta sent for, but her father seeing the messengers come, bega to take such sorrow at their departure, that it would haue melted a heart of steele into teares, to heare his coplaints, that the messengers pittying the sorrowes, olde Andrugio made, returned without her: which draue Pollipus to such an extasie of desperate sorrowe, that hee seemed altogither impatient to endure her want, but seeing no other furtheraunce to his loue, he often repaired to old Andrugios house, and manifested his sute vnto her, who vsed him most kindly, but stil delaied his sute with such excuses, yt he was therby further intrapped in the snares of loue, and yet nothing the nearer of obteining his sute. At last, it was concluded betwixt Parismus and him, that Parismus should accompanie him in some disguise, and make himselfe knowne to none but Violetta , thereby the sooner to procure her good liking to Pollipus , which he was the more willing to do, for that he thought vppon manifesting himselfe vnto her, shee would not denie Pollipus request, and therefore finding a conuenient time, they went to olde Andrugioes house, where they were kindly vsed of Andrugio and his Daughter Violetta , who welcommed these more kindly, then euer she had doone Pollipus comming alone, being thereunto drawne by an inward forwardnesse which shee felt, contrary to her former disposition, where they had not long continued but Parismus found opportunity to greete Violetta in this sort: Faire damosell quoth hee, I am come vnto you as an humble petitioner in the behalfe of my friend Polipus , whose loue is such and so feruent towardes your selfe, that vnlesse you pittie him, and yeeld some comfort to his care, you will bee the death of the woorthiest knight liuing, therefore I desire you that I may bee the happie Oracle, to declare vnto him his happy fortune, pronounced from your sacred lips. Violetta all this while stood as one amazed, feeling such an exceeding throbbing at her heart, that shee could not well tell what to aunswere, at last, beeing touched with remembring of his loue that had reapt the fruits of her virginitie, she replyed in this sort: Gentle knight quoth shee, I would not willingly bee any mans death if I could otherwise choose, but to graunt to this sute I cannot, without dooing another as great wrong as might bee: for so it is, I haue alreadie placed my affections, & haue already vowed neuer to alter them, whilst life doth last in me, which sodain & resolute reply of hers Parismus much commeded, yet vsed many perswasions in the behalfe of Polipus , & began to demand of her to whom she had vowed her loue, vsing many intreaties, yt at last she said it was but a folly to aske ye question, for that she was resolutely determined not to declare who it was. Said Parismus , what would you say if I name the man wherewith Violetta blushed exceedingly: & Parismus puld out of his bosome the scarfe which she had before giuen him. Quoth he, behold in this scarfe your selfe haue set downe a description of your loues first comming vnto you, which was the Prince of Bohemia himselfe, vnto whom you presented this, who leaping downe the Pallace wall, slew your fathers dogs, & what kindnesse he receiued at your hands your self know best, & since it is impossible to obtain any recompence at his hands (being wedded to the Princesse Laurana ) let Polipus , who in Chiualrie is inferiour to none, be the man that shall possesse the second roome in your good liking. Violetta hearing him make so true a rehearsall of her aduenture, and to affirme by many reasons yt it was Parismus , was stroke with such a sodaine feare & shame to heare her secrets disclosed, that she was ready to swound with greefe, & kneeling down with the teares standing in hir eies, began to intreate him not to reueale the same to any, for she was fully resolued not to loue any but him, although it were Parismus : and although it were impossible to attain any fauor or recompence at his hands. I will not (quoth he) reueale it to any, for none but Parismus knoweth thereof, who is heere present with thee, wherewith hee most louingly tooke her in his armes and kist her, shee yet being in some doubt that it was not hee, at last Parismus made himselfe knowne vnto her, and by such priuie tokens, as shee assuredly knew it was hee, which so reioyced her heart, that shee humbly vppon her knees intreated him to pardon her boldnesse, and vowed neuer to loue any but himselfe: which protestation so greeued him, that he beganne to perswade her not to wrong her selfe so much, for that hee was no way to break his wedlock vowes to pleasure hir. My deare Lord quoth she, if I had a thousand liues, and euerie life tenne thousande times dearer then this my life, I would most willingly spende them in meditating on the first fruites of your kindnesse vnto mee: hee seeing her firme resolue, could not tell what other perswasions to vse, to alter her resolution, but passing some time with her in priuate talke till hee sawe Polipus expected with heauie sighs, his happie or vnhappie newes: therefore departed and came vnto him, telling him, that there was some hope of obtaining her loue, vpon which comfortable speech Polipus still earnestly prosecuted his sute vnto Violetta , who hearing that Parismus was departing towards his owne countrey, determined to venter her life and credit to go with him, and therefore fitted her selfe in Pages apparrell, which so well became her, that she seemed to be the artificiallest workmanshippe that euer nature had framed, her sute being greene Satten, her buskins of the finest Spanish lether, fastned to her daintie legge with Christall buttons, her haire wreathed with a carnatian Ribbin, and all things else so neate and so comelie vppon her delacate body, that shee was most comely to beholde, and in this sort apparelled, shee secretly stole from her Fathers house, and soone gat to the Pallace, where although there was generall search made by Andrugios meanes, (who soone mist her, and the reporte of her losse came to Parismus hearing) yet shee was not in that habite any way suspected, where shee continued many dayes together, in which time shee laboured by all meanes to bee entertayned by Parismus . And on a time espying him with Laurana , walking priuately in the Garden, on a sodaine shee came towardes them, who beholding her comely shape and delicate complection, deemed her to be rather a diuine then a mortall creature, who beeing come neare them, Parismus demaunded whose Page hee was, My Lorde sayde Violetta , as yet I haue no maister, but I would gladly bee entertayned: quoth hee then, would you attende on Laurana and my selfe, if it please her to like you: I am (quoth shee) in all humble dutie readie at your command. Many questions Laurana asked the Boy (as shee supposed) demaunding his name, his Countrey, and parentage. Violetta annswered, my name is Adonius , my countrey Greece, and my parents all dead, and the fame of the noblenesse of this Court, made me trauaile into this Countrey with the Emperour, with determination to gette my self some good seruice, which you haue vouchsafed me, & herein my dutie, and indeuour, shall be such, as I trust you shall heereafter well like of, which speeches poore Violetta vttered, with so pretie a grace, that they both tooke great delight in her behauiour, whome now wee will call by the name of Adonius . How Parismus and Laurana with diuers in their companie, departed from Thessalia , and how they were dispersed fro the King of Bohemia , and set vpon by Pirates, whom they vanquished. All this time Parismus with Laurana continued in such blisfull estate of contented loue, still daily encreasing in honour and affectionate kindenesse, as though the one could not liue without the others presence, hee still growing into greater fauour (if greater might bee) in the Thessalians hearts, that when the day of his departure was come, the Cittizens of Th aebes with mournefull hearts, and watrie eyes, bewailed the same, all beeing sad and heauie, no instrument of musick, nor signe of ioye, nor sound of reioycing beeing heard, as though theyr departure were a signe of some ominous euent to insue. Laurana with many a salt teare, bad her countrey men Adieu, and poore Violetta , seeing her Father stand at his doore as it were comfortlesse, vttered such passionate lamentations, that were beyond compare. The two Princes being conducted by Dionisius and Oliuia the King and Queene of Hungaria , the Prince of Sparta , and the Lady Issabella , and most of the Thessalian peeres, vnto the Hauen where they should take shipping, there parting, beeing in such heauie sort, and with such aboundance of teares, that Parismus vttered these speeches. Most noble Princes, these sad teares which you shed at our departure, sheweth your vnwillingnesse to leaue vs, whose company you shal not long wat for your daughter Laurana and my selfe will very shortly returne againe, that she may be a comfort vnto your aged yeares therefore I humblie desire you to cease your greefe. Dionisius said: Most noble yong Prince, our greefe must needes be great, to loose the company of such assured freendes as your noble father and your selfe, haue showne your selues to be, therefore for our last farewell wee pray, that the goods woulde prosper you in this your iourney. Laurana hauing receiued their blessings, with most heauie harts they committed these two Princes vnto the seas, who hoysing sayle with speede, launched into the mayne, where they were soone out of sight, and Dionisius and the Queene, sadly returned vnto the Cittie of Th aebes . The King of Bohemia had not sailed aboue two daies space in great hope, soone to recouer the coast of Bohemia , but the windes began to blowe, and the seas to rage and swell, and such an exceeding tempest arose, as though the heauens and earth had conspired their vtter ouerthrowe, that theyr shippes were disseuered, and the marriners expected nothing but present death: that Parismus, Laurana , and Pollipus were disseuered from the rest of the companie, and they all in dispaire, euer to see them againe. The crueltie of this tempest, continued for the space of three daies, in such raging and extreame sort, that the marriners were compelled to cut their sailes & heaue their Mastes ouerboord, and by the violence of the winde were driuen past their knowledge, but when the storme ceased, the marriners kenned a farre of an Iland, and with such prouision as they had stored thither amaine. Parismus beeing glad that they had so well escaped the furie of the seas, with most comfortable speeches reuiued the fearefull spirit of the Princesse Laurana , from her sadnesse in this sort. Deere Laurana , since the destenies haue allotted vs this mischaunce to be thus disasterly seuered from our companie, and driuen into an vnknowne place, comfort your selfe in these extremities with hope of better successe, for I do not doubt but we shall well recouer the companie of my Lord and Father, who by these bitter misfortunes, is seuered from vs, but I trust the sease will not be so vnmercifull, as to drench his aged yeares in theyr spacious gulfes, my deere Laurana were you safelie on shoare, then would my heart bee at rest. Many other speeches hee vsed to comfort her in her sadnesse, who was the more comfortable for that she was in his companie: they had not long continued in this good hope of recouering land, but they espied a ship making towards them with all speede, who beeing come neere to them, they knew him to bee a Pyrate, who presently began to boorde the ship wherein Parismus was, but the marriners resisted them, wherewith began a fearefull battell. Parismus beeing vnder hatches, soone armed himselfe, and made such a slaughter among the Pyrates (most of his owne men being slaine) that he with the helpe of Pollipus , had soone destroyed the greatest multitude of them, and the rest yeelded vnto their mercie. Afterward they boorded the Pyrates (who were belonging to Andramart of Tartaria the Sythian Pyrate, that had filled the whole world, with the report of his tyrannie) and beleeuing them vppon such protestations and oathes, as the villaines made, they conueied such riches, iewels, and prouisions as they had, aboorde the Pyrates ship, for that thyr owne was shrewdly wether beaten. And likewise hauing shifted Laurana, Leda , and Adonius , into the same, suncke their owne, and placed such fewe mariners as they had left aliue, for gouernors ouer the Pyrats, they made towards the Iland, which they saw before them, and soone landed, determining there to refresh theselues. Where they founde the countrey waste and desolate, without any inhabitant, yet well replenished with wild Deere, and fowle, of which they got good store. Parismus demaunded of the Pyrates if they knew that Iland, who tolde him, that they gaue it the name of the Desolate Iland, for that they neuer sawe any liuing creature there: but they told him that there was a bewtifull Castle that stood vpon the toppe of a mightie Rock, in the middest of the Iland, inhabited as they thought by some Diuels, for that many of their fellowes had oftentimes gone thither, but none of them euer returned, but they neuer sawe any creature in any place of the Iland besides: though there were many goodly Townes not inhabited. Which straunge newes made them wonder: some two dayes they cotinued vpon the coast of this desolate Iland. And on a time, Parismus and Polipus , only attended by Adonius , straied from their ship to kill Uenison, leauing Laurana aboord, little mistrusting any trecherie, and trusting too much to his owne men. But the Pirattes hauing awayted such a conuenient time, by pollicie conueyed most of the Bohemian Marriners vnder Hatches, sauing some two or three whome they easily ouercame, and fast bolted downe the same, and before the Knights were returned from killing their Uenison, they had hoysed sayle, and were launched quite out of sight: they vnder boord not yet knowing that they were so betrayed. How Parismus, Pollipus , and Adonius the Page, going a shore in the Desolate Iland, were betraied by the Pirates. And how Laurana was conueyed to the Castle of Rockes, vnder the custodie of the Tyrant Andromart . As soone as Parismus and Pollipus had sufficiently stored themselues with freshe victualls, they returned towards the shippe, which they founde launched and gone, which Parismus seeing, and missing his beloued Laurana (now too late suspecting the Pirates trecherie) fell into such an extreame rage of sorrowe and vexation against his owne carelesnesse, that he tare his haire, stamped on the earth, cursed the day and houre of his birth, and was so farre ouermaistred with the extremitie of vexation, that he fared like a man extreamely madde or frantick, oftentimes being in minds to leape into the Sea and drowne himselfe, and oftentimes attempting to destroy himselfe, that all these vnsupportable passions concurring togither, so ouercame his sences, that he fell into a dead traunce. Poore Adonius seeing his Lord in this extreame case, vsed all the skill that was possible, to recouer him to his sences, that seeing nothing to auaile, hee beganne to make such wofull lamentation, as would haue made the stonie Rockes relent at his pittifull exclamation, where Violetta continued rubbing his pale cheekes with her soft hande, a thousand times kissing his colde lippes, and washing the same with salt teares, that Pollipus seeing his friend in that sort raging against Fortune, and hearing the greeuous lamentations the poore Page made, (full little suspecting who it was) by viewing their infirmities, most prudently gouerned himselfe, and did what he could with poore Adonius to recouer him, but their labour was in vaine: then hee beganne to meditate on this afflction, thinking that if he should rage so excessiuely as Parismus did, he should be no whit the nearer any hope of remedie, but should thereby giue incouragement and example to him to continue in that sorrow, which was beyond the compasse of compare. But seeing Parismus come to himselfe, looking like one ouermaistred with care, and staring vppon him like a madde man, fearing that this suddaine griefe had altered his wittes, vttered these speeches. Most noble Prince, since it is allotted vnto you to be thus crossed in your happinesse, I beseech you beare the same patiently, and remit this extreame care which so ouermaistreth your vertues, that their splendor cannot shine in such perfect sort as wontedly they haue don: what can helplesse griefe auaile you? what can care herein pleasure you? or what can this distemperature sorrow helpe you in the recouerie of your lost friend? then do not shew your selfe so inconsiderate, to destroy your sences in this sort, but let vs consult which way to recouer them, for these sorrowes, and tenne thousand times as many, cannot any way pleasure you. It ill beseems your honour in this sort to cast your selfe downe, but rather with quietnesse beare your afflictions, and with wisedome deuise how to ease you of this griefe. Pollipus spake these words with such feruencie, that it made Parismus somewhat remember himself, that rising from the earth (beholding his poore Page kneeling by him with blubbred cheekes, sorrowing to see his sorrow) he vttered these speeches. How can I containe my selfe within the compasse of reason, when my losse exceedeth the bounds of reason? how can I with patience beare this affliction, when my losse is such as all the worldes wealth cannot counteruaile? How should wisedome beare sway in me, when she was my onely wisedome, and with her precious selfe, all that was mine is parted from me? Why should I not torment my selfe, when through my selfe she is perished? Why should I not rage, sorrow, and lament her losse, procured by my negligence? Accursed Traytor that I was, that left my deare Laurana , yea the most vertuous Ladie liuing vpon the earth, so slightly in the custodie of barbarous people. What will she say of me, but that I regarded her not? how may she condemne me of inhumanitie, that haue suffered her thus to be taken from me? Can there be any limits giuen to this my sorrow? Can I euer recompence this extreame wrong I haue done her? Is there any hope that I shall euer see her again? No Polipus , no. What know I how these villaines will vse her? what can I tell whither they will conuey her? Or what knowe I the griefe shee will endure? This, this, torments my heart, that I am past all hope euer to see her againe. How then can I asswage my griefe, but rather increase the same? what sufficient torment can I inflict vppon my cankred carelesse heart, that left her in their custodie, and by that meanes haue lost the fruition of her diuine presence, whereby my life was maintained? No, no, Pollipus , my sorrowes are such as can no way be salued, therefore it were but in vaine to perswade my selfe that there is any hope left to redeem this my losse  & lost friend: Here you see we are left in an vnfrequented place, inuironed rounde with the Sea, and no meanes to escape a miserable death by famishment, vpon this accursed land, that was ordained to be my graue, then Pollipus , what counsaile haue you left to comfort vs withall? Or how can you thinke well of him, by whose meanes you are brought to this hazard of your life? My Lord answered Pollipus , let vs doo the best we can to get foorth of this solitarie place, which once attained, there is no doubt we might in continuance of trauaile, meete with some that can giue vs knowledge of whence those Pirattes were, the which if wee can finde out, then shall we soone heare what is become of Laurana , in the meane time, with patience let vs endure the search for her dilligently, for I vowe, that if shee be any where to be found, I will neuer desist trauaile, vntill I can come to heare some happie tydings of her abode: which speeches of this worthie Knight, so reuiued Parismus , that he altogither abandoned that effeminate kinde of griefe and lamentation, but with a mind puft full of inward sorrow, he kindly thanked Pollipus , and with this resolute determination, these two worthie knights vnarmed sauing onely their swords, hauing no company but onely their Page, beganne to trauaile along the coast side, to see if happily they could finde any shipping that might lye vppon those coastes. In which trauaile we will leaue them for a space to speake of the king of Bohemia . Assoone as the storme was ended, the King of Bohemia missing the ship wherein Parismus was, beganne to take the same most greeuously, fully assuring himselfe that they were perished, but himself was driuen vnto the confines of Phrigia , where he peaceably soiournied, vntill he had fraughted his shippes with all things needfull, and within short space landed in Bohemia : where he gaue himselfe to a solitarie and austere life: and such sorrow and lamentation was generally made for the losse of their Prince, as is not to be described. Likewise the newes thereof was soone conueyed to Dionisius Court, where the sorrow they made, was such as the like was neuer heard of in any age. The Tartarians ioyfull of their bootie, made all the haste they could towards their Countrey, not any vnder hatches for a good space, misdoubting their captiuitie, the Princesse her selfe being fallen into a sweete and silent sleepe. Leda being with her, maruelled why Parismus staied so long, and seeing her mistresse fast a sleepe, stole out of the Cabin, and found the Marriners all carelesly quaffing: and leauing them, she would haue gone vp aboue hatches, for that her heart could not be at quiet, but finding them fast shutte, shee called aloud to the Marriners to come open the same: but they likewise finding the same fast bolted, soone perceiued the Shippe was vndersayle and they betrayed, that being desperate, what with shame and griefe, there beganne a very great mutinie amongst them, that most of them were slaine in this rage, not knowing almost what they did, and the rest that suruiued desperately murthered themselues: which Leda beholding, assuredly perswaded herselfe they were betrayed, and with abundance of teares went to her mistresse againe, who still was asleepe, but at last awaked, and seeing Leda weeping, her heart beganne to faile her, and demaunding the cause of Leda , shee could not answere a worde, wherewith Laurana was driuen into such an extreame passion of feare, that all here ioynts began to tremble and shake, her colour went and came: but at last, what with intreaties, and threatnings, shee caused Leda to declare the circumstaunce of their woe. Laurana no sooner heard Leda say that they were betraied to the Tartarians , and that the mariners had in a mutinie slaine one another, but there she fell downe dead, that doo what Leda could, shee was not able to recouer her to her sences in a good space: but at last her breath began to make passage through the sweete cunduit of her throte, and shee lifted vp her eyes, looking with such a ghastly and pitifull countenaunce vpon Leda , that she was almost afraide to beholde her. Then Laurana began to teare and spoile her golden tresses, and disheueled her precious haire, and rent her costly garments from her precious bodie, wringing her handes, beating her breasts, and knocking her precious head agaynst the boords, that had not Leda with all her might hindered her, she had there destroyed her selfe. In this sorrowfull sort, she on the one side continued her lamentations, and Leda on the other side wept her fill, that the conduits of their eyes were dried vp, and not able to shed another teare, and her heart was sore with throbbing, and she desperately, and with a constant resolution, attended the comming of those villaines that had betrayed her, who knowing themselues to be past the reach of the two knights, began to lift vp the hatches, and called to those that were below, but none made answere, which caused one of them to go downe, and found all the Bohemians lie murthered, and with that ioyfull tidings came vp to his fellowes. One that was the chiefe, and captaine ouer the rest, allotting euerie one his seuerall office, went down to see where Laurana was, whom he found (as is said) making such mone, that himselfe (notwithstanding his barbarous disposition) could not refraine from pitying her griefe: and in that case wthout speaking a worde he left her, and returned againe within two houres, thinking by that time she would haue ceased her complaints: but she not giuing her thoughts any respite of consideration, but onely to thinke on Parismus , still continued her sorrowes, altogether refusing to be comforted by any perswasions, and for two dayes space, vtterly abstained from all kind of sustenance, by meanes wherof she was brought to extreame hazarde and perill of her life, which caused Leda to vtter these perswasions. Dere Mistesse quoth she, if you would vouchsafe to heare me speake, then I would not doubt but to ease your heart of some of the care you so impatiently endure. You know that my Lord Parismus, Polipus , and Adonius , are yet liuing, and no doubt in good estate, but only for ye losse of you, for whose sake my Lord Parismus will preserue his life: why shoulde you then destroy your self that he so much tendereth, and not rather vse all possible meanes to preserue your selfe, vntill you can by some meanes heare of him? for there is no doubt that he will search most part of ye world but he wil find you, & by his valour make the place where he cometh, speak of his worthinesse, that I doo not doubt but it will by some accident or other come to your hearing: then were it vain for you by destroying your self, to destroy him likewise, whereas otherwise you may happilie meet, to both your exceeding comforts: your vertues haue the the power to rule straungers affections, let them then restrain you from dooing your selfe harme. What will Parismus think? and what thinke you will be his greefe, when he hath trauailed manie Countreys, and indured many thousande perils in search of you, and in the end findeth that you haue fullie made away your selfe, and were the onely cause of his sorrowe? I beseech you deare Mistresse, consider of these things aright, and weigh the estate that we are in, and then I do not doubt but your wisedome will consider, that it is better for you to preserue your selfe for his sake, then by destroying your selfe, be guiltie both of your owne death, and his too. With these forcible perswasions, Laurana beganne somewhat to pacifie her selfe, and with a setled resolution, determined to indure what miserie soeuer she should light vpon: and therfore began to conferre with Leda about their hard hap, & miserable estate, which draue her to her very wits end to thinke of. But in the midst of their thoughts came in the captain, who beholding Lauranaes maiesticall countenance, and exceeding beautie, was so amazed therwith, as he codemned himselfe of villanie to haue procured so diuine a creatures discotent. Laurana seeing him stand gazing vpo her, began boldly to demand of him what he wold haue, he hubly kneeling, told her that he had prouided her dinner, if she pleased to tast therof, which she willingly consented vnto, & began consideratly to recall her former sences, but yet so inwardly sorrowfull, as it was a rare vertue in her, so suddenly to ouermaister her intemperate griefe, & yet still remain so ful of grief, that the very substace of her sences was perfect sorow. By this time the pirats had safely landed their ship in the Iland, where their maister Andramart was, which was incompassed with such mightie rocks of stone, that it was impassible, but only one way, in which way a few were of power sufficient to keepe out a whole army of men, & soone they conueyd Laurana , and Leda to the castel, where they presented her (with such iewels as they had with her) to Andramart , who (being a ma of a most proud and hautie disposition, and maiestically seated in an imperial seat) was so rauished at the first view of Lauranaes bewty, that he stood aduisedly beholding her: at last he came to her to haue imbrast her tender body in his rough arms, but she abhorring him, thrust him fro her with a disdainfull scorne, wherewith he began to fawn vpo her, like as a dog wil do on his master, whe he hath bin newly beaten, & began to make shewes to them of great welcome, and kindly brought them to stately & gorgeous chambers most richly furnished, and soone all things needefull were there presented vnto her, by such women as were in the Castell. Laurana seeing her selfe thus kindly vsed, and not euill intreated was therewith somewhat recomforted, and vsed her selfe according to the condition of the time and place, and kindly accepted all their courtesies: but the loue which Andramart made vnto her seemed so hatefull in her eies, that it was worse vnto her then a thousand deaths, to indure his sight. The night being come, and after they had supped (beeing serued in most stately maner, and with most costly and delicate cates) she with Leda her maide (who lodged with her) betooke themselues to their rest, where she could by no meanes giue one minutes respit to her sorrowes by sleepe, but vttered most heauie plaints and lamentations bewailing the losse of her deere Lord, that the verie walles seemed to grone forth the Ecchoes of her complaints, in which sort she continued most part of the night. Early the next morning she was saluted by Andramart , who could giue his minde no rest nor quiet, but in her companie, and his loue was so exceeding towardes her, that he could not do anie thing that was offensiue vnto her. In this miserable kinde of happie estate Laurana continued by the space of a moneth, in which time shee had knowledge of a number of prisoners that this tyrant kept within the castell, by the grieuous cries they made, some for want of food, some with paine of tortures, that hee inflicted vpon them, beeing himselfe hated of all men, and therefore he hated all mankind, but such whose minds accorded to his wickednesse. Laurana in this time vsed herselfe so, that she still deferred his importunate sute, and had him so tied in the snares of loue, that what she commanded, he would presenly execute: but so odious was his loue vnto her heauie hart, that she was oftentimes readie to swound, with the remembrance thereof: but still by the counsell of Leda , she held it the best course to keepe themselues in his fauour, vntill they coulde by some meanes escape out of his cruell handes, where we will leaue poore Laurana in this comfortlesse place, amongest rude and vnciuill people by night, and by day, her musicke being the dismal noise of pittiful cries of poore prisoners, & clogd with the lothsome loue of Andramart , without hope how to escape from that miserable place of bondage, where you may iudge the sorrow she indured was such as no tongue is able to expresse. The miserable trauaile Parismus indured in the desolate Iland, how he was succoured by Antiochus , and afterwards how they were inprisoned in the inchanted castell by the Inchantresse Bellona . their food being wild fruit that grewe vpon Trees, and their drinke the cleare fountaine water, their lodging the hard and cold earth: in which trauaile they ouerpast manie goodly auncient townes, but altogither vnpeopled, the houses being for the most part, stored with many rich and costly ornaments, which caused these two knights greatly to maruaile, and desire to know the cause thereof, and remembring what the Pirats had tolde them, that in a stately castell, scituate in the midst of the country, it was likely there were some that inhabited, they determined next to trauell thither: for they saw no hope howe to get from that Iland, being growne very weake by reason of their faint food, and hard lodging, which trauell poore Adonius most willingly endured, thinking all paine a pleasure in his maisters companie, vnto whom he behaued himselfe with such tender care, that Parismus would oftentimes extol and commend him to Polipvs . For when Parismus at any time slept, he would couer his face with his thinnest garment,  & made a pillow of the rest for his head, & oftentimes driue from his mind many heauy thoughts by his sweete songs, that Parismus thought he could neuer haue indured that tedious iourney with patience, if Adonius had bin absent. These worthy knights hauing continued a long while in this their solitary walk, took their iourney by gesse towards the midst of the country, in which trauel they continued some three weekes, in which time they were often in danger of drowning by reason of many deceitful quicksands, & often like to be famisht for want of sustenance, & often in danger to be deuoured by wild beasts, yt were abundantly in this country & yet neuertheles they were nothing ye neerer, their wished expectation. At last Parismus & Polipus bega vtterly to despaire of euer accoplishing the means of getting fro that vnfrequeted place, & they trauelled all a whole day & a night, ouer a mightie plaine, where there was neither water to staunch their thirst, nor fruit to asswage their hunger. Early in the morning, they espied a mighty wood, where they thought (although there were no other cofort) yet there they should find fruit: but being come thither, their expectation was frustrated, for there was nothing but thornes and briers, & so thicke, that they could by no means enter ye same, that there they surely expected nought but famishment. And Parismus , what with extemitie of hunger, griefe for the losse of Laurana , and lastly for Pollipus & Adonius sake, sat him downe vnder a mightie oake, & with a heauy heart vttered these plaints. How vnfortunate am I aboue all men to be driue to this exegent of miserable calamitie, yt by my ill fortune haue betraid the most chast, vertuous, & beautiful lady liuing, into the hands of tirants, to her endlesse griefe, and by my means haue brought these my friends in danger of a lametable death by famishmet. Had all these bin proper to my self, then wold I in despite of my crooked destnies haue indured the, then should not they complaine, then should my vertuous Laurana haue bin in the pleasant court of Dionisius , whose teares at my departure, did prognosticate my vnluckie successe in this extremitie what hope is left for my comfort? how may Laurana curse my vnfortunate destines? how may Dionisius accuse me of dishonor, for loosing his daughter? how may Phrygia condemne me for the losse of the worthy Pollipus ? and how may I sufficiently recopence al the wrongs? Dispair shal attend my steps, & sorow shal be my food: affliction shal be my copanion, & care my rest: the day will I spend in teares, and the night in grones: let the heauens poure down their vengeance on my head, & the earth work my sorrow: for I the most vnfortunate of al men, haue deserued the greatest punishment that euer was inflicted vpon man. In that vexation of minde continued Parismus , and poore Adonius lay weeping at his feete, almost dead for want of food. Polipus he went vp and downe, raging inwardly in his minde, his heart beeing so full fraught with griefe, that his eyes were swolne with extreame vexation. All the while that these woorthie knights had continued in this simpathie of sorrow, there was an aged Hermit had beheld their complaints, and vnderstanding by their behauiour, that they were some distressed strangers, pitied their passions, and came towards the, being al three laid vnder the oake togither lamenting, and saluted them with these kind speeches. Worthie knights (said the Hermit) for that I see you are stragers, & distressed, if my poore Cel may any way ease you, and such simple vittailes as the same yeeldes, refresh you, or my selfe, or councel may any way pleasure you, I desire you to go with me thither, and you shall be welcom. Parismus beholding this aged man vtter such kind speeches, as one rauished with ioy, rose from the ground, and kindly with thankes told him, that he willingly accepted his profered curtesie: for curteous old man (qd. he) you could neuer haue come in a time of more need, for we are now giuen ouer to despair, therfore we may say happy olde man, you shall do vs a friendly deed, which we wil thankfully accept, and willingly requite, if it lieth in our powers: then I pray you (quoth he) go with me, for I perceiue your bodies are wearied with trauell, & your hearts tired with grief: so they ioyfully went to his Cell, being glad of this comfort, & in little space attained thither, which was in a large caue vnder ye earth, most secretly cotriued: where they were soone wel refreshed with wine and venison, which this olde man had alwaies ready After that they had wel satisfied their hunger with this good cheere, the olde man requested to knowe of whence they were, and by what mischaunce they were arriued on that vnhappie Iland. Parismus tolde him that he was sonne to the King of Bohemia , and that his companion was a knight of Phrygia , rehearsing vnto him all their whole misaduenture, and the losse of Laurana , vttering the same in such doleful wise, that the olde Hermit could not refraine from griefe. By that time Parismus had ended his tragicall discourse, it waxed darke, and therefore the olde Hermet brought them vnto their lodging, which was the same bed whereon he layd himself (there being no other) on which Parismus was very vnwilling to lie, thereby to displace this good old man: but by ye manifolde intreaties of the Hermit, he yeelded, & soone addressed himselfe to go to the same, desiring Pollipus to be his bedfelow, and for that Adonius was somwhat sickly, they laid him in ye midst betwixt the, for that he had done them many pleasures in their trauel. Parismus being so far in loue with him, as he wold haue ventered his owne life for to do him good. Poore Adonius with blushing cheeks put off his apparell, & seemed to be abashed whe he was in his shirt, & tederly lept into the bed betwixt these two worthy knights, who litle suspected that it was Violetta , where she poore soule lay close at Parismus back, ye very sweet touch of whose body seemed to rauish her with ioy: and on the other side not acquainted with such bedfellowes, she seemed (as it were) metamorphosed, with a kind of delightfull feare: but had Pollipus knowne it had bin his deere Voiletta , he would haue more kindly regarded his bedfellow, who seemed to start if Polipus did but stirre. Thus they all tooke their rest for that night, the two knights only being glad of this quiet repose after their log trauell: & Adonius hauing in his heart a thousand delights of ioy by touching Parismus sweete bodie, early in the morning Adonius was vp, being afraid to vncouer her delicate body, but with speed soone araid himself, & had so neatly prouided al things against these two knights should rise, that both of them admired his behauiour, hauing prouided most holsome bathes for their feete, which did them much ease, for that they were sore bruised with trauaile. The good old Hermit seeing these worthy Knights readie to take their leaue (for that they were vnwilling to stay to trouble him) requested them that they wold stay with him some daies, and refresh themselues. Good father (sayd Parismus ) if we be not troublesome vnto you, then wil we stay, and bring our selues further into your debts: not so woorthie Knights (quoth he) for I know not how you will get from out of this countrey, vnlesse you wil stay some time with me, for I assure you that there is no meanes but one, which must be achiued with much hazard of your liues, which many haue attempted, yet neuer any could effect. I pray you good father said hee, let vs be so much beholding vnto you, as to know the meanes, for were it neuer so daungerous, I will most willingly vndertake the same, seeing there is no other meanes to escape, for I greatly desire to know what is become of the vertuous Laurana : wherewith the Hermit began in this manner. Most worthie prince (quoth he) I now begin to rehearse a Historie of the most vildest traytor liuing on the earth, whose name is Druball , sometime a subiect of mine, but now my superiour: for know woorthie knights, my name is Antiochus , sometime the vnhappie ruler of this Iland. This Druball some time serued me, vnto whom I committed my secrets, as the ma I most trusted, who in time grew so proude, that vnder colour of my fauour, he would commit many bad actions, that he was much hated amongst my noble men, & my subiects began to accuse me as accessary vnto his euil facts, & for that I was so blinded with his flatteries, they began flatly to rebell, and being reproued for his misdemeanour be my eldest sonne, hee offered in my presence to haue slain him, which made him so odious, that by the importunities of my nobles I banisht him my court & country, which he took in such disdainful sort, yt euer after he deuised to do me mischiefe, & ioyned himself to Bellona my greatest enemy, which dwelt in an neighboring Iland, the most wickedest hag liuing vpon the face of the whole earth, vsing witchcrafts, sorceries, & inchauntments, to further their purpose against mee: and came into this my country, hauing many frieds, first woon many of my subiects hearts, and afterwards made open wars against me, & by their strength put me to flight. When hauing gotten my Crowne, they imprisoned my Queen, and two sons and a daughter which I had liuing, but notwithstanding, they could neuer quietly enioy the gouernment, but were oftentimes disturbed by my subiects, who vtterly refused to liue vnder his tyranny, for that hee daily grew more odious amongst them, that by continuall warre his countrey was almost wasted, and by the Counsell of that wicked hagge Bellona , hee with his confederates betooke themselues vnto a mountaine heere hard by, and there fortified themselues, and by witchcraft framed an inuincible castle, from whence they continuly issued forth and vanquished and slew most of my noble men, the rest remaining now in their custodie, in most miserable seruitude. But not contented with this crueltie, they were so much giuen to diuellish furie, that they destroyed all this whole countrey, not suffering man, woman, nor childe to liue, neither can any creature land heere, but by their sorceries they will destroy them. In which kind of crueltie they haue continued many yeares: my selfe haue secretly beene hidden in this place, from whose hands I haue bin preserued al this time by diuine operations, and by the vertue of a Iewell that was giuen me by an olde artsman of Tartaria . The Castle wherein they remayne is distant from hence some three miles, beeing the goodliest thing to the outwarde shewe that euer eye behelde, where Druball and Bellona without dreade, liue in great mirth, continually tormenting my Queene and poore Children with extreame torments. Nowe most woorthie Knights (quoth he) vnlesse you can by some meanes ouercome these furies, there is no other hope to escape from hence, for long you cannot remaine, but they will knowe of your beeing heere, for all passegers do vtterly shun this place as a hatefull and ominous coast. They hauing heard this hermits strange discourse, woondred at the crueltie of Bellona , and were confounded in their thoughts with the daunger they should endure to conquer their inchauntments, that suddainly they could not tell what to determine off: but crauing pardon of Antiochus for their rude behauior towards him, whom before they knew not, most louingly saluting him, Parismus said that he woulde the next morning without delaye trauaile thitherwards: My Lord (quoth Pollipus ) were I sure to abide a thousand deaths, I would beare you companie, for I wold not now loose your sight, nor abstaine any hazarde for your sake. The next morning they were earlie vp: determining to leaue Adonius with Antiochus in his Caue, but notwithstading all their perswasions, hee would not staie, but what with teares and humble intreaties, he obteyned Parismus consent: who was vnwilling to haue him goe, least he might be hurt in this attempt. Antiochus conducted them vntill they were within sight of the Castle, but then left them, returning to his Cell, Inuocating and praying after his manner, for their good successe. When they had well viewed the Castle, which was beautifully seated on a strong Rocke, incompassed with a mightie huge deepe lake, they sought round about the same, but coulde finde no passage thereto: hauing neither bridge nor other way to goe on foote. At last they heard a little Bell ring within the castle, which was by the watch, by the sounde thereof, giuing warning to those that were appointed to keepe the same: vpo which noise, they saw a boat with six armed knights in it, coming towards them, assoone as they were landed Parismus demanded of the who was lord of ye castle, one of ye knights answered, come wt vs quoth he, & thou shalt soone see: wherwith they began to lay hold on them. Stay said Parismus , lette mee aske you one question: say on, said one of them. Is the Lord of this castle amongst you, said he? no said the other, I would hee were (quoth Parismus ) for I vow were he here, I would haue his traitours head, before he returned: wherwith Polipus and he drew theyr swords (being otherwise vnarmed) and so valiantly assayled those sixe Knights, that they were all slain within a short space, they themselues hauing verie little dammage or hurt. The ferrie men seeing theyr sixe Champions lie weltring in theyr purple goore, ranne towardes theyr boate, but Adonius seeing his Maister and Polipus had slaine theyr enemies, was before gotten downe into the same, and seeing the Rulers comming towardes him, and Parismus and Polipus pursuing them, thrust the same past theyr reach, by which meanes they hadde soone taken these slaues, and putte them to death, who by no meanes would manifest any thing of the secrets of the Castle. But Parismus comming to Adonius , most kindly embraced him, and with exceeding prayses extolled his wisedome in performing this exployt, to Polipus , who admired to see so great wisedome in so young yeares, but his wit and wisedome was such, that hadde they knowne the partie, they would haue more admired his vertue. By meanes of this Boate, they had passage vnto the other side of the riuer, where they were no sooner landed, but they heard such a hideous noyse within the Castle, such thundering and rattling in the skyes, that it woulde haue amazed the stoutest Champions in the worlde: but they were nothing abashed thereat, sauing Adonius stoode quaking and shaking with extreame feare, when issued out of the Castle two mightie huge proportioned monsters, seeming rather to bee Diuelles then naturall men, who assayled these two woorthie Knights with such furie, that hadde they not nimbly auoyded theyr blowes, they hadde at that very instant perished, who prosecuted their stroakes with such fiercenesse, that the verie earth seemed to shake therewith, and what with labour and rage, that they could not offend those knights, they were so hotte (the Sunne being then at the highest) that their eyes were dazeled with sweate that fell from their browes, which aduantage these Champions soone espied, and with their swordes (hauing gotten within compasse of their mightie Maces) soone ended their wretched liues, who gaue such groanes, that all the Castle rung with the noyse thereof: which crie, so amazed Druball and Bellona , (being then at their pleasure) that they came hastily running to beholde these two woorthie Knightes, who were then entering the Castle, and no sooner come into the inner Court, but they beheld the most excellent bewtie of the Castle, being the most gorgious and stately buildings that euer they had seene: where they had not long staied, but they behelde Bellona comming towardes them, whome they thought to haue beene some Queene inclosed in that Castle, for that shee was crowned with an Imperiall Diademe: who with her sorceries so bewitched their sences, that immediately they fell into a dead and sounde sleepe: presently shee commaunded them to bee conueyed into a strong prison, and there fettered them with Irons. At such time as they awaked, they were exceedingly amazed to see themselues in that manner imprisoned: and Parismus was so inraged with extreame sorrow, that he tare his haire, rent his garments, rayled on his misfortune, cursed his Destinies, and vexed his owne heart with extreame passions of sorrow, that his speech was turned into bitter sighes, and his sences forgot their former vertues, and he was so desperately sadde, that no griefe might be compared to that hee endured. Pollipus on the other side, continued his wonted manner of enduring affliction, which was presently to studie howe to ridde himselfe and his friende from the same, which might be accounted the rarest vertue that euer was in knight, he only studied for his release, and neuer raged nor railed agaynst himselfe, nor otherwayes distempered his sences, but ouercame his inwarde sorrowes (which were exceeding) with such patience, that Parismus woulde highlie extoll him for the same: and poore Violetta , woondered at his gouernment, as a most rare vertue, which shee neuer behelde in any but himselfe: which made her oftentimes accuse her selfe of unkindnesse, that shee had so vngently refused so courteous a knights loue, which verie thought touched her so neare the quicke, that shee was otentimes in minde to yeeld to loue him, and beganne afterwardes to affect his vertuous qualities exceedinglie. They continued in that darke Dungeon all that night, so laden with Chaines, and Irons, that they coulde not one helpe the other, without sustenaunce, nor able to take anie rest, with the care they indured, at the pittifull grones and cries of a number of poore distressed people, which were imprisoned hard by them, that it seemed more terrible to Violetta , then death it selfe. But they were still comforted by Pollipus , who hearing the sorrowe poore Adonius made, and seeing the heauinesse of Parismus , vttered these comfortable speeches. My Lord, do not discomfort your selfe, neither bee discouraged, or so much as disquieted with these crosses, for I doo not doubt but in short space wee shall free our selues of these bandes, and therefore beare the losse of Laurana with more patience then you haue done: what though shee be in the handes of Pirates, and villaines? Assure your selfe there is none so barbarous, or inhumane, as will once offer to iniurie her. And were it not for the care she hath taken for your absence, I durst assure my selfe shee is in good health: and for your owne safetie or ours, you neede not greeue yourselfe so extreemelie, as it seemeth to mee you doo, for that is not so greatlie to bee feared, as wee neede anie way to despaire: for doe but followe my counsaile in this, to contemne these pettie for a while, and regard them as if they were not, and you shall see by that meanes, we shall sooner come by freedome, then by effeminate lamentation, which will make our enemies reioyce at our affliction, and not pittie vs. Deare friend (quoth Parismus ) your comfortable speeches were of force to reuiue a dying heart, but so great greefe attainteth my minde for the losse of Laurana, that felt you but the griefe of such a sweete friendes absence, and feare neuer to see her againe, you would say that I did not greeue sufficientlie. My Lorde (replied Pollipus ) I haue often made triall of your vertues, which maketh me the bolder to trie your patience: I confesse that the losse of such a friend as Laurana is, can not bee sufficiently lamented, for my selfe doo feele such sorrowe for the losse of my deere Violetta , that my heart endures that torment my tongue is not able to expresse, which maketh me silent in my greefes, for that I woulde not put you in remembrance of yours by mine: for my Violetta is as deere to mee as tenne thousand liues, if I had them, and I doo not doubt but one day I shall see her vertuous beautie, for whose sake my heart will neuer bee at rest: the remembraunce whereof restraineth me from manie desperate attemptes, that otherwise I woulde inflict vppon my selfe, that haue not deserued the loue of so vertuous a damosell. But why do I vtter these speeches when shee is not by to heare them, and little regardeth the torments I indure by her vnkindnesse? But I beseech you comfort your selfe in these afflictions, for a comfortable heart is now necessarie: wherewith the water appeared in his eyes, and poore Violetta hearing his speeches, so much pittied his sighes and sadnesse, that for verie kindnesse shee wept for companie, and resolued to graunt his sute, which had well deserued to bee beloued: but the loue she bare to Parismus , so altered and changed her thoughts, that the could not determine what to do: at last she began to consider, that in louing Parismus , she did wrong to Laurana in some degree, and that shee might no whit alter her true friendship to him, being onely vertuous, and yet accept Pollipus offer, and yeeld him loue for good will. In these and a thousand such like thoghts, she spent the night, and the knights continued busie, bethinking themselues how to worke their deliuerie. Early the next morning, (fast bound in Irons) they were brought by a company of ragged hunger-starued fellowes, into a goodly Hall, most richly furnished with stately hangings, at the vpper ende whereof, satte Druball and Bellona , before whome they were no sooner come, but Druball with a tyrannous looke, demaunded of whence they were, and what was the cause they had so euill intreated and slaine his seruants. Parismus so much disdained to bee examined by so base a villaine, that he could not for extreame anguish of minde speak, nor could he (would he) haue answered him: but Pollipus stepping forwards, answered, we are straungers that haue suffered shipwracke, and were vnluckily cast vpon this hatefull Iland, made so, by thy trecheries, where we haue bene often in daunger of famishment, and comming to this Castle, thy seruants offered vs violence, and we haue rewarded them, and thou like a Tyrant hast vniustly imprisoned vs, not vsing vs as all knights should be vsed, and not by valour, but by sorceries, hast brought vs into thy subiection, which if not our selues, the heauens will reueuge. Which words he vttered with such a disdainfull countenance, that the Tyrant was amazed at his resolution, and tolde him, that he would soone abate his haughtie minde, commaunding them to prison againe. How Bellona the Inchauntresse, fell in loue with Pollipus , by which meanes, hee released himselfe and Parismus out of prison: and finished the Inchauntment. And how afterward Antiochus was restored to his kingdome. And how Adonius the Page fell sicke, and was preserued by Pollipus . thought them the goodliest men that euer she beheld, and at that instant, vowed either to obtaine their loues by faire meanes, or inflict such torments vppon them, that they should yeeld by force to her lust: wherefore she secretly commaunded her seruants to loade them with more Irons, which they performed, where these two woorthie knights laie by the space of a weeke in the most cruellest torment that might be: their food being bread and water, their bedde the hard and colde earth, in a most loathsome stinking prison. Which paine they patiently endured, but were both so greeued for poore Adonius , that their hearts were almost readie to burst with griefe, who continually (notwithstanding his weakenesse) seemed to be of great comfort. But being all his life time tenderly broght vp, he began to wax very sick with il sauours, and hard fare in this loathsome prison, that they thought he would haue at that instant ended his life: but Pollipus , what with deuises and force, wroong himself from the place where he was fastened, and made such meanes (notwithstanding his heauie Irons) that he came to poore Adonius , and vnloosed many of the boltes and Irons from his weake bodie, and continually made him sit on his lappe (being all the means he had to comfort him withall,) that he poore soule being almost dead with lying on the colde grounde, felt great comfort by Polipus warme bodie: which kindnesse poore Violetta so kindly accepted, that euer after she began to loue him most entirely, and remembring an impossibilitie of enioying Parismus , her affections were setled on the woorthie Pollipus , thinking that since he was so kinde to her being taken as a Page, hee would be much more kinde if he knewe her to be Violetta . Euery day they were serued by a rude vnciuill slaue, in such sort, that it would haue made daintie fare loathsome to bee so handeled, which Bellona did vppon pretence, first to vse them hardly, and then by better vsage to drawe them to a good opinion of her gentlenesse, for on a time shee came to visite these prisoners, being no wayes drawne thereto by a vertuous inclination, but of a most vnchaste and beastlike disposition, and colourably seemed to reprooue the Iaylor that hee had vsed them so hardly, commaunding him to remoue them into a more delightsome place, where they had verie soft bedding, good aire, and farre better dyet, which kindnesse of hers, they both commended. In which place they remained many dayes: during which time, Pollipus and Adonius were bed-fellowes, he full litle knowing whom it was he so tenderly regarded, for by reason that he was sickly ( Pollipus being drawne thereto by a vertuous inclination proceeding from milde pittie) would oftentimes folde him in his armes, and so kindly cherish him, that by his meanes poore Violetta had recouered her former health: which imbracements of Pollipus , at the first seemed straunge to her, but in continuance, she tooke such vertuous delight in his sweete company, that his presence was her whole delight, and those kindnesses did so much reioyce her heart, (by the knowledge of her owne estate, and remembrance that shee was vnknowne) that she was a thousand times in minde to reueale herselfe to him, when she laie folded in his armes: (he hauing not the least thought that she was a woman,) and a thousand times that determination was crossed by cotrary thoghts, that her ioy seemed without compare, had it not beene for remembraunce of the estate they remained in, but her heart was so cheared with these delights, that by her pleasant deuises she would driue many sadde thoughts from the vnchearfull hearts of these imprisoned Champions. Which so greatly admired their Pages vertues, that they were both drawne into an exceeding loue of his quallities. Bellona had all this while (by remembring the comely proportions of her two new come prisoners,) kindled such sparkes of immodest loue within her loathsome breast) that the burthen thereof was intollerable to her to endure, and therefore arming her selfe with an vnshamofaste countenance, shee resolued either speedily to worke her owne content, by enioying one or both of their persons to satisfie her appetite, or to worke their endlesse torment, and her owne death, which diuellish resolution, tooke such deepe roote in her impure heart, that she presently came vnto the place where these two knightes were, and with a fawning countenance saluted them: being attired as she thought most gorgiously to delight their eyes, but so vnseemely she became those rich attires, that it would haue altered a deepe grounded affection to extreame disdaine, to beholde rich attire on so vnseemly a carkasse. Parismus nothing regarded her: but Pollipus aduisedly marked her behauiour, and his fancie iumpt rightly on her disease, that at the very first, he rightly conceited this her amorous passion. Assoon as she was entered,  & had saluted them, she began to enqire of Pollipus (for that he seemed to be the cheerfullest) of what country they were, and how they arriued in that coaste: Pollipus told her, that they were knights of Phrigia , that trauelled towards Tartaria , but by a mightie tempest they were driuen vpon that Iland, where their ship and men were all caste away, but themselues and their litle Page, being therby driuen to trauel, and by chance lighted on that Castle, intending to see if they could get passage into Tartaria , for that the Countrey was no where else inhabited, & since our arriual worthy Lady, yourselfe know what miserie we haue indured, being inflicted upon us for no offence that we haue giuen to the Lord of this Castle, therefore faire Lady, if there be any vertuous pittie in you, grant our releasment from this bondage, which can no way benifit you: we are such, as neuer intended your harme any way: but by necessitie were compelled to this place, which hath prooued so miserable. Bellona being tickled with this flattering speech of Pollipus , (which seemed to agree with her disposition) made him this answer. Woorthy knight (quoth shee) if it lie in my power, to release you, I would most willingly do it, for such good will I beare you, and such pittie I take of your hard vsage that I haue caused you to be remooued fro the miserable prison wherein you were before, and haue both bettered your lodging and your dyet, and would do all that you wishe, or venter my life in pursute thereof, if you would condiscend to stay with me in this countrey; for woorthy knight, though it ill beseemes my sex to begin the motions of loue, and shewe their beloued, the depth of their affection, yet (for that peraduenture your inclination is not so bent) I here both offer you freedome, & what else you will require: so that you will yeelde to loue mee. For at the first view of your person my heart so surfetted with delight of beholding your perfections, that euer since. I haue inioyed no quiet, but onely the hope to inioye my desired wish: therefore gentle knight, resolue me of my doubt, and grant this my sute, and thereby ease your selfe of further paine, and set these your freendes at libertie. Pollipus hearing her speeches, thought it the best course to glose with her, and therefore answered. Most woorthie Lady, this your request, is daungerous for me to performe, for if the Lord of this Castle, should any way heare thereof, then would he inflict a miserable death vppon mee (as he might well doo,) and also my heart is oppressed with a heauie passion of feare, least these your kinde speeches should proceede of no good will, but onely to trie mee withall, and thereby bring me in daunger, beeing already surprised with loue of your vertues, which are such as might content a farre better man then my selfe. Bellona hearing his kinde speeches and hauing priuily receiued a sweet kisse of him, neither Parismus nor Adonius seeeing the same, was nowe indeede fettered in the snares of loue, whereas before shee intended nothing but lust, and therefore resolued to obtaine his loue, and to worke the downefall of Druball , thereby to possesse the same, without any let or impediment, and therefore with oathes, protestations, teares, and vnfained vowes, shee gaue him assurance of her loue, which was so kindled in her adulterous brest, that shee would haue hazarded a thousand liues to possesse the same, and taking her leaue of Polipus shee went out of the Prison, by a priuate Key which shee had alwayes about her, promising him to returne thither about midnight, when hee should haue full assurance of her loue. Parismus maruailed what communication hadde passed betweene Bellona and Polipus , but seeing him vnwilling to vnfolde the same, would demaunde no further of him. Violetta likewise wondered why hee would not reueale the same, that her heart was oppressed with such a sodaine doubt, that shee could not refraine from teares, and getting into a corner secretly by her selfe, beganne to studie what might be the cause of theyr long talke, fearing least Polipus heart might bee drawne by her inchauntments, to some inconuenience, or altered by some diuellish deuise which shee might vse: likewise shee beganne to call his loyaltie in question, which shee thought was the truth indeede, because hee would not reueale it, for that shee thought some amarous conference had passed betweene them, which thought could by no meanes passe from her minde, but continued still in her carefull brest, wherewith shee was much greeued, and so continued all that night, but when she sawe that Bellona came about the appoynted time to Polipus , shee poore soule, lay in her vnquiet bedde, tormented with infinite cares and greefes, that shee all bewet the place where she lay with her salt teares. Bellona and Polipus departed together out of the roome, for she had made Druball sleep with a somniferous spel, she had infused vpo his body, that a mightie volly of cannon shot could not haue awaked him, and she beeing greedy of the sweete delights of venerie, hasted to the lodging where Polipus was, who expected her comming, and tooke him by the hand, fast locking the doore, & conducted him with amarous speeches into a most goodly Garden, where Flora in her summer weeds was comelie dect, and from thence vnto a most gallant summer house, so richly adorned with precious ornaments, that it made Polipus admire, & had his paramour so wel liked him as that delightsome arbor, he wold haue wisht no other felicitie: where they were no sooner come, but kindly (though far from any good intent) he embraced Bellona in his armes, who was therwith so greatly pleased, that she vsed many thousand protestations of the loue she bore him, & that it was such as she had yet neuer professed to any, vowing that in requital of his kindnes she wold do any thing, yea, though it were to destroy Druball & that Castle, which consisted in her power. Which words of hers well pleased Polipus , who hearing her say the power of that Castle wholly consisted in her, had that he would haue, & hauing his ful libertie, framed an embracemet of kindnes, and with al his might caught hir by the cursed head, and with main force wroong a two hir neck, wherwith she gaue many a greeuous groane, & there arose such a mighty tempest in the garden, as though legions of infernall spirits had arriued there, which hideous noyse almost amazed the valiant Knight, that with all the hast he could, gat out of the garden, and by that time Phoebus beganne to beautifie the earth with his splendor, hee was safely come vnto the place where Parismus was, and by the key Bellona had (which he had taken vp, as beeing carefull thereof) he entred in and lockt the doore again, but the noble minded Parismus marking his gastly looks, being somewhat affrighted, would not question with him, and poore Adonius was somewhat comforted with his presence, but otherwise wonderfully perplexed in thought. As soone as he was in, hee walked vppe and downe sadly a good space, by which time came the Iaylor with theyr breakfast, whome Pollipus presently caught hold on, and with manie threates, compelled the villaine to vnloose all the fetters from Parismus and Adonius , which when hee had doone, he tooke vp a bolt of Iron, and beate out his braines, and locking fast the doore, came to Parismus and tolde him the whole truth that had passed betweene him and Bellona , which when he had declared, Parismus with a thousand kind imbracings, extolled that worthie acte, and poore Adonius was so inwardly vexed with greefe, to thinke of the iniurie shee hadde doone him by her iealous thoughts, that she began to weepe afresh, and renew her former kind of sorrow, which she vsed against him, in accusation of her self. These two knights, thought it not good in this time of neede to vse delay, but finding the bunch of Keyes the Iaylor carried about him, & filling themselues with such weapons as the place yeelded (being the longest bolts of iron) issued out of that place into the Court, where they sawe no creature stirring, at length they espied two or three of Druballes seruants, who no sooner saw these two knights, but with open exclamations they ranne towardes Druball , and they with all the haste they could, followed them, and at the very enterance in at a doore, slew two of them, and the third yeelded himselfe, promising if they would saue his life, he would direct them to the place where Druball was, and also helpe them to Armour. Uppon which condition, hee brought them into a mightie large roome, where they behelde many braue and rich Armours, being the armour of such knights as were imprisoned and destroyed in that castle, and befitted themselues with the best they could choose, for they knewe they shoulde haue occasion to vse the same, and by that time they were armed, they heard a great noyse and muttering of people for Druballes somniferous spell was ended, and hee missing Bellona , and hearing the cryes of his seruants, fearing some treason, caused his Larum Bell to be rung, and presently there were gathered to him a hundred of his seruaunts. With which noyse, these knights wel armed, came out into the court, who Druball no sooner espied, but he caused his men to assault them, thinking because they were but two he shuld easily ouercome the, but the first that offered to lay hads on Parismus , had his arme parted from his body, & hee ran about the court: anothers leg was by Polipus lopt off, & he compelled to lie and tumble on the earth, some lost their heades, some had their bodies pearced quite through by ye vnconquerable hands of these worthy knights, & happie was hee that came not within compasse of their weapons, that by that time the sunne was mounted to the highest zodiake, the greatest part of Druballes seruants lay weltring in theyr bloud, and these valiant knights still continued theyr massacre amongst them, that the rest seeing themselues also likely to perish by the machlesse chiualrie of these Champions, with a generall consent cast away theyr weapons, and yeelded to theyr mercie, which when Druball sawe, beeing of a traiterous disposition, ranne at Parismus with all the force hee hadde, thinking either desperately to kill him, or die himselfe, but Polipus with a quicke eye marking his intent, strooke him so mightie a blowe vppon the head, that he ranne staggering vp and downe, and by the commandement of Parismus , his owne men had taken away his weapon, whome Parismus caused to bee layde in the most vildest prison in the Castle, which so vexed Druball , that there hee grewe to such a desperate rage, that hee would haue slayne himselfe, but that hee was in the hope still to bee releeued by Bellona . Most parte of his seruaunts they likewise committed to safe custodie, and beeing more at quiet, demaunded if Antiochus Queene, and his two sonnes and Daughter were liuing, who tolde him that they were liuing in wonderfull poore and miserable estate. Wherefore by the direction of one of Drubals seruaunts, they were brought vnto the prison, where they were no sooner come, but they heard the most greeuousest grones, cryes, and lamentations, that euer eare heard, and being entred, they beheld a number of prisoners, in the most greeuous and pittfullest manner, lying on the earth, that their hearts were woondrously greeued to behold the same: Amongst the rest, they beheld an auncient woman fettered and chained vnto a poste, and right opposite against her, a comelie yong maiden, chained in many chaines, their apparell being all torne from their bodies sauing some little that shadowed their middle parts, whome the seruaunt told him, was the Queene and her daughter, and two that lay chained with their backs togither, were Antiochus sonnes. Parismus , and Pollipus commanded them to fetch some apparell to couer their bodies. In the meane time they began to commune with the Queene: who was much ashamed at her nakednesse, but seeing some comfort in theyr lookes, tolde them that shee was sometimes Queene of that countrey, but had long continued imprisoned in that sort by the trecherie of Druball . Parismus told her, that now the time of her deliuerie from that bondage was come, which so reioyced the poore Queene, that with a cheerefull countenaunce, she smiled on her daughter, the messenger being returned, Parismus couered ye queenes bodie with rich apparrell, and with his owne hands loosed her bands: Pollipus did the like to Freneta her daughter, and all the rest of the prisoners were set at libertie: Parismus and Pollipus led the Queene and Freneta , vnto conuenient lodgings, beeing scarce able to stand, they were growne so feeble, where they had all things conuenient ministred vnto them, by Adonius , who was most willing to vndertake that office, and there left them whilest they tooke order to release the rest of the Prisoners, from their miserie, which were a great number amogst whom, were many knights of strange countries, that they admired the crueltie of the tyrant Druball , which exceeded the compasse of reason. Afterwardes they viewed the whole Castle, where they beheld in sundrie places, the dead carkasses of Thousands of men, women, and children, consumed to Ashes, for assoone as the tyrants had satisfied their appetites in sundry abhominable sorts with them, they burnt their bodies. At last they came vnto the mayne Castle (whereinto the seruaunts of Druball told them, they neuer sawe any to enter) which they found fast shut, and assaied by all meanes they could to open the same, but theyr labour was in vaine, which caused them to maruaile what might be the cause thereof. But they were no sooner departed (determining to goe see where Bellona lay dead) but immediatelie the windes began to blowe with such vehemencie, that with much a doo they coulde stand vpright: wherewith such thundrings, and tempests began to arise, yt al the whole rock shooke wheron ye castle stood, & the buildings quaked, in such manner, that such as were within compasse of the roofes, ran forth into the open court, and the tower whereinto Parismus and Pollipus would haue entred, seemed to turne into a mightie flame, fro whece came such a smoake, as darkned the whole place where they stoode, yt they could not see one an other. In which sort, it continued a good space, when presentlie the smoake vanished away, and the Tower and buildings of the Castle were neuer after that any more seene: which so amazed the woorthie Knights, that with the fearefulnesse thereof, they stood like men agast: Neither was ye body of Bellona any where to be found, for the terme & date of her inchantments, then tooke end. The riuer ouer which they had passed, was not to be seene, nor any other goodlie thing, that before seemed most admirable for beautie. Wherefore Parismus comanded a tent to be pitcht for their habitation, being no other there to be had. Druball being (as before I said) in prison, hearing this noise, and seeing the darkenesse that ouerspred the castle, soone knew, (for Bellona had reported the secret thereof vnto him before) that Bellona was dead: he by that meanes, desperately without any hope of aide, beate out his owne braines against the stone walles, and his body being found in that sort murdred, Parismus commanded to be cast as a pray to the beastes of the Fielde for that he was not woorthie of buriall. After which, the two Knights came to the Queene, who was in the tent, accompanied by her two sonnes & daughter, who by Adonius good tendance were well strengthned, & they no sooner sawe the come in, but with a thousand commendations, they began to applaude their magnanimious vertues, that had wrought the dounfall of those two wicked tyrants, yt had long time kept the in thraldome, yeelding vnto them so many heartie thanks, that Parismus requested the not to vse such ceremonious thanks to them yt were altogither vnworthie thereof, & began to demand of ye queen, whether the king of ye Ilad, were liuing or no: wherwith she told him, that he was slain in a battaile by Druball , many yeares since, the remembrance of whose death, caused the teares to trickle downe her cheekes, in aboundance. Weep not deere queene (quoth Parismus ) for things past recouerie are no way to be lamented, but (quoth he) this cofort is yet remaining, yt Antiochus is liuing, & in good health, for since our comming into this countrey, we haue bin preserued fro famishmet by his courteous meanes, & to morrow (so please it you) my deere freend Pollipus , & my self, will conduct you vnto the place of his abode. At which words, ye queene, her daughter, and two sonnes, were so reuiued wt exceeding ioy (assuredly beleeuing his words) that with many thanks & courtesies, they prostraited themselues before these woorthie knights, that had euerie way brought them happie newes: where many other speeches passed betwixt the, till by the nights approach, they all betooke themselues to their rest within those tents, where all things were orderly prouided by Druballs seruants: & they quietly rested vntill the next morning, Adonius still being Pollipus bedfellow, who was now growne into such admiration of his spledant vertues, yt she resolued rather to die a thousand deathes, then to loose one iot of his loue, which by many infallible tokes she knew to be so loyall, yt no thought of change wold take roote in his constant heart: and indeede so it was. For Pollipus was so feruently affectioned to her loue, that although hee knewe not what was become of her, and at his last, beeing in her Fathers house, had from her selfe receiued a flatte deniall, yet hee determined (after that Parismus had againe recouered Laurana ) to spend the rest of his daies in search of her, who was more priuie to his actions, then he was aware of. The next morning Parismus earlie came to visit the Queene, where after some salutations, they departed towards the caue, where olde Antiochus was, who hearing no newes of these knights, was fullie perswaded, that they were imprisoned by Druball , as many had beene before, and therefore was now out of all hope of hearing any good newes by their returne, and gaue himselfe to his former austere kinde of life: and being in the midst of a sorrowfull meditation, he suddainly beheld Parismus , and Pollipus within his Caue, comming totowards him, whom at ye first he knew not. By reason whereof, he was attainted with such a deadly feare, as if he had beene attached by his enemie Druball , but with more attentiue aspect, beholding these Knights, he knew them, and with great ioy reioyced at their prosperous returne. My Lord (quoth Parismus ) we haue by the diuine prouidence, and ye vertue of the woorthie Pollipus , destroyed that wicked Druball , and the inchauntresse Bellona : whilest they continued this talke, the Queene and her Children (being guided by Adonius ) entred the Caue, who no sooner saw her Lord Antiochus but presentlie she knewe the forme of his countenance, though much altered by age, and vppon her knee saluted him, who kindely tooke her vp, requiring to know why she vsed such reuerence to him? Parismus seeing that he knew her not, told him that it was his Queene & children, came to visit him. Wherewith Antiochus with a thousand kisses, and embracings welcommed them, that it delighted the knights to behold their exceeding ioye, in which salutations, they continued to their mutuall comforts a good space, and at last departed towards their tents. In which iourney Parismus vnfolded the whole manner of their aduenture, and how by the wisedome of Pollipus , they attained the conquest of that hellish castle, where they cotinued some daies, spending the time in great ioy. After theyr troubles in the Inchaunted Castle were ended, Parismus began to renue the remembrance of his lost Laurana , (by seeing the ioy these parted friends enioyed by their happie meeting) that he could not be quiet, but began to conferre with Pollipus how to get shipping to goe in search of his beloued Princesse. Therefore they came both vnto olde Antiochus , to aske his aduise therein, who told them, that since it was their desire to depart, he would vse all the meanes he could to purchase their content, and therefore went towards the sea side, where stood a goodly Towne, being sometimes the chiefest of that Countrey, and there determined to make his abode, and to seeke traffique amongst other nations, as in times past, where the King dwelt many dayes, hauing some two hundred to inhabit the same Citie, being such as were seruants to Druball , and prisoners in the castle, where he caused his flagges of truce to be hung out, which was a token vnto such as passed by, that there they might safely arriue without daunger. In this place Parismus and Pollipus remained in good hope to get passage many dayes. Where we will for a season leaue them, to declare what happened to Laurana . How Andramart finding no hope of Lauranaes fauour, committed her to the custodie of Adamasia his sister. How Laurana was deliuered of a goodly Boy, and named him Parismenos . The miserable life Laurana indured, and how Parismenos Nurse saued him from death, which was intended by Adamasia . (as is before rehearsed) by Andramart , who was surprised with such desire to obtaine her fauour, that it was a griefe to him at any time to see her sad, and on a time he came vnto her (being in her Chamber, accompanied by Leda her maide) and hauing obtained her consent, vttered these speeches. Most bewtifull Ladie (said he) I beseech you shew some fauour vnto poore Andramart ) who languisheth with desire of your loue, you see that now you are in my power, and it were but folly for you to seem so scornfull, and so slightly to regard my proffered loue, wheras I might (if I pleased) inflict some greeuous punishment vppon you, thereby to compell your consent, but you likewise see that my mind is not bent to any such crueltie, but I haue euer since your arriuall humbly sued,  & intreated your friendship, which I esteem more dear then my life. Here shal you abide in great quiet and pleasure, not subiect vnto any, but shall be chiefe Gouernour of this Castle, my self, and all that is mine. Diuine Lady, if you wil graunt me loue, Ile haue you clad in costly robes and damaske vestures, imbost with diamonds, and the richest burnisht gold, perfumed with Camfire Bisse, and Sirrian sweete perfumes, a hundreth virgins clad in purple, shall daily attend thy person, as many sweete recording Instruments shall bring thy sences to their quiet sleepe. Thy foode shall be the precious delicates of the world, thy drinke more costly then Nectar and Ambrosia: my selfe will be obedient at thy call, and all my seruants shall bowe at thy command. If all this will not purchase thy sweet content? I wil prepare a sumptuous Chariot made of the purest gold, wherein thou shalt be drawne by Kings, along the pleasant fields of this Countrey, whereas the euening aire shall breath a coolenesse, farre more sweeter then Ambergreece, vpon thy crimson cheeks, and make thy splendant bewtie shine like the purple Pallace of Hiperion , when he leaues Aurora blushing in her bedde, whereby all creatures shall admire thy excellencie. All this, and tenne thousand times more, will I performe, to delight your vertuous selfe withall, but if all this will not suffise, then shall I spend my daies in endlesse sorrow, and your selfe purchase thereby your owne discontent. Therefore sweete Lady, let me receiue some comfortable answer to mittigate these my sorrowes. Laurana hauing heard his speeches, was so surprised with a vertuous disdain to hear his flattering, that she was resolued not to answere him at all, but at last she replied in this sort. It is in vaine Tyrant (quoth she) for thee to think to purchase any loue at my hands by thy flatteries, therefore desist thy sute, which is as odious vnto me as thyself, which thinkest because by trechery I am broght into thy cruel hands, I wil yeeld to thy allurements: no Tyrant, no, inflict what punishment thou canst vpon me, I wil neuer yeeld to shew thee any fauour, that deseruest to be hated of all men: besides, thou seeest my estate vnfit to listen to the allurements of loue, therefore if thou hast any vertue in thee, (as thou shewest thy self to haue none,) shew that thou louest me, by desisting to trouble me any more with the harsh sound of thy odious intisements: wherwith she turned from him, and he in a monstrous rage departed the chamber. Afterward comming vnto a sister which he had with him, named Adamasia , he began to vnfold vnto her the sum of his affectio to Laurana , and how disdainfully she had vsed him, requesting her counsel to further him therin: who being an euil disposed creature, and rather readie to intice him to euil, the to disswade him from the same, she promised him, that if she might haue the custodie of Laurana , shee would not doubt but soone to bring her to consent vnto his desire, which Andramart was in some doubt to suffer, for that he was loth any should haue the keeping of her but himselfe. But at last being intised by hope of obtaining her good will, gaue his consent, and the wicked Adamasia had the charge of the most vertuous Laurana , vnto whom she vnfolded the cause of her comming, vsing many perswasions to Laurana , to consent to loue Andramart , telling her that she was vnwise to refuse the good will of him that was so mightie a man. Laurana seeing a worse plague then euer she before endured, to be now befallen her, by being troubled with such an impudent solliciter, was so ouercome with sorrow and griefe, that this last vexatien seemed more greeuous then all that euer she endured: and would giue no answer vnto her impudent sollicitings: by which meanes Adramasia was frustrated of all hope to obtain her liking, but many daies she vsed the vertuous Laurana very kindly, & seemed so loth to offend her, that she would not in long time after motion any thing in the behalf of her brother, which the wicked hag did, only to feele the dispositio of the vertuous Laurana : and also perceiuing that she was great with child, told Andramart that it was to no effect to deale any further in their sute, vntill she were deliuered. Wherefore with all diligence they ministred all things necessary, and the time of her deliuery being come, she was inriched with a goodly boy, whom she named Parismenos , whom Andramart caused to be nursed, and most delicatly brought vp many daies in that Castle. After a fewe daies Andramart grew so impatient in his loue, that with many intreaties, he requested Adamasia , either speedily to worke his content (by obtaining Lauranas liking) or else he told her she shuld soone see his death, for without the same, it was impossible for him to liue. Wherewith Adamasia began to settle her selfe to the taske she had vndertaken, and finding (as she thought) a conuenient time when Laurana was alone, she began to feele her minde in this sort. Uertuous Ladie (quoth she) I haue long diligently marked the dolefull plaints you secretly vtter, which maketh me muse, that you hauing no cause at al, shuld spend your daies in such heauy sort, wheras you might if you pleased, inioy such happy delights as many thousand ladies wold wish for. You are here in a happie place in my opinion, where nothing is wanting that might procure your content, where no iniurie is offered you, that vnlesse you endure some secret greefe, I know not what to coniecture of your discontent, & the loue of Andramart in my iudgement faire Lady, would bring you that happie content, that yet you neuer enioyed the like, who in all respects beareth such an intire affection to your selfe, that whatsoeuer he hath or can comand, resteth wholly at your disposition. But if it be so that you haue some friend already, vnto whom you are any way tied in the bands of loue, & for him you indure this pensiuenes, that by some mischance is perished, then let the famous Andramart possesse the second roome in your gentle heart, and let me be the messenger to carrie these happie tidings, to ease his torment. Laurana hauing heard this cunning insinuation of Adamasia , wel vnderstood her meaning, & therfore told her that her greefes were best knowne to her selfe, which she determined not to reueale: and as for Andramart , she told her she esteemed his loue worse then his hatred, & that she had rather indure the greatest force of his malice, then the loathsome profers of his loue, and therfore willed her not to prosecute any further her vnwelcommed sute, which should make her lesse welcome vnto her companie. Adamasia hearing Lauranas resolute answere, was so kindled into anger with the same, and being of a proude disposition, could not refraine from vttering her inward rancor, but replyed as followeth. Proude Lady (quoth she) know that Andramart more fauoring thee then thou deseruest, hath appointed me to intreate thy fauor, but thou disdainfully reiectest his profered courtesie, and makest scorne of my speeches, which I cannot indure, for thou shalt well know that I am thy better, and I tell thee that thou shalt yeeld vnto his iust sute, or repent the time that euer thou wert so coy, therfore let me haue thy answere to morrow, which is the vttermost respit that I wil giue thee. Auaunt foule hag (quoth Laurana ) my answere thou shalt now receiue: yt for thy detested sake I wil neuer yeeld vnto his sute. Which words so inraged ye rude Adamasia , that coming to Laurana she strooke hir such a blow on the face, that the bloud ran aboundantly from hir mouth, wherwith she departed, & left Laurana in that sort bleeding, with hir bloud mingling her christall teares, which in aboundance ran from her eies. This hag was so inraged with the sharp answer of Laurana , that presetly she came to Andramart , & told him that there was no dealing with her in gentle sort, rehearsing how disdainfully she refused, al the proffers & sutes she could make, vsing such perswasions, that Andramart cosented to be wholly ordered by her, nothing regarding what she intended, so he might haue his desire. Adamasia therefore purposing to bring her businesse to effect, first caused Leda to bee imprisoned, and restrained from her mistresses presence, which was an insupportable greefe to her. Next shee caused young Parismenos with his nurse, to bee kept from his Mothers knowledge, and such thinges as Laurana had before inioyed for her vse, were nowe quite kept from her, and her diet scanted, beeing serued of such as ill agreed with her stomacke. Laurana seeing her selfe thus vsed, began to feare some harder measure, which very shortly fel out true: for Adamasia longing to execute her cruelty vpon the vertuous Lady, came vnto her, & asked whether as yet shee would condiscend to yeeld hir loue to Andramart : for (said she) it is now no dallying, for I will eyther purchase his content by thy consent, or else worke thy sorrow. Laurana would make her no answere at all, but with silence heard her talke, raile, stampe, and rage, in such extreame sort, that she thought she wold with fury at that instant haue run mad: for Lauranas silence inraged her more, then the sharpest answere she could haue giue would haue done, that in an extreame rage she lockt the chaber doore, & departed presently, deuising how to torment her. And choosing vnto her two olde women, fitte to execute any euill action, hauing instructed them what they should doo, sent them to her, where they were no sooner come, but they behelde her sitting vpon the ground, hauing elected the darkest place in the chamber, as fitting to her mournful disposition, with her cheekes besmeared with old dryed teares and fresh drops, resembling the purest christall pearles, ready to fall, leaning her arme vpon hir knee, and her head vpon her hand, her haire being carelesly attired, and al her ornaments so defusedly hanging (but yet so delightfull to behold) that the old hagges could not deuise how to find any occasion to execute theyr intent, but were so abashed at her countenance, that they were often times in minde to returne, without once offering to trouble her. Laurana seeing the stand gazing vpon her, rose from the place where she sate, and demanded what they would haue, whom they answered not: but she suspecting that they were sent by Adamasia , for no good intent, beganne to vtter these speeches. Feare not quoth shee, to execute the wil of hir that sent you, who seeketh for that at my hands she shall neuer obtain, it is not al the torment she can deuise, shall cause me alter my vow, for I am resolutely determined to indure them, and death too, if it be her will to giue it me. Cruell fortune hath wrought my sorrow, & inflicted greater punishment vpon me then she can deuise, by the losse of my deare Lord and husband, who I know not what fortune keepeth thus long from redeeming his poore Laurana , nor into what place of the world he is, wandred in search of me, that in all this time I can heare no tydings of his happie arriual. But why do I wish his comming hither, when there is no meanes to escape death, if he once fall into the handes of these tyrants? Worthie and vertuous Lord, al happines attend his royall person, and shield him from harme, and all woe and sorrow belong to me. Come furies, come, execute your will, or returne to the cruell beldam that sent you, & tel her that Laurana scorneth to intreate any fauour at her hands. She had no sooner ended her speeches, but they began to vnstrip her delicate body, & disrobed her of all her ornaments sauing her white smocke, which they vnfolded downe to her tender waste, and scourged her with whips, vntill the pure purple blood began to trickle downe her precious bodie, which torment she indured so patiently, as it was a most rare vertue in her so quietly to endure griefe, in defence of her honour. And hauing executed their crueltie in most extreame sort, left her alone, who couered her bleeding bodie (which was such a lamentable spectacle to beholde, that had Andramart seene her distressed estate, he would haue runne mad with extreame furie) and gaue her selfe to continuall sorrow, expecting more hard vsage: for she knew, vnlesse she would yeeld her bodie to be imbraced by the hatefull Andramart , she should endure many other torments, which shee would not in any wise yeeld vnto, though she endured ten thousand deathes. The next day comes to her againe Adamasia , whose countenance bewrayed the guiltinesse of her conscience, and demaunded whether as yet she would giue answere to her demaund. Laurana was so inwardly tormented, to heare any more motions that tended the breach of her loyaltie, that she would not indure the thought thereof, and knowing that this wicked fury would continue along circumstance of odious perswasions, she interrupted her with this answer. Wicked woman (quoth she) thinkest thou by thy cruell vsage to purchase my dishonour? No, were I so intended, for thy sake I would reuoke my disposition, and tell that tyrant Andramart , that he shall sooner see my bodie torne into a thosand peeces by his detested crueltie, then yeeld to his beastly desire. Execute thy rage, and practise all the diuelish deuises thy hatefull heart can inuent, they shall no whit feare me: for thy damned selfe, thy hoarse voyse, and abhominable sute, are as deadly poyson to my sences, and the thought of them so odious, that do what thou canst, I will neuer condiscend to the least thought of graunting thy request: therefore trouble me no more with thy serpentlike hissing forth of hellish protestations, for my soule hath vowed in despite of all thy cruelties, and vttermost deuises of detested tyrannie, to giue thee no other answer. Proude disdainefull trull (quoth Adamasia ) I see thou art willing to worke thine own sorrow, being some stragling mate, or base borne huswife, that art not woorthie the loue of Andramart , and thinkest to escape my hands, by thy resolute replies, and denialls. No: know foolish contemner of thine owne good, that nothing shal satisfie me but thy consent, which thou wilt yeelde I feare me, when it will bee too late. The downefall of thy self, thy sonne, & all that is thine, shall not appease my furie, but thy consent to loue Andramart : and since thou wilt by no intreaties be perswaded, al this, and more will I inflict vpon thy proude heart, that so wilfullie denieth his request, and therefore eyiher speedilie yeelde thy vnworthie fancie to attend his liking, or resolue to behold the tragedy of thy infant. With which wordes she departed, and left Laurana so terrified with her speeches, that her seces were ouercome with feare, and she fared like one without sence: but reuiuing her selfe from that heauie dumpe, with abundance of teares shee bedewed her Crimson cheekes, and in silent sorrowe spent her time, still expecting the heauie newes of Parismenos tragedie which within fewe daies, the wicked tyrannous Adamasia effected in this sort. She caused the nurse that kept Parismenos to bring him to his mother with this message, that vnlesse shee would in all respects fulfill the request that Andramart hadde made, she must presently destroy him before her face: who hearing the nurse vtter that dismall doome of her sonne, shee fell into a deadlie sounde, in which sort, she continued a good space, in which time the nurse was departed with yong Parismenos which when Laurana perceiued, she began to vtter many heauie plaints, that the very walles seemed to pittie her distresse, but being diuersly tormented with feare, to thinke what was become of her yong sonne, she got to the windowe, and there beheld Adamasia with the nurse readie to strangle the infant before her face: but the nurse pittying the infant, who lookt with such a smiling countenance, that the cruell tigers would haue spared his life) vppon her knees with a boundance of teares intreated the hard hearted Adamasia to spare his life, who was no way guiltie of his mothers offence: but all the intreaties she could vse nothing auailed: but she taking the infant from the nurse, addressed her selfe to execute her cruell intent. Which Laurana espying, beeing therewith terrified, called aloude from the window vnto her, and desired her to heare her speake, before shee spilt the innocent bloud of her yong sonne, which caused Adamasia to stay, but still shee continued like a furious Lionesse, standing readie to deuour her pray, and Laurana from foorth her window vttered these speeches. If thou wert euer borne of a woman, bee not so inhumane as to destroy that harmelesse infant which is of no power to worke thy discontent: wherein hath it offended thee, or howe hath it any way deserued such an vntimely death? what will it profite thee at all, to see his destruction? it is I that haue offended thee: it is I that may appease thy cruell minde: it is my bloud that may satisfie thy deuouring appetite: then inflict thy wrath on my head, reuenge thy selfe on mee, that here offer my selfe willingly to destruction. What mercilesse creature would bee so tyrannous as to destroy an harmelesse innocent, when they haue in theyr power a fitter subiect to appease theyr ire? Cruell Adamasia , or lette me call thee gentle cruell woman: lette my plaints mooue thy heart from acting that cruell deede: lette my humble teares, and remembrance of a mothers loue to her childe, reuoke thy cruell doome: let my paines and intreaties so much pricke thy flintie breast, as to cause thy heart relent, and stay thy hand from that mercilesse deede. Heere I am that haue offended, why wilt thou not then reuenge thy selfe on me, that may satisfie thy wille and spare that tender babe, whose death will make thee so odious, that the verie earth will refuse to beare thy hatefull body, the sunne will send noysome vapours to poyson thy soule, the ayre will infect thy intrailes, and the verie soules will worke thy downefall. Remember that his life may bee a meanes to alter my minde, but his death will harden my heart so much, that it will bee for euer impossible for thee to attaine the thing thou seekest at my handes. Then bee not so cruell as to spill the bloud of that sillie lambe, that is not yet readie for the slaughter. Adamasia hearing the conclusion of Lauranas speeches, perceiuing that they shewed some likelihood that shee would change her inclination (wherein shee was deceiued) deliuered Parismenos againe to his nurse, with many oathes protesting, that if Laurana did not the next day graunt her request, hee shoulde surely die. Laurana was somewhat comforted, by this little truce shee hadde gotten for Parismenos life, but still rested in such care and perplexitie of greefe, that she was in the most wofullest estate of miserie that euer any Ladie was in, her sences beeing so stuffed with aboundance of sorrow, that she could neyther resolue what to doo, nor once studie how to auoyde these intollerable mischiefes. The nurse hauing receiued the yong Parismenos , with great ioy departed to her place of aboade, where shee was no sooner come, but shee beganne presently to deuise, howe to saue the sweete babe from death, for although shee was a straunger to Laurana , a woman of a rude and barbarous nation, and altogether voyde of ciuilitie, yet by the diuine operation, shee was so farre in loue with the sweete countenance of the yong infant, and shee tooke such delight to educate so gallant a childe, that she determined either to saue him from Adamasias crueltie, or thereby worke her owne destruction: therefore in the middest of the darke night, when all things were at silence, shee stole from the castle with Parismenos , and by that time it was day, shee was trauailed some twentie miles from the same, where she gat into a wood, and there made such prouision, that she carefully brought vp Parismenos , as conueniently as was possible to doo, in that vnfrequented place, of whom wee will speake more hereafter. The next morning Adamasia came again to Lauranas chaber, demaunding the accomplishment of her request, who by that time had sufficiently determined what to do: and weighing the distressed estate shee was in, considering that if shee should condiscend to loue Andramart , she should both disrobe her self of chastitie, and do a most monstrous iniurie to the noble Parismus , shee resolued rather to see the destruction of her sonne, and endure death. And therefore tolde Adamasia , if nothing but her dishonour would content her minde, shee might do all as pleased her, for she was resolued neuer to yeelde to violate her chastitie, but yet most humblie intreated the hard hearted hagge, to spare her sonnes life, vsing such manifold reasons, that it would haue pearced ye hart of the cruellest tyrant liuing: but Adamasia was rather inflamed to fury, then any way mollified with her gentle intreates, that in an extreame rage shee departed, with full intent to execute her vnsaciate reuenge on Parismenos : but comming to the nurses chamber, and not finding him, nor his nurse, she could not tell what to thinke. And making further enquirie (being thereby assured that they were not to be found) shee was inraged with such madde and diuelish frensie, that shee came vnto the two olde hagges, that had executed her commaundement before on Laurana , stamping and staring, and discoursed vnto them all that had happened, and how that the Nurse was fled with the yong infant: who by her wicked commaundement, for manie dayes after, continually tormented the vertuous Laurana , with such extreame tortures, that it was impossible for her long to endure that extreame miserie, wherewith shee was brought into a most dangerous estate of death, beeing voyde of all comfort, and continuallie spent her time in bemoning the losse of her Lord, and the vntimelie slaughter of Parismenos , whom she thought assuredlie to be dead. Howe Andramart vnderstanding how Adamasia had vsed Laurana , and missing young Parismenos , woulde haue slaine her, but she hasting to auoyde his furie, burst her necke downe a paire of staires. Andramart all this while continued in good hope of Lauranaes fauour, which hee was in some sort assured of by Adamasias perswasion, who continually vsed all the delaies she could to hinder him from visiting Laurana : for she was assured, that if he had any knowledge how she had misused her, it would turn to her great displeasure. But hee hauing a long time indured her absence with an afflicted mind: and seeing that he could not attaine the felicitie he expected, but was still delayed by the faire promises of his sister which came to no effect, determined himselfe to visit her, which he had not done in many dayes, and therefore with a pleasant countenance, he entered her chamber, where at his comming in, he found such an alteration, as he was astonished to beholde the same: for Laurana sate by her beds side, vpo the floore, shedding abundance of teares, her ornaments all betorne by the two cruell hagges, that vsed dayly to torment her, her golden tresses hanging disheueled about her shoulders, her crimson coloured cheekes turned to a pale hue, her face mangled and scratched with their hellish nailes, and all things so disordered contrarie to his expectation (little suspecting the crueltie that the cruell Adamasia had vsed) that in a maruellous perplexitie hee stoode coniecturing what might bee the occasion thereof. One while thinking, that her owne impaciencie had caused her vse that crueltie agaynst her selfe. Againe hee beganne to suspect Adamasia , for that hee mist Leda, Lauranaes Gentlewoman. At last Laurana hauing espied him, beeing abashed at his suddaine comming, for that shee was so disrobed, arose from the place where shee sate, fearing least his comming might bee to offer her violence. But Andramart humbling himselfe vpon his knee, vttered these speeches. Most vertuous Ladie, vouchsafe to heare your vassaile speake, whose heart is oppressed with a thousande griefes, to see the sorrowe you remaine in: I haue according to your commaund, absented my selfe from manifesting my desire to be acceptable in your sight this long time, trusting that your gentle heart would in time pittie the extremitie of my passions, and now being oppressed and ouerburdened by a longing desire to enioy your heauenly presence, I haue presumed to shewe my selfe in your gentle aspect, though contrarie to your commaund, trusting to haue some hope of your gentlenesse, but contrarie to my expectation, I finde my selfe frustrated of all comfort, and your selfe in that equipage, that I knowe not howe to vtter my speeches, nor coniecture of the cause of this your sorrow, which driueth me into a thousand doubtfull cogitations, least I am nowe more vnwelcome into your companie, then I haue deserued, being altogither ignoraunt of any cause of offence that I haue giuen you. More he would haue said, but that Laurana interrupted him in this sort. It ill beseemeth a man of thy sexe to vse dissimulation, for that the cruell vsage I haue indured cannot bee vnknowne vnto thee, but procured by thy meanes: and nowe further to torment mee (that am resolued to abide thy greatest furie) thou commest with dissembling and counterfeit flatteries, to excuse thy tyrannie, thinking by thy counterfeit ignoraunce, to purchase that which thy tyrannie cannot effect. But be assured, that I am now so far from condiscending to conceiue any good opinion of thee, as it is in vaine for thee to vtter any more speeches: but thinke and be perswaded, that by thy cruel deuises, thou hast giue me such cause to hate thee, that I will for euer esteeme thee, the hatefullest tirant liuing, and the cruellest homicide that is in the world. These speeches draue Andramart into such an amazement, that with many thousand oathes, vowes, and protestations, he requested Laurana to manifest vnto him the occasio of these her speeches, which she was vrged to do, wondring at the many intreaties he made: for shee thought assuredly it had bin by his procurement, but at last by his protestations, she suspected the contrartie,  & began to declare to him the maner of her vsage: how she was daily whipt, and beaten, by two old mercilesse women, and how Adamasia had murdered her sonne Parismenos , with remembrance of whose death, she vttered such abundance of teares, that Andramart was likewise readie to weepe, to see the sorrowe shee endured. This hard vsage (quoth Laurana ) I haue indured by your cruell meanes, besides the imprisonment of my seruant Leda , or her death, for that I haue not of long time seene her, and now in fraudalent maner, I feare me, you come to spill my blood, which is here ready to abide your tyrannie. Most vertuous Ladie (quoth Andramart ) if any of these euils haue happened by my meanes, or any wayes by my consent, then esteeme me the most cruellest creature liuing, then let mee neuer enioy anie title of your fauour, which wil be more greeuous vnto me, then a thousand deaths: then let the heauens poure down their vengeance vpon my detested carkasse, and al the furies of hell, eternallie possesse my soule. Let the earth receiue my hated bodie into her bowels, and let me for euer be detested and abhorred of al creatures. Which words he had no sooner vttered, but Adamasia was entred Lauranaes chamber, & seeing her brother in that rage, would haue departed againe: but he espying her, called her vnto him. And Laurana now assuredly perswading her self that he was no way guilty of her cruel vsage, abhorring the sight of the tyrannesse, said: behold the cruell executer of Parismenos tragedie, & your tyrannie: at which words Andramart drew out his fauchion, which he continually ware about him, determining to ende her detested life, but shee fearing his crueltie, and beeing terrified with his gastly countenanuce, ranne with such swiftnesse from his presence, that missing her steppes she fell downe a hie paire of staires, and dasht out her hatefull braines, and in that manner acording to her owne wicked life, she desperatelie ended her daies. Andramart thinking her death, not sufficient to make amends for the cruell torments Laurana had indured, in furious sort, ranged vp & down the castle, vntill he had found the old hagges yt had bin Adamasias instruments of furie, one of them he immediately slew, and the other fled into the court, whom he pursued, and in the sight of his mistresse, (who was beholding the dead body of Adamasia ) at one blow he parted her cursed head from her filthie body. Which in some sort, reioyced Laurana to see, but he still ran vp and downe, raging in such cruell sort, that his seruants fled fro his presence, and hid themselues for feare of his furie. At last he came to the place where Parismenos was nurced, but finding him gone, and withall, remembring Lauranaes speeches, for very greefe he tare his hayre and stamped on the earth, at last by derections of his seruants, he came to the place where Leda was imprisoned, (being vsed in most vild sort) and vttered these speeches. Faire damsell, if you haue coceiued any hard opinion of me for this your vsage, I beseeche you remit the same, for it was altogither without my knowledge, and assure your selfe I haue so handled the vnwoorthie procurer therof that she shal neuer hereafter purchase your discontent, humblie desiring you to pardon my negligence, by meanes whereof, you are fallen into this mischance, and also I pray you certifie your noble mistresse, that Andramart is no way to be blamed: for the remembrance of her grief, hath brought such terror to his heart, that he shall neuer rest in quiet, vntill he hath wrought her the happie content she desireth, which if he knew what it were, hee wold presentlie put it in practise. And taking Leda by the hand, with all humilitie, hee brought her vnto Lauranaes Chamber, who reioycing at her sight, louingly and with ioy, embraced her, and Andramart departed, presentlie comanding all things to be ministred vnto Laurana in such diligent sort, that shee could not choose but commend his good nature, whom she assuredlie beleeued, was no way priuy to his sisters actions: for that he had sufficientlie showne the contrarie, and still laboured by all the meanes he could to purchase her good liking. Leda as I said, being come to her mistresse, so reioyced her heart, that she began to leaue of her sad and pensiue thoughts that still oppressed her minde, and declared vnto her, the cruell vsage of Adamasia , withall, the report of Parismenos , which newes made her againe begin her former sorrow: but by the comfortable perswasions of ( Leda whose counsaile she much esteemed) shee gaue her minde vnto much quiet. In which quiet state, let vs once again leaue her, to declare what happened vnto the two noble Knights in the desolate Iland. How Parismus and Pollipus departed from the desolate Iland, in a ship of Hungaria : And how they were endaungered by Pirates belonging to Andramart , by whose meanes they woon the narrow passage into the Iland of Rocks. Parismus and Pollipus continued manie daies in the Desolate Iland, expecting the happie arriuall of some ship, wherein they might haue passage to go further in search of Laurana , for whose absece they indured much sorrowe. At length it chanced, that a marchants ship of Hungaria , passed by this desolate Iland, which they wel knew and shunned for the daungerous report they had heard thereof. Comming against the Citie where the King lay, the mariners aboue hatches, had sight of flagges that were spread vpon the toppe of the Castle,  & signified the same vnto their chiefetaine, whose name, was Barzillus , who hearing their report, woondred what might be the cause, and beeing desirous to knowe the certaintie, made thitherwardes, where hee durst not bring his ship to shore, but taking his cockboate himselfe, with such as rowed him, landed at the Castle: which such as attended the same espying, came and saluted Barzillus , certifying him, that hee need not now feare the furie of Bellona , for that there were two knights in the citie that had destroyed the Castle, and freed their King and Queene out of thraldome, who would be very ioyful to heare that any passengers were landed. Barzillus hearing their report, without feare (beleeuing theyr speeches (went with them vnto the court, which was but smal, yet there he was most kindly welcommed by the king & queen, but especially by Parismus and Polipus , who enquired of him, of whence he was. He certified them he belonged vnto the king of Hungaria , his name Barzillus , and that seeing the flagge of truce, he came to see what aduenture had happened in that desolate Iland. Friend quoth Parismus ) your comming hither may greatly pleasure my self, and this worthy knight, my friend Polipus of Phrigia , by whose prowesse this Iland was reduced to his former happie estate. Barzillus hearing him name Polipus , suspected him presently to be the famous Prince Parismus : of Bohemia , of whose losse at sea he hadde heard many reports, by diuers shippes he had met, both of Thessaly and Bohemia , that were gone in search of them, and therefore with great reuerence hee vttered these speeches. Most courteous knight, I haue in my trauaile, often times heard of that woorthie Knights name, and also of the famous Prince of Bohemia , by many knights that are in search of them, whom I suppose your selfe to bee, and therefore account my selfe the happiest man aliue, to bee an occasion to pleasure you in any respect: therefore most worthie knight, if my selfe, my men, or shippe may any way doo you seruice, I heare most humblie offer than at your vertuous commaunde. Parismus kindly thanked him, assuring him that hee was the same whome he had named, and that a long time hee had remained in that Iland, for want of shipping to go in search of Laurana , Daughter to the King of Thessalie , whome they hadde lost: and that if hee would shewe them that courtesie as to leaue his further trauaile for Marchandize, and accompanie him in his trauailes, hee would make him such sufficient recompence, as he shuld neuer after need to trauell to get wealth. Barzillus tolde him, that (notwithstanding his honourable proffer) hee should haue all that was his at commaundement. So giuing him all the courteous intertainments that might be, they soiourned still with old Antiochus , vntill they had furnished theselues with al things conuenient, and finding a fit time (with al courtesie taking their leaue of the king, & queen, & Freneta , who took their departure most heauily, for that these knights were so gracious in their eies, as they accounted the one part of theyr soule departed with them, hauing obtained a promise of them, to visit them, whe they found their wished friend) hauing wind at will, they launched into the maine, not knowing which way to take their course, but committed themselues to the direction of their good or ill fortune. They hadde not trauailed three dayes, but Barzillus gaue them to vnderstande, that they were neare the Prouince of Tartaria , where hee tolde them it was daungerous trauailing: for those Seas were still frequented with Pirates and Robbers, whose words imediately they foud true. For they had not sailed the space of two houres, but they espied a far off, a ship making towards them amaine, whom Barzillus presently knew to be Pirates, and therfore vttered these speeches. Most worthie knights, nowe prepare your selues to resist the enemie approching vs, whom I know to be such as seeke ye destruction of al passengers, into whose hands if you fall, you may expect nothing but cruell tyrannie and hard vsage. By that time he had ended his speeches, the pirats had laid them abord, & began to enter their ship, but Parismus and Polipus , hauing armed themselues, with their weapons drawne, demaunded of them what they would haue? their general hearing his speech, told them he would haue them yeeld. Yeeld quoth Parismus that we wil, wherwith he strook one of them so violently, that hee cleft his head, Polipus did the like to another, who seeing themselues so handled, assailed these champions with great furie, being a multitude in respect of theyr small companie. But they resisted them with such valour, that the Pyrates were greatlie discomfited, and a great number of them slaine: in which conflict, Pollipus (not regarding the perill hee was in, nor the trecherie the Pyrates might vse) was gotten aboord the Pyrates ship, & there made such hauock, that they dispairing of victorie, hoysed their sailes, and before Pollipus could againe recouer his own ship, were lanched from the other a good way, which Parismus espying, desired Barzillus to make out after them. Pollipus seeing himself in that sort betraied, laid about him with such furie, yt none durst come neere him: at last, ye general noting his valor, came vnto him wt these speeches. Knight (quoth he) yeeld thy selfe & do not heape a woorse mischief vpon thy head, by procuring my further displeasure against thee, for if thou wilt aske mercie at my hads, I wil giue it thee, otherwise, know yt I am of sufficiecie to abate thy corage and bring thee in subiection, in despite of the best resistance thou canst make. Pyrate (quoth Pollipus ) I scorn thy profered friedship, & dare thee to vse ye best skil thou canst to conquer me, for I am resolued to try thy valor. Which words being ended, they assailed each other with such furie, yt it had bin a sight worth the beholding (if any had bin by) to see the brauerie of their fight: but Pollipus assailed his enemie with such valour, that he hee had mangled and cut his body in many places, who being growne faint with the effusion of his blood, fell downe at his feete dead: which the mariners perceiuing, all at once assailed Pollipus , who so valiantly withstood them, that they could little or nothing at all in damage him: One amongst the rest, offered him a thrust, which lighted on his left side, at the skirites of his Armour, which greeued him woorse then all the woundes he had receiued, and so inraged him, yt he chased them vppe and downe with such furious blowes, that many of them in shunning his keene swoorde, tumbled ouer-boorde: many of them were dismembred, & the rest seeing theselues vnable to withstad his force, got themselues vnder hatches, and Pollipus was left alone. Who seeing none to trouble him, and being sore wounded and wearie, satte him downe, as well to rest himselfe, as to consider of the estate he was in. Parismus hasted after the Pirates shippe with all speede he might, but do what Barzillus could, they had lost sight thereof, which draue Parismus into such sorrow as was straunge, and poore Adonius seeing the knight she deerly loued fallen into such mishap, gate her selfe into a secret place in the shippe, and there vttered these plaints. How vnhappie am I, that haue caused the losse of so woorthie a knight as my deare Pollipus is, who hath giuen himselfe to a carelesse desperatenesse for my losse, whom am not woorthie for my vnthankfulnesse to be esteemed of him. Now is he fallen into the hands of such as will soone abridge his dayes, it is impossible for him to withstand the force of such a multitude, but fall into vtter ruine. O that my vnworthie selfe had bene in his company, that I might haue taken part of the affliction he is likely to endure, and haue comforted him in his distresse. Accursed and vncurtuous that I was, in so many fit occasions as I had, that would neuer manifest my selfe vnto him, who continually sorrowed for my absence, neuer more shall I enioy his sweete company, neuer more shall I lie folded in his manly armes, the touch of whose imbracings, were more pleasaunt then all the ioyes I shall euer hereafter endure. What resteth now for me, but to spend the rest of my accursed dayes, in continuall sorrow for his absence? Hauing ended these speeches, she suddainly started vp, and with abundance of teares, came to the place where Parismus was, who seeing the sorrow he made, exceedingly wondered whence such kinde loue and affection, and so many vertues as he continually beheld in him, should proceed. By this time the night approached, and they still made forwards, till by the counsell of Parismus they cast anker, determining to staie there, vntill the next morning. Pollipus , likewise seeing the ship wherein he was, saile so fast from the companie of his freendes, with his swoord cut a sunder, all the tackles and coardes, that the sailes fell ouerboorde, and he all night lay hulling vpon the Sea, the weather being very calme, determining the next morning to compell such as were remaining vnder hatches, to conduct him back to the other ship, whom he knew would not stray far from his companie. The morning being come, the ship was with the tide brought backe againe, that the mariners of Barzillus ship, gat a sight thereof, with which newes, they came to the Prince, who was accopanied by Adonius his page, which newes so reuiued him, yt presentlie he came vp, by which time they assuredlie knew it was ye pyrates ship, and Pollipus seeing the, stood wauing his sword aboue his head, in signe of victory and being both, met Parismus with great ioy imbraced him, comending his valor, & poore Adonius stood by, beeing affected with such inward ioy, as I altogither want the skil to expresse: Whe Pollipus declared vnto the the maner of his victorie, and called vp such as were in the ship, who expecting nothing but death, were vnwilling to shew themselues, but at last came like men agast, being many of the so greeuously wouded yt it pittied Parismus to see ye estate they were in. he demaded of the of whece they were, who told him yt they had sworne not to reueale the truth therof to any. But since it was so, yt they must needes, they began in this sort. We are seruants vnto Oswalde , the Generall of our company, who this woorthie knight hath slain, himselfe likewise a seruant vnto the mightie Andramart , Gouernor of the Ile of rocks, so termed, for ye the same is not to be entred, but one way, by reason of ye mightie Rocks yt incopasse the Iland. My master cotinually brought vnto him such riches as he could get vpon ye sea, & had you falne into his hands, thither would he haue conueied you as prisoners, fro whence you should neuer haue escaped, & we being subiects were compelled to take this kinde of life. In which we haue cotinued a log time but being fallen into your hands, we intreate you to saue our liues, whose death will nothing at all profit you. The Prince hearing this report, was wonderfully troubled in mind, & began to coniecture yt the same pirats that had betraied them in the desolate Iland, & fled with his espoused Laurana , were likewise of Andramarts seruants. Which caused him to confer with Polipus , who was troubled with the very same thought, & grounding their hopes theron, they determined to make trial thereof, but first they questioned with: Oswaldes seruants, to see if they could gather any comfortable report from them, who told them, that it was a great while since they were in the Iland, and therefore they could no way informe them thereof. But these noble Knights hearts were so reuiued with this report of Andramart , that they assuredly perswaded themselues that they should heare some news of Laurana , and with that determination they chose such of the pirates as were fittest for their guides, & with al hast they could, hasted thetherwards, once againe committing theyr fortune to the mercie of the seas. Not many daies after, they by happie successe in trauell, were come neere the Iland of Rocks (the wished place of their expectation) then Parismus and Polipus began to consult betwixt themselues for their best landing, for that it was assured them, that it was impossible to enter by force: for the passage was continually strongly guarded, and all things so artificially contriued, for the disaduantage of such as shuld attempt any thing, that it was altogether vaine to thinke that way to enter. These discomforts, draue them to the triall of their vttermost wits, for by the perswasion they hadde to finde Laurana there, they determined (thogh the attempt were neuer so dangerous) to make tryall therof, for Parismus determined rather to be detained there as a prisoner, the to leaue any thing vnperformed, wherby he was put in any comfort of his long & wished expectation. Terfor calling vnto the such as were the seruats of Oswald , they told the that the coquest of that place wholly rested in their powers: therfore Parismus said, if you wil condiscend to follow my direction herein, I do not doubt but easily to accomplish ye same, & for your truth reward you so kindly, as you shall no way need to feare the furie of Andramart , who maketh no other account of you, but to keep you as his vassals and slaues, in bondage, and cruell seruitude, whereas if you will be faithfull and true vnto me, I will set you at libertie, and reward you to your hearts content. For I my self am Gouernor of a Countrey farre exceeding this place, whither I wil conduct you with me, if I happily atchieue my desire herein, or if my determination faileth herein, you shall safely retire into our ships, and be acquited from all feare of his reuenge. The Pirates hearing the curteous speeches of Parismus , hauing also in the time they had bene in his company, noted his Princely behauiour, and on the other side, weighing the estate they remained in, being his prisoners, on whom he might inflict a cruell punishment, if they should refuse to aide him in the request he made, and also considering the litle account Andramart had alwayes made of them, and the crueltie he vsed to them: All these considerations, wrought such a chaunge in the hearts of these poore slaues, that they freely condiscended to follow his directions, in any thing he should demaund. Parismus was glad of their consent, but fearing to trust them, he vttered these speeches. Sirs, I thanke you for your willingnesse to pleasure me, but pardon me, though I make some question of your loyaltie, for that I haue bene already deceiued by men of your profession: and as I suppose, of Andramarts seruants, by whose vnfaithfulnesse, these miseries that we are fallen into haue happened. Whereupon he tooke occasion to report vnto them, the trecherie of the Pirates in the desolate Iland, therby to make vnfaithfulnesse seme odious in their sights. The Pirates vowed with such confidence to be true vnto them, that they were fully assured of their faith, and being now neare the place of their landing, admiring ye wonderful strength of the same, thus they contriued their stratageme. Parismus, Pollipus , and Barzillus (who would needes accompany them) armed themselues with the best armour they had, and putting on sea gownes (whereunder they had conueyed their swords so secretly, that none could discerne the same) were conducted as conquered by the Pirates, vnto the passage into the Iland, and Adonius in their company (who by no means would leaue them.) Which the gardians perceiuing, and knowing Oswalds seruants, and thinking the rest to be prisoners, carelesly laid aside their weapons, nothing suspecting their intent, kindly welcomed their fellowes, and conducted them with ioy, past their places of resistance, which the knights perceiuing, suddainly seuered themselues, and with their weapons drawne, so valiantly laid about them, that they soone had slaine such as resisted them. The Pirates seeing this happie successe, went on with Parismus and Pollipus , towards Andramarts Castle, which when they had showne them, they desired (being terrified with fear of Andramarts crueltie) to returne vnto their ships. Who laughing at their timorousnes, gaue them leaue to depart with Barzillus , who vndertooke to keepe the passage, that none might enter to indammage them. With what daunger Parismus entred Andramarts Castle, and how they were by him brought in daunger of their liues: and how afterwards they slew him, and his two brethren. After this conquest obtained, and all things as yet falling out according to their wished desires, Parismus and Pollipus , onely attended by poore Adonius , made towards the Castle, where by reason that it was late, they could not enter, but secretly conueyed themselues into a heape of short shrubbes and bushes, that grew by the castell wall, sufficient to hide them in,  & there determined to take their nights repose. This exployt was so suddainly performed, that those within the Castle had no knowledge thereof, which fell out well for ye two knights, who quietly rested in that place, being no way molested that night, but were exceedingly greeued to heare the grones, cries, and greeuous complaints, of such as remained in prison, which continued in such miserie, as it were too heauie to report. Early the next morning, these Noble minded knights, hauing with wise consideratio weyed ye greatest perill of this their attempt, attended their fittest opportunitie, which thus fell out. Sitting in their secret shrowde, they espied some of the seruants passe in and out at the Castle gate, whither they presently went, and came to the porter with these speeches. Porter (quoth Parismus ) open the gate and let vs in. The Porter seeing them, was so amazed, that he stood like one that were sencelesse: but calling his better remembrances togither: Sir knight quoth he) it is perillous to enter here, for be assured, if you once come within the gates, it is impossible for you to return. Go to quoth Parismus , open me the gate. With that, the Porter began to ring a Bell, with all his force, but was soon hindred from proceeding by Pollipus , who gaue him so deepe a wound on the arme, that he was inforced to let go: but that litle time of ringing, was a sufficient warning to those within, who by multitudes came flocking to the gate, and opened the same. Whe presently Parismus offred to enter, but they being stronger by reason of their number, shut to the same againe, and ran vnto Andramart , who hearing their report, presently commanded 20. of his hardiest knights to arm themselues, himself likewise armed himself, and went down to the gate, which he commanded to be opened, and seeing no more but only two knights, (himself not vouchsafing to speak to them) commanded his seruants to carry them to prison, by which meanes they had occasion to enter within the gates, whe drawing their swords they stood vpo their defence, which Andramarts me began to laugh at, thinking them foolish to resist them, but it fell out to their sorrow. For Parismus began to laie about him, and Polipus to desend himself, that immediatly they had slain 2. of Andramarts seruants, which the rest perceiuing, all at once began to assaile these champios: who placed themselues in such order, that they easily withstood their force, and by exquisit skil, furthered themselues, that still the assailants perished, and in short space they had slaine the one halfe of them, and the rest seeing their partie still decrease, began to drawe backe, which turned to their destruction: for these knights perceiuing them to quaile, so furiously assaulted them, that they all there ended their liues, which others that stood by perceiuing, fledde into an other Court, and shut a strong gate against the knights that pursued them, and in the meane time, by the commandement of Andramart , they were inclosed within that court, by such, as while they were in this fight, went out at a posterne gate, & fastned ye gate at which they entred, so surely, that it was impossible for them to get out: by which means they were inclosed in that court. Which whe they beheld, they perceiued it to be no other the a strong prison: for it was incompassed within a mightie stone wall, and no passages but the two gates, by which meanes they were betraied into the hands of Andramart , vnlesse by some strange meanes they should be deliuered. This draue these knights into such vexation, that they could not tell what to do, nor how to behaue themselues. Andramart seeing his me thus slaughtred by onely two knights, greatly admired their valor, and also maruelling what the occasion of their quarrel might be, which he desired to know, fearing the trechery of his seruants that kept ye passage, by meanes wherof, before that time, he euer thought himself in securitie: he spake vnto them (looking from ouer the wall) in this sort. Knights (quoth he) what seeke you in this place, that hath moued you to offer such outrage against my seruants? If any that belongeth vnto me, hath offred you discurtesie, I am ready to see him make you sufficient satisfaction: if none hath done you offence, I wold wish you depart, without bringing your selues in further daunger: for so much I regard your good (beholding your valour) that I would be loth to seeke reuenge of these my seruants deaths, but set you at libertie, so you will promise to depart, with offring me no further iniurie. Parismus thus replied. If thou art the owner, and ruler of this Castell (as I suppose) then know that we are such as go in search of a lost friend, whom we assuredly thinke thou vniustly detainest, for none but thy selfe wouldst do such a discourteous deed: as also hearing of the trechery thou vsest to trauellers, and the continuall outrages thou attemptest by sea, whereof wee haue had sufficient trial, we determinately came, as well to find our lost friend, as also to requite the discourtesie we haue found by thy seruaunts: since which our comming, thou knowest what we haue begunne, and our determination is to go forwards, vnlesse thou wilt vouchsafe of courtesie to let vs see the prisoners thou detainest, which if thou deniest, assure thy selfe wee are fully bent to purchase the thing wee came for, or in pursute thereof, hazarde our dearest blood: therefore resolue vs what thou wilt doo, for wee challenge thee, if thou hast anie sparke of honourable knighthoode, to shewe the same, in honourable, and not in treacherous sort, which will make our reuenge more sharpe. Andramart hearing the speeches of the valiant Parismus , could not well tell in what sort to aunswere him, one while purposing to detaine them in that place: but not confidently trusting the strength thereof, that thought was soone vanished. Then he began to coniecture that Laurana was the Ladie in whose search they came: withall remembring that she should be taken from him, which was more greeuous then a thousand deaths, he resolued to offer them the sight of the prisoners, fearing that they would otherwise do him some mischiefe. At last a multitude of sundrie cogitations so oppressed his minde, that he determined to trie the vttermost of theyr power, and to put them in the most extremitie that might bee: and therfore returned them this answer. Proud knights (quoth he) whose malice I nothing feare: know yt I will not in any respect yeeld your request, and therfore content your selues with this answer, that I am determined (since you refuse my gentle offer) to detaine you here, vntill your pride be somwhat abased, and by that time, I hope, you will wish you had accepted my offer: & with these words departed, which vexed ye two knights, the rather for that they were void of meanes, to seeke reuenge: being inclosed in such sort, that there was no way for them to escape famishment: Where they continued all that night in most heauie case, not being able to take one minutes rest. In which time, Pollipus according to his woonted manner, tyred his wits with deuising how to vnfasten the gates, or escape their imminent daunger. Parismus on the other side, had his minde troubled with a thousad cogitatios, of his beloued Laurana , who he thought assuredly to be ther imprisoned, which draue him into such good hope, that notwithstanding the extremitie of Andramart , hee shewed a countenance of greater ioy, then before hee had vsed, which reioyced Pollipus and poore Adonius , whose heart was much greeued to see the perill his deere freendes were like to endure. Andramart began to coniecture, that if Laurana were the Ladie for whom they sought, then it was his best course to keep them as prisoners still in that place, and not to destroy them by famishment: as before he had determined, but to rid himselfe of that doubt, he priuily called Leda vnto him, and brought her vnto a secret place, where she might behold the two Knights with these speeches. Damsell (quoth he) there are newlie arriued at my Castle two Knights, whome I suppose are come in search of thy mistresse Laurana : therfore I desire you to resolue me. For if you knowe them, I will not vse such rigor towards them, as I am determined: But for her sake (in whose sight I still desire to be gratious) I will remit the offence I haue taken against them, for the slaughter of my seruants, whom you see lie dead at their feete. Leda all this while had diligentlie beheld these Knights, but knewe them not, by reason of their strange Armour: but at last she espied Adonius , whom she very well knew, thereby assuring her selfe, that it was Parismus and Pollipus that were in Armour, and fearing that the speeches Andramart vsed, rather did proceede from a pollicie to sift her minde, then otherwise to intend their good, for that he was full of trecherie, shee made him this aunswere. Syr, I knowe not whence these knights are, neither did I euer see them before: but I woulde that I might be so happie, as to carrie anie such good newes to my Ladie, or were he so happie as to arriue in this place, that hee might bee at your courteous disposition, who, I am sure, for my Mistresse sake, would intreate him well. But had Andramart well marked her countenaunce, it woulde haue bewrayed that which shee concealed, and hee desired: for shee thought the time verie long, vntill she were come to her Ladie with these ioyfull newes: and he being satisfied with her aunswere, let her depart vnto her Mistresse chamber, where shee was no sooner entred, but shee declared vnto her the cause why Andramart had called her foorth, and that she was assured Parismus and Pollipus were arriued: rehearsing howe that they had slaine aboue twentie of Andramarts seruants, and were inclosed in a yard, where they remained in verye good estate. Laurana was reuiued with such ioy, to heare her deere Lord named, that her heart leapt within her, and a thousand times imbraced Leda , for bringing that happie newes. The she began to cosider of the estate they remained in, being inclosed that they could not get out, which thought was most greeuous vnto her: but by the comfortable speeches of Leda , shee was in great assuraunce of their happie escape out of all daunger, in which good hope shee remained, with a most longing desire to heare some more newes of them. Andramart determining not to vse such rage as to famish them, (for that hee had in him some sparkes of humanitie) caused sufficient meate to bee ministred vnto them, fortifying his Castell so stronglie as he could possiblie deuise. He was likewise giuen to vnderstand, that the passage towardes the sea was strongly fortified, and defended, that none coulde passe that way, which brought a great terrour to his minde. The imprisoned Knights continued in great care, earnestly studying to ridde themselues from that thraldome. At last they concluded in the silent of the night, to set Adonius on the wall, who should get downe, and go to Barzillus , to will him send them some coardes, wherewith they would make a Ladder, which was the readiest meanes to further theyr intent: which Violetta vndertooke most willinglie, nothing regarding the daunger she should put her selfe into thereby: and so with much adoo they got her to the toppe of the wall, whose heart began to faile, when shee sawe the height she shoulde leape downe, being vnaccustomed to such perils. But remembring the parties for whose sake she should vndertake that hazarde, arming herselfe with an vnwoonted courage, not agreeable to her sexe and weake nature, shee leapt downe, and (the earth refusing to harme so sweete a creature) safely escaped the danger of the fall, and with a ioyfull heart went towardes the place where Barzillus remained, which she could scarcelie finde, by reason that it was darke: and remembring the daunger of the place, shee thought euerie bush that encountered her view, had beene her enemie. But with more then accustomed boldnesse in her sexe, shee soone arriued at the passage, where Barzillus was: not sleeping, but carefullie attending his charge: who espying Adonius , requested how his Lorde and Pollipus fared, who declared vnto him the estate they remained in, and the cause of his comming, which Barzillus presentlie perfourmed, hauing good store of such prouision in his Shippe: and leauing the custodie of the passage, to such of his men as hee knewe to bee both courageous and faythfull, hee went with Adonius vnto the Castell wall, and with their Ladder mounted the toppe of the same, so that both of them went ouer vnto the Knightes, who most ioyfullye welcomed, Barzillus . Who hauing saluted them, and conferred about theyr exploytes, at theyr intreatie he departed againe vnto his charge, whereon depended the chiefest stay of theyr safetie, for that they knewe diuerse of Andramarts seruants were abroade, whose arriuall might much indamage them. To preuent which it behooued them to haue an especiall regarde: beeing gladde that they had gotten this deuice, they presentlie put the same in execution, and got ouer into the next Court: the statelinesse of which place, in their opinion, excelled for sumptuousnesse, all the buildings that euer they beheld. In the midst of the court stoode a most statelie erected fountaine, whereon were placed manie beautifull images, of most curious ingraued worke, the pleasantnesse of which place, much delighted theyr troubled sences to behold: vnder which fountaine they staied, to behold the gallant buildings, statelie Turrets, and sumptuous walles, that outwardly adorned the place, expecting the cheerefull light of the sunne to comfort them in that distresse, which presentlye began to shewe his splendant beames, which glistered vppon the glasse window, that the place seemed another paradice, and there they attended the conclusion of their attept, either to their comfort, or confusions. The first that entred the Court, they laide hands on, and by compulsion, vrged him to declare what force was in the castle, Who (vppon promise that they would not offer him violence) told them, that latelie there arriued at the Castle two of Andramarts Brethren, being esteemed men of great courage, which inhabited the further parts of that Iland, who were determined to make triall of their strength that day: the eldest, named Guilmor , the other Bramon , And that Andramart determined, if that his Brothers failed, himselfe would make triall of his fortune, but if all of them failed, he had a hundred seruants readie in Armour to aide him. Parismus hearing his speeches began greatlie to dispaire of victorie, considering that such a number were in readinesse onely against them two, but such was the constant resolution of these two Knights, that choosing the fittest, place for theyr furtherance in fight, they determined to trie the vttermost of their fortune. Andramart being earlie vp, and discoursing with his Brethren about their affaires, by chance lookt out at a window, and espied, where the Knights (that he thought had beene sure enough) were walking at libertie, which strooke such a terror to his minde, that at the verie sight thereof, his heart failed him, which so altered his former purposes of crueltie, that he thought it his best course to vse himselfe towards them, as agreed with an honorable minde. For notwithstanding, yt often times in tyrannicall manner, he persecuted such as neuer offended him, yet he often shewed many tokens of a courteous and vertuous minde, though altogither darkened by his crueltie: which togither with the feare he had of these Knights valour, and seeing their resolution, caused him to come to his Brethren with these speeches. Beholde (quoth hee) yonder are the Knights that haue escaped out of the place I had inclosed them in, and are come to worke my further daunger, hauing alreadie by their valour slaine twentie of my best seruants: two more goodlier knights did I neuer behold, which maketh me pittie the estate they are in, beeing likelie now to suffer death by your Inuinsible strength, and were it not that I had sent for you to aide me heerein, and that it might in some measure touch mee with the name of a Cowarde, I would vse them in the kindest sort I could deuise, and remitte all further cause of strife. For I suppose they are come in searche of a Ladye that remaineth in this Castle, whose presence is the onelye preseruer of my life, which beeing taken from mee will soone ende my dayes: Therfore good brethren resolue me of the best course to be vsed herein. Guilmor being of a proude and haughtie disposition, and scorning at the lenitie of Andramart (whose heart was touched with an insupportable feare) woulde make him no aunswer, but presently went and armed himself, which they beholding, did the like, and altogither went downe into the Court. And without any speeches, the two brethren beeing full of scornefull pride, fullie assuring themselues of the victorie, assailed Parismus and Pollipus . Who seeing no greater oddes, but one to one, entred the Combat so chearefullie, as it had beene a sport or pastime, which continued a good while betwixt them, without anye great disaduauntage, on eyther partie: the noyse of whose weapons, clashing on theyr Armour, came to Lauranaes hearing, who coulde by no meanes take any rest that night for feare to thinke, least Andramart shoulde worke the death of her deere Lorde and freende, that on a suddaine, starting to a windowe that lookt into the Courte, shee espied the foure Knightes Combatting, assuring her selfe, that her freendes were two of them: whome shee knewe not, but as shee was informed by Leda to bee those in the blewe Armour. Whose sight reuiued the afflicted heart of Laurana : but on the contrarye parte the daunger shee sawe them in, as much tormented her with feare. Andramart standing by, to beholde the issue of this Combate (hauing an eye to the windowe where Laurana was) vnfortunatelie espied her looking out: Whereuppon immediatelie hee sent foure of his Seruants to remooue her into a strong and close Prison, farre from theyr sight: which so tormented the minde of Laurana (togither with the feare shee conceyued for Parismus , hauing no freende but Pollipus , inuironed with a number of enemies) that had not Leda laboured the contrarie, shee hadde there ouercome her vitall sences with extremitie of sorrow. Still continued the Combat betwixt the Champions, but Pollipus feeling himselfe sore wounded by Bramon , was so inraged with furie, that with all his force and skill, hee laboured with such puissaunce against his assayling enemie, that hee had soone laide him at his feete deade. Which Andramart perceiuing, came to Pollipus with these speeches. Knight (quoth he) thy taske is not yet ended, for heere am I to reuenge the death of him thou hast now conquered, wherewith hee began to assayle Pollipus with all his force: who aunswered his blowes with the like courage, by which time Parismus had left his enemie breathlesse, who laye wallowing at his feete, strangled with his owne blood. Andramart seeing the same, woulde haue fledde, (fearing his owne downefall) but Pollipus seeing his intent, thought nowe or neuer to shewe proofe of his valour: therefore to ridde themselues from further daunger, with both his handes strooke with such violence vppon his crest, that the weakenesse of his Armour, yeelding to the sharpnesse of his swoorde, and force of his blowe, so astonisht him, that hee staggered: Wherewith Pollipus closing with him, ouerthrewe him on the grounde, and thrust his swoorde through his bodie in diuers places. By which time Andramarts seruants seeing the distresse their Maister was in, all at once assailed Parismus and Pollipus , who coulde not well tell how to indure any further assault, but drawing backe to the corner of the Court, placed themselues in such sort, that their enemies could not greatly indammage them, but still receyued the woorste, most of them beeing in small continuance of fight, sore wounded, and many of them were slaine, so that they seemed therewith like men that were desperate. One amongst the rest, that Andramart hadde before taken Prisoner, but for his good qualities hadde againe released, as one of his chiefest seruants, whose name was Tellamor , seeing Andramart slaine, and marking the braue and valiant courage of these two Knights, vsed all the perswasions he could, to withdrawe his fellowes from their madnesse, who still followed their reuenge eagerlie, without any consideration of the little good they could reape thereby, at last some of them beganne to listen to him, by which meanes Pollipus hadde respit to breath himselfe, and Parismus perceiuing them to stande doubtfully, debating matters betweene themselues, beganne to speake to them in this sort. Maisters quoth hee, me thinks men that are indued with reason (as you should be) shuld not shew themselues so inconsiderate, as to seeke reuenge against those that neuer harmed you? what causeth you thus wilfully to endanger your selues by offering vs violence? you will say the death of your Maister: why what was hee but a Tyrant? what account did he make of any of you? but to keepe you as his vassailes and slaues in bondage and extreame seruitude: how was hee esteemed of any? but as a cruell homicide, a robber and spoyler of poore personages, whereby himselfe and such as were his seruants were hated and despised of all good people. Did he not continueally tyrannise ouer you in most cruell sort, that many of you were put to shamefull offices, and for euerie displeasure in danger of death and imprisonment, by his furie? what doo you thinke was the cause of our arruall heere? not (as you suppose) to make you captiues, nor to get wealth, or the spoyle that theeues and robbers seeke after, nor yet to offer violence to Andramart , or any of you, but to redeeme a lost friend that your maister hath wrongfully detained. Then lette that wisedom rule your minds, that shuld be in men, and shew what you require at our hands, and we will in any reasonable respect satisfie you. We are not determined to stay among you to beare rule ouer you, thereby to spoyle you of your wealth, but will leaue this Castle and the riches thereof, as youres to dispose of, which you may quietly enioy, nowe your cruell maister is dead, whose life would haue beene cause of your further seruitude, but by his death you are freed from the cruell bondage and slauerie wherein you liued, and haue by the same occasion, the choyse of electing, or refusing of quiet content, and peaceable wealth. Parismus had no sooner ended these speeches, but by a generall consent (being perswaded thereto by Tellamor , whose counsell they highly esteemed) they cast downe their weapons, and yeelded themselues: which greatly cheered the hearts of both the knights, being before that, in great peril, and hazard of their liues, hauing taken the faithfull oath of their loyaltie. Pollipus pulling off his Helmet, began greatly to extoll and commend their wisedome, in that they had that good consideration, to conceiue aright of Parismus speeches: promising them that by his consent, Parismus should so highly content them before their departure, that they should for euer account themselues happie by their arriuall. And hauing taken order for their securitie (not trusting them, notwithstanding their oathes, because they knewe them to be vnaccustomed to vertuous humanitie) they were conducted to verie fayre and sumptuous chambers by Tellamor , and there had their wounds carefully drest by Adonius, whose tender heart bled drops of warme blood, to see the purple gore that issued from their mangled bodies, whose care and diligent tendance, was a great comfort vnto them at all times: by meanes whereof, they made such account of him, that they would not haue parted from him for any good in the world. Tellamor hauing been vertuously brought vp (being also a knight of good account, and honourable parts) carefully prouided all things necessarie, and with such affection tendered their safetie, that there could no mischiefe bee attempted by Andramarts seruaunts, (whose heades still ruminated on treacherie) but he would still seeke to appease and preuent the same, whose diligence was well marked of the two knights, whereby they grew into good liking, of him, and much commended his curtesie. How Parismus beeing past all hope to finde Laurana, at last found her to his exceeding ioy. And how afterwards leauing the custodie of the Castle to foure of Andramarts seruants, he departed towards Thessalie : and by the way visited olde Antiochus , in the desolate Iland. Parismus all this while could by no means be quiet for thinking on Laurana, the remembraunce of whose absence was continually in his mind, more then was wonted, whereby, his perswasion of some happie newes of her abode in that place, still increased: which caused him the next day to resolue himselfe by searching (for otherwise he could not learne, for that Andramart woulde not suffer any of his seruaunts but onely foure, to see or haue anie knowledge of Laurana , who were all slaine with their master) that comming to Pollipus they went to search the Castle. And first of all beeing directed by Tellamor , they came to the prisons, where were manie straungers of sundrie Nations, lying in the most wofull and lamentable miserie that euer eye behelde: their ioynts and flesh beeing worne with the waight of the Irons wherewith they were fettered: who then beganne to feare theyr vtter destruction, which they had long expected: but contrarie to their thought and expectation, they were set at libertie, which greatlie comforted theyr dying heartes. From thence they went vnto the Dungeons of the Castle, wherein were manie distressed wights remaining, that of long time had not seene the pure light, nor felt the comfortable heate of the Sunne, and nowe to their ioy were set at liberbie, who highlye applauded the valour and bountie of these two most noble and courteous knights. Parismus hauing not yet founde the ioy hee expected, could not harbour in his minde any rest, vntill that hee hadde searched all ouer the Castle, sauing the place wherein Laurana was, which was so secretly conueyed amongst the other buildings, that the way thereto could hardly be found, wher by Parismus was deceiued. And thinking verily that there was no place but hee hadde alreadie searched, entred into most heauie and sorrowfull cogitations: and being wonderfully discouraged of all comfort, wandered from Pollipus (who was eareslly in talke with Tellamor ) and by chance happened on a darke entrie, which place seemed to agree with his heauie disposition: into which hauing entred, and a while walked vppe and down, he found a doore at the further end therof, fast shut, which caused him to cease his morning, and study how to open the same, which he had soone effected:  & entring further, he found a most stately chamber, wherein were diuers signes that it was not vnfrequented, but being vnarmed, he would not too rashly go further, least hee might vnawares runne into daunger. Therefore softlie hee lifted vppe the hangings, behinde which was a doore into another Chamber, where hee beheld a Ladie sadly sitting vppon the earth, with her backe towards him, leaning her head vppon the beds side. At which sight his heart began to throb and pant exceedingly, but looking more narrowly, he espied a damosell with blubbered cheekes, weeping to heare the restlesse plaints her mistresse had made: who hauing with extreame sorrow bewailed her vnfortunate estate, beeing likewise terrified with remembring the daunger Parismus was in, and greefe to bee abridged his sight, was fallen into a silent slumber: wherein shee had not long continued, but (at the verie instant when Parismus entred the chamber) she dreamed he stood behind her, wherwith she awaked, and earnestly looking about her, she espied him, wherewith she was extreamely amazed, fearing least she had still beene in a dreame, that shee stoode fearefully trembling betweene an earnest hope, and a comfortlesse dispaire. But Parismus assoone as he beheld her face knew her, and tooke her in his armes, with such exceeding ioy to them both, as that the teares proceeding from kinde affection, ranne downe both their cheekes in abundance. And Leda, seeing her Lord, kneeled at his feete, with that exceeding ioy, as is not to be exprest, who had no leysure to speake to her, his heart was so replenished with exceeding content, by the sweete and delectable presence of his vertuous and louing Laurana : whom a thousand times he folded in his armes, and as many times greeted her ruddie lippes with sweete kisses, in which louing imbracings, they continued a good space, being vnable to thinke of any thing else. But at the last, hauing somwhat recreated themselues with that kindnesse, Parismus vttered these speeches. Most kinde and louing Princesse, since we are thus happily met, and that we haue now no further cause of sorrow, it would be greeueus to make rehearsall of our sad mishaps since our parting, therefore let your heart be at quiet, and now forget all former griefes, which were vnfortunately occasioned by my negligence, and accept my acknowledgement of offence, for a sufficient satisfaction, and let your vertuous bountie, still bring me farther in admiration of your vertue, vnto whom I am most infinitely bound in al the bonds of true and loyall friendship. To recount my noble friend Pollipus kindnesse (by whose valour I haue escaped many imminent daungers) and the kinde tendance I haue had of poore Adonius , craueth a longer circumstance, and therefore at this time I will omit the same, onely desiring you to make such estimation of them, as of my most dearest friends, but by whose meanes I had neuer enioyed the fruition of your heauenly company. I now account all paine pleasure, and the reward of my trauailes so bountifull, as all the worldes dignitie cannot counteruaile: Hauing at last attained the height of my desires, and fulnesse of all felicitie, by enioying your vertuous presence, whose absence was more bitter vnto me, then a thousand deaths. Many other most louing and kinde speeches past their lippes, being often interrupted with sweet kisses, and hartie embracings, that in this delight, they would haue continued a long time, but that the desire Parismus had to acquaint Pollipus with his happie newes, and Laurana to see her freend, caused them to breake off, and walke out to him, who had quicklie mist Parismus , & began earnestly to inquire for him: in which time of his absence, he had sought in most places of the Castle, but still mist the darke passage wherein he was entred, which draue him into a carefull woonder, what should be become of him. Wherewith he began greatlie to feare that hee was by some treacherie indangered, but suddainly in the midst of this perplexity, he espied him with Laurana , coming towards him: which sight exceedinglie reioiced his heart, with an vnexplicable ioy. Whe comming to Laurana , he reuerenced her with all humilitie, and she most kindlie saluted him, yeelding him many heartie thanks for his honourable loue and kindenesse showne, in the manifold paines, he had taken for her behoofe. Likewise speaking to Adonius , she greatlie commended, and kindelye thankt him for his diligent seruice to Parismus , promising to reward him with all kindenesse. So with exceeding ioy on all sides they spent the rest of that day, in pleasant communications, hauing all things necessarie, readily prouided by Tellamor , and diligently ministred by such prisoners as had receiued their libertie: who had now so well refresht themselues with wholsome meates, that they were of sufficient strength both for their owne defence, and the safetie of those that had set them at libertie whom they exceedingly tendred. Parismus presently sent a messenger to Barzillus , to certifie him of their happie successe, who leauing the custodie of the passage to his seruants, came to be partakers with the in theyr reioycings. But notwithstanding, when all thought there was no more cause of sadensse, their quiet and pleasures were darkned by the heauie countenance of Laurana , who could not forget the death of her yong sonne Parismenos , but stil was purposed to conceale the same from Parismus , which caused them greatlie to maruaile. And vppon a day when Pollipus by the intreatie of Parismus , had rehearsed the discourse of all their aduentures in the desolate Iland, and the occasion of theyr arriuall in that place, Laurana with these sad remembrances, was put in minde, deepely to compare her owne miseries with theires, and found them to be greater, for that they were all in safetie, but shee mist her yoong sonne, who was vntimelie lost, which strooke such a sadnesse into all her sences, that suddainelie she burst into aboundance of teares. Which draue them all into an admiration, that Adonius and Leda seeing her teares, could not refraine from partaking with her in that sadnesse, but (as the custome of women is) wept for companie. Parismus maruailing what was the cause of her sorrowe, and desirous to knowe the same, for that his heart therewith was exceedingly tormented, most earnestly intreated her to vnfolde the cause of her greefe, that he might (if it were possible) comfort her therein. Laurana beeing vnwilling in the least degree to shewe herselfe vndutifull to his will, began to declare the manner of her bringing to that place by the Pyrates, after they had betrayed him on the coast of the desolate Iland: as also the kindenesse she had founde at Andramarts hand, and how that from time, to time, he had vsed her in most honorable sort. But my Lorde (quoth shee) Andramart had a sister named Adamasia , who many times vrged me to yeelde to loue her Brother: which when she could effect by no parswasions, first, shee imprisoned my seruant Leda , next, shee withhelde from me (the cause of this my sadnesse) my young sonne that was borne in this vnluckie place, whome I caused to bee named Parismenos , and with cruell torment afflicted my body, and dailye caused two olde Women to whippe mee in most cruell sort: which I was contented to indure. But when shee sawe that all this woulde not preuaile, shee caused the nurse that kept Parismenos to come vnto mee with a message, that vnlesse I woulde in euerie respect fulfill her demaunde, shee woulde before my face strangle that tender babe. And beeing about that cruell deede, I intreated her to referre his punishment and vnnaturall doome, vntill the next day, since which time I neuer sawe my tender Babe, nor is hee, or his Nurse anie where to bee founde: and afterwardes againe, shee continued her former manner of crueltie. Nowe Andramart all this while by perswasions of his sister, absented himselfe from mee, (for that shee had promised him to obtaine my consent to his request) nothing misdoubting the crueltie shee vsed to mee. But at length, seeing his sute still frustrated, and finding (as well by my owne report, as by other manifest proofes) her trecherie, and my miserie, hee woulde with his Swoorde haue slaine her: but shee running away to auoyde his rigour, burste her necke downe a payre of stayres. The two olde women hee likewise slue with his owne handes: my seruant he sent vnto mee, and euer after againe, vsed me in most kinde and good sort. And the verie day when you entered in fight in this Court, he caused me to be lodged in the place where you founde mee. The greatest cause of this my sadnesse, is the losse of my young sonne, whose death was vntimely, and whose presence woulde haue expelled such sad thoughts as haue possessed my minde, and disquieted the happie content I should receiue by your honourable presence. Parismus hauing heard the sum of her tragicall report, coulde not chuse but greeue, especially to thinke of the miserie she had indured, and the death of his yong sonne, whom he had neuer seene, that what with his, and Lauranaes sadnsse, all the whole companie were growne into heauinesse. But with the comfortable perswasions of Pollipus , the remembraunce of these griefs were somwhat mittigated. Many dayes after, they staid in this castell in good and quiet estate, vntill the longing desire Parismus had to returne into Thessalie , caused him to make prouision for his departure. Tellamor hauing knowledge thereof, desired that hee woulde vouchsafe hee might attende him in his trauailes, for that himselfe was of Salmatia , who trauailing in search of a Sister that hee had lost, was taken by those Pirates, rehearsing the whole truth, whereby Parismus knewe him to bee brother vnto the Damosell, in whose rescue Osiris was hurt, as hath beene before declared: which caused him make greater account of him, then before he had done, and enter into a deepe insight of his former courteous behauiour, and with all the kindnesse he could, yeelded him thankes for the friendship hee had showen him, and his friend Pollipus since their arriuall: telling him that he needed not make any further search for his sister, for that she was in the Court of Thessalie , in good health, repeating the whole circumstance of the fauours hee had founde at her handes, and the manner how shee was taken by the outlawes. Which newes much gladded Tellamors heart, as also that he had liued to be so happie, as to bee esteemed of so worthie a knight as Parismus was: that hauing assurance of his sisters saftie, and his owne happie fortune, to haue to fit an occasion to rid himselfe from bondage, he euer after indeuoured by all dutifull meanes, to grow further into his fauour. Parismus and Laurana remaining in happie and peaceable contentednesse (by meanes of their good successe, hauing respit to viewe others griefes) beganne to note the sad countenaunce of Pollipus , which before they did not marke: which caused Parismus suspect that his olde sore was not cured, which was his loue to Violetta , wherein hee aymed aright: for Pollipus seeing his trauailes for Laurana , were at an ende, beganne to desire to heare some newes of Violetta . And though there was no likelihoode for him to attaine her loue, yet the extremitie of his affections were such, that hee thought hee coulde no way content himselfe better then to spende the rest of his lyfe in her seruice, still purposing (according to a most noble and constaunt resolution) neuer to desist from shewing the true zeale he bare to purchase her fauour. Often times he would spende manie houres in secrete complaintes and protestations of his loyall loue, wherein (according to the humours of louesicke people) hee thought hee did in some measure ease his heart. Which behauiour of his Violetta well noting, (as being infected with the selfe same disease) would oftentimes interrupt him in his sadde lamentations, with such conceytes, that Pollipus wondered to see such wisedome in a Boy: but by reason that shee was taken to bee no other then a Boy, hee entered into no deeper consideration of her actions. In the night time Violetta did with such kindnesse affect his plaints, that when hee sight, shee likewise sight: and if he at anie time complained of his harde fortune, Violetta woulde as often blesse the happie time, and hower when first shee sawe him, and that shee was so happie to bee beloued of so honourable a knight. The difference of whose ioyes were contrarie: for Pollipus (little thinking his Violetta had beene so neare him) continuallie spent his time in heauinesse, not beeing any way able to comfort himselfe with anie hope of attayning his wished desire, beeing eftsoones terrified with remembraunce of her last doome, and deniall to his sute, as also the manie mischaunces that might befall her, or that she had wilfullie thrust her selfe into, with a thousand other displeasant thoughts sufficient to discourage anie, from presuming vppon anie good successe. By meanes whereof, he continually remayned in most heauie and sadde estate, still deuising howe to ease his heart of the care it endured, wherein he greatlie excelled in constancie, the fickle and wandering thoughts of diuerse, which are discouraged from persisting in their first resolutions, for euerie small discomfiture. Violettaes ioyes were as exceeding, as his sorrowes were extreame, for shee continuallie behelde the constancie that reigned in his heart to her wardes, the noble gifts wherewith his minde was indued, the comelinesse of his goodlie proportion, which might well please a curious Ladies eye, his vnconquered valour and prowesse, whereby hee atchieued incredible victories with great fame, the friendship and courteous behauior that aboundantly flowed from his gentle heart, wherby it was apparant that hee did not disdaine the meanest persons: besides, hearing the continuall complaints he made of her hard sentence, and the constancie of his resolution, for that hee determined to spende his life in her seruice, and also the pleasure shee tooke in his companie, beeing neuer from him in the day time, and his bedfellow in the night, that shee was priuie to all his actions, vsing many kindnesses, which hee full little thought proceeded from such affection. And nothing deeming Violetta hadde beene so priuie to all his cogitations, though shee poore soule, neuer touched his body, but with a trembling feare, remembring her owne nakednesse, still vsing such bashfulnesse in her actions, as if many eyes had beene priuie to her disguise, and watchfully noted her behauiour, wherewith her ioyes continued in such a secret content, as is not to bee expressed. And one night when shee hadde shrowded her selfe within the bedde, as Pollipus lay tossing and tumbling by reason of the restlesse thoughts hee endured, in the middest of his heauinesse, Violetta pittying his sorrowes, and to drawe him from remembring them, vttered these speeches. Sir knight (quoth she) I maruaile what passion that is which so distempereth your quiet sleepes, and if my talke be not offensiue vnto you, I beseech you make me acquainted with the same, for in all my life time I neuer behelde the like in any man. Poore boy (quoth Pollipus ) it were but follie for mee to expresse that to thee whereof thou canst not iudge, for that thy yeares are not of sufficiencie to entertaine such diuine cogitations. Diuine (quoth shee) can diuine cogitations so distemper mens wits? yea (quoth Pollipus ) for loue is a diuine and heauenly gift, and loue it is that so tormenteth mee, not that I loue, but that I am not beloued againe. For in Thessalie I loued a damosell named Violetta , whose excellent beautie, and vertuous gifts haue so inthralled my senses, that I feare me boy, it will bee to mee a cause of perpetuall heauinesse. Whose absence is cause of my greefe, and not onely that shee is absent, but that I knowe not where to beholde her attractiue beautie, for euen at my comming from Thessalie shee was (I knowe not by what misaduenture) missing, to my great sorrow, in whose search I am determined to spende the rest of my wearisome dayes. It is verie much mee thinkes (quoth shee) that you will so much regarde her good, that hath showen her selfe so discourteous, and surely you are not of my minde, in that you will take such paines to finde her out, and in the ende peraduenture reape nothing but disdaine for your good will: for it is likely shee hath made choyse of some other knight, not so woorthie to bee beloued as your selfe, with whome shee is departed: then why will you hazard your person in the daungers incident to trauaile, and spend your time in purchasing nothing, but your owne discontent? Well replyed Pollipus , howsoeuer I am rewarded, a thousand more perrilles then I can imagine shall not discourage me. For were I but so happie as once to finde her, then wold I commit the rest to my good fortune, which shal be sufficient, if I can but once againe make my loue knowne to her, that shee may haue some further tryall of my seruice. If shee shoulde not rewarde you (quoth shee) according to your hearts content, I shoulde account her the most discourteousest Ladie liuing, and were I in her case, I would indure a thousand deaths, rather then shew my selfe ingratefull to so honourable and kind a friend: and because I would see the issue of your loue, I desire you that I may bee partaker with you in your trauailes, for though I am altogether vnwoorthie to bee esteemed of you, yet if you would vouchsafe mee that kindnesse, I would both shew my selfe dutifull and diligent, and also rest continually bound vnto you for the same. And thus farre I presume (though my words may seeme ridiculous) that if euer you meete Violetta , shee wil yeelde vnto your iust sute, for I know Violetta well, and haue beene better acquainted with her thoughts, then I was woorthie of, though she nowe hath forsaken her fathers house, and hath absented her selfe I know not for what occasion. Pollipus hearing the pages words, smiled to thinke howe farre it was from his power, and yet how kinde he was to put him in such comfort. Gramercies (quoth hee) for thy good will, and if euer I meete Violetta I shall be willing to yeelde the recompence for thy kindnesse. Then (quoth she) set your hart at rest, and trouble not your selfe with these cares, but liue in hope of some better successe: for my minde perswadeth me, that you shall find Violetta safely returned at your arriuall in Thessaly , and if you find it not so, the neuer hereafter credit my words: for I haue alreadie hadde triall of the euent of my presaging thoughts, that I haue oftentimes found things fall out, euen according as I haue before deemed. Pollipus hearing the boyes speeches, at the first tooke them as spoken of course, but beeing drawne into a deeper consideration of all his former qualities, beganne to make a doubt whether he should repose any credit in them or no, that his heart euen with those speeches (yet in his fancie bearing no shew of likelihood) was somewhat reuiued, and therefore determined to make tryall of the boyes diuination, such vertue had Violettas speeches, that they wrought an vnexpected euent of perswasion, in the heart of the loue sick Pollipus , who was easily drawne to yeeld conceite of any comfort, because he thought Violetta might be still in Thessaly , and so the pages words prooued true. The rest of that night they past in slumbering sleepe. The next morning Pollipus came to Parismus Chamber with a more cheerefull countenance then he was woont, which caused them maruaile at his sodaine alteration, and afterwards they spent some fewe daies in great pleasure, and in the meane time made prouision for their departure towardes Thessaly , committing the gouernment of the Castle to two of Andramarts seruaunts, taking their oath to yeelde the same to Parismus againe vppon his demaunde, leauing all the rest likewise so highlie contented, as that they accounted his arriuall the best good fortune that euer befell them. The rest that had beene Prisoners there, departed euerieone ye way, yt liked them best. Parismus finding the wind lye conuenient for theyr passage, hoysed saile: himselfe beeing in Barzillus , ship with Pollipus and Laurana , hauing in his companie, three other ships laden with exceeding riches & treasure, such as Andramarts Pyrates had taken at sea, and made towards the desolate Iland, according to the promise past to Antiochus : where within fewe dayes (the winde and weather, fauouring them, they safelie arriued) where they were most honourablie and louinglie welcommed, by the king and Queene, and especiallie by the Kings two sonnes and Daughter, who admired the woonderfull beautie of Laurana , accouting the trauailes those knights indured, worthilie spent, to redeeme such and so vertuous a Lady. How Freneta was exceedingly in loue with Pollipus , who remembring his loue to Violetta , shunned her companie, and how Freneta after his departure, desperatelie ended her life. Iland, in great ioy and myrth, till theyr hearts began to desire the sight of their natiue countries: wherefore, they appointed their time of departure within one moneth, which greeued Freneta to here off, for that shee was farre in loue with Pollipus , vnto whom shee vsed many kinde kindnesses, thereby to giue him knowledge of her affections, but so farre was his heart from thinking of anie other loue then Violeta , that he neuer noted the extraordinarie kindnes she vsed to him, which on the other side, caused Freneta to increase the heate of her affection more and more. But in the end seeing him so little to regard her, nor scarce at all to entertaine her courtesie with good lookes, shee determined (though it might be some blemish to her modestie) to manifest her affection to him, which she presently effected: for finding him walking alone, attended onelie by Adonius , shee came into the Gallerie where hee was, kindlie saluting him as though shee would passe by. But Pollipus finding himselfe idle, thought to entertaine the time a while in some conference with her, and as kindlie saluting her sayd. Faire Ladie, may I bee so bolde as stay your iourney, or if your businesse be not great, vouchsafe me your companie, that am alone. Sir (replied she) my businesse is not ouer great, therefore I am the willinger to stay, especially to beare you companie, vnto whom I am much bound, and a greater fauour then my companie would I graunt, so that it stand with my honour to fulfill: therefore this liberall proffer I make vnto you (whom I knowe will request nothing but that which is vertuous) that if in anie conuenient sort I may doo the thing which may pleasure you, it shall bee your fault if you haue not the same. I thanke you heartily (quoth Pollipus ) and if I shoulde bee vngratefull vnto you for this your kindnesse, I shoulde doo much amisse. And for such desert in mee as you speake, I knowe none at all, but it is your aboundant courtesie, that vouchsafeth mee such fauour, which I knowe not how to requite, neither can I bee so bolde, as to bring my selfe further into your debt, vntil I haue by my indeuours laboured, to shew my selfe thankefull, for that which you haue alreadie graunted. Manie other speeches past betwixt them, which if Pollipus had diligentlie marked, he might easily haue seene the loue Freneta bare him, but he hauing his deuotions vowed to another saint, perceiued it not, which any else but himselfe would easily haue discerned. Which stil increased her burning affection, that at last, fearing to misse the fit meanes was offered by so sweete oportunitie, taking him by the hand,  & withdrawing to a window that lookt into a pleasant garden, with a blushing countenance she vttered these speeches. Sir knight, contrarie to the maner of modest maidens, I am compelled to hazard ye reuealing of that which may turn to my dishnor, vnlesse it please your vertuous wisedom, to giue a fauorable censure of my good meaning, which I am constrained to do, as procured therto, by the short abode you determine to make in my fathers court, as also for that I see your mind canot conceiue therof, without I my selfe make demonstration of the same. Wherefore most noble knight, relying vpon your courteous conceit of my true & vertuous intention. I let you vnderstand, that loue hath seized my heart with a desire to be beloued of you again, which maketh me manifest the thing that modestie wils me to coceale. Therfore I desire you to vse that charitable opinion of me, as that my honor may no way be misconceited, and my greefe relieued, which I would neuer haue vttered, but that I shall for euer hereafter be banisht your heauenly companie, the affection I beare you being such, that vnlesse you pittie my estate, your departure will bee the shortening of my dayes, and my restlesse sorrow thereby augmented, in such sort, that I shall for euer remaine in heauinesse. Pollipus hearing her speeches, was halfe astonied, and now calling to mind her former behauiour, well vnderstood that her kindnes proceeded from the affection she had vttered, that of a sodain he could not tell what answer to make her, that might in some measure quiet her mind, and ridde himselfe from discourtesie. Uertuous Lady (quoth hee) I see that I am more beholding vnto you, then I either expected or haue deserued, being sorie yt you haue placed your affection on him yt cannot recompence your kindnes by any merit, & one that is altogether vnwoorthy to bee so highly esteemed at your hads: but lady, as I am now in no measure able to yeeld you that thanks that I would, so I trust hereafter my vngratefulnesse shall not cause you repent your kindnes. At which instant Laurana by occasion entred the gallerie, by means wherof they left off their speeches to salute her, of whose coming Pollipus was glad, & a while accompanied them, in such communication as occasion offered. Violetta al this while, had wel noted Frenetas behauior towards Pollipus , and listned to their talke, which strooke a sodaine feare into her minde, least her speeches might mooue Pollipus to yeelde to her desire, for that shee was verie beautifull, & besides that, the daughter of a King, that euer after she grew into an extreame ielousie of her, that Pollipus could neuer in al the time of his abode there, be in any place, but shee would stil attend him, that he wondered at the pages diligent attendance, which proceeded not from the awfull dutie of a seruant (as he supposed) but from the faithfull loue of a friend. Polipus hauing left Freneta with Laurana in the gallerie, got to his lodging, to meditate of Frenetas rash motion, and distemperate loue, and the manifolde inconueniences that might arise thereby, as well to call his honour in question, for that it woulde bee thought it was procured by his perswasions, as also for that it seemed she was growne to that desperatenes in loue, that vnlesse shee miggt inioy the thing shee desired, it would much indanger her life, and rather then hee would thinke a thought to violate his vowed loyaltie to Violetta , himselfe would indure death. For Violetta (though she were no Kings daughter) yet by reason of her exceeding beautie, she was much spoken of in Thaebes , and nothing inferiour to Freneta in giftes of minde, the remembraunce of whose perfections, together with his loue, hadde so much bounde him in the inuiolable bonds of true friendship to his first beloued, that for euer after he eschued all occasions to come in Frenetaes sight, but still kept companie with Parismus , vnto whom hee vnfolded the whole circumstance of that which had passed betweene him and Freneta , which when Parismus vnderstood, he told him that she was an honourable Lady, and that in his opinion, he should do her wrong to reiect her loue, which should proceede from a vertuous inclination, vsing manie perswasions to that effect. Which when Pollipus heard, hee sayde, My Lord, I cannot so much wrong my deere Violetta , as so soone to yeelde ouer my fancie to loue another, and forget her perfections in whose seruice I haue vowed to spend the rest of my life. Then good my Lord, do not so much iniurie that vertuous maiden, who in Thessalie hath so much honored you, for I will neuer yeeld to loue any but her most worthie selfe, so long as my life doth last. Parismus then answered, frind Polipus , I would not any way wrong Violetta , nor your selfe, if I saw any likelihood that you should euer see her againe: and yet so much I commende your resolution, as that I shall euer extoll those honourable parts that rule your heart, whereby I my selfe haue beene preserued, and obtained the height of all felicitie, neither do I vtter any worde to alter your affection from Violetta , but to make triall of your vertues, which still continue perfect. And since our abode in this place, may againe turne to our disparagement and hinderaunce, I will by all meanes possible, hasten our departure towardes Thessalie , whereby, by good happe, you may find the partie, that withholdeth your happie ioyes, vnto whom I will vse all the perswasions I can to purchase your content. And also during our staying here, I will labour all that I can, to stay the rash increase of Frenetaes loue. Adonius standing and hearing theyr speeches, had much a doo to refraine from teares, which melted in his tender heart, to see the kindnesse of these two friendes, and the care they tooke to finde her in Thessalie , who was continuallie in their presence. Pollipus euer after, shunned all occasions, that Freneta most earnestly sought to haue some further conference with him, but when she plainlie saw that he nothing regarded her loue, but still eschewed her companie, shee fell into such heauinesse, and set the greefe therof so neere her heart, that in short time she grew so weake, that she kept her Chamber, not once vttering to anie the cause of her sadnesse, though her parents earnestly laboured to know the same, which turned their ioy into care, and theyr former pleasure into heauinesse. Pollipus hauing knowledge thereof, would neuer come at her, vntill the verie day of theyr departure, and choosing a conueniet time when she was alone, onely attended by a damosell, hee entred her Chamber: shee no sooner espied him, but her poore heart began to leape for ioy, expecting some kindnesse, but Pollipus taking her by the hand, sayde. Courteous Ladie, I am at length come to your presence, to satisfie your mind of that which I would haue you to know. Your loue to me (that am vnworthie thereof) and the little account I seeme to make of the same, hath brought you to that weakenesse you remaine in, which if so it be, I am most heartily sorrie: but for that I am now departing this countrey, I would now satisfie you in any thing I could: therefore I intreate you, to mittigate the extremitie of your passions, which I cannot salue, for that long since, I vowed my seruice vnto a Lady in Thessaly , vnto whom I am bound by manie inuiolable bonds of passed promises: neither can I be disloyal to her, without impeachment of mine honour, which is the only Iewell I most esteeme: then let me perswade you to abstaine from louing him, that cannot shew himselfe so kind as he would, and you deserue, but banish from your minde, all good conceit or opinion of me, that must against my will be ingratefull: and if in any other sort, I may do the thing with hazard of my life that may content you, I am here readie to accomplish your will. And in my absence do not accuse me of inhumanitie, for I may not, nor will not, do my Lady wrong: vppon whose fauour, my life, if it were ten thousand times dearer dependeth. Freneta hearing his resolute and vncomfortable words, fell into a deadly swound, which her maide perceiuing, laboured to reuiue her againe: in the meane time, he departed to Parismus , and hauing solemnelie taken theyr leaue of the King and Queene, who indured their departure with great heauinesse, they hasted to their ships, and soone launched into the maine, and with a prosperous gale sailed towards Thessalie. Freneta being reuiued from her trance, & missing Pollipus (whom she thought had been still by her) fel into an extreame exclamation of his discourtesie, with that vehemencie, that her brethren hearing her ragings, demanded the cause of her sorrow, which shee vttered in al respects, as hath bin before declared. Which rashnesse in her, they reprooued with such bitter tearmes, that her care for Pollipus disdaine, did not now so much greeue her, as theyr vnkindnesse. That a multitude of greefs and vexations, so ouerwhelmed her carefull and tender heart, that for euer after, shee continued in perpetuall exclamations, against her cruel destenies, that with the extremitie of greefe, she became lunaticke and quite bereft of sence, and so ended her life. Which strooke such a sorrow to old Antiochus & his queenes heart, yt within short space (as by the first coming of the knights, they had receiued their ioyful liberty, so by their last departure, they receiued the cause of their death: leauing their two sonnes to rule the Iland, who gouerned the same in such peaceful quietnesse, yt with in short space, it grew to be as famous, as euer it had bin in the first beginning of their fathers raigne. How Parismus with prosperous successe arriued in Thessalie , and of the exceeding ioye that was made for his returne. With prosperous successe, Parismus in few daies landed on the shores of Thessalie , which he (for ioy he was safelie returned with his beloued Laurana ) a thousand times saluted, with glad lookes. Laurana likewise felt her heart possest with an exceeding delight to behold her natiue soile, where her carefull Parents liued, vnto whom she shuld bring vnmeasurable comfort. Pollipus he was animated to comfort by an inwarde perswasion to heare some newes of his Violetta ,  & Violetta was affected with no lesse gladnesse then anie of the rest, in that she was so happily returned with the vertuous knight Pollipus , and the remembrance of her parents sight, which she much desired to enioy, that their ioyes on all sides were so exceeding, that there was no person whatsoeuer, but had his heart fullie replenished with gladnesse euerie way. When they were landed, Parismus determined to sende a messenger to the Citie of Thaebes , with report of their health and happie arriuall, which Pollipus desired to execute: and arming himselfe in an Azure armour, beset with starres of golde, and gallantly mounted with his speare in his rest, hee hasted towardes the Cittie, as hee rode along the streetes, multitudes of people forsooke their houses, and businesse, to beholde him, and noting his gallant proportion, thereby remembred the want of the valiant Parismus , that theyr hearts were affected with a wonderfull perswasion, that either it was himselfe, or some happie Messenger that brought good tydings of his safetie, that by infinite multitudes they followed after him to the Court, beeing desirous to knowe from whence hee was. Pollipus comming to the Pallace, beheld a wonderfull alteration there since his departure, for all were attired in mourning weedes, and euerie thing seemed to shewe a signe of sadnesse. When Dionisius had knowledge that there was a knight that had brought a message vnto him, hee coulde not iudge whence he might bee, for that hee was in armour, and rather tooke him to bee a Herault at Armes, then a Messenger that brought newes of peace. But dinner being then newly ended, he was brought into the great Hall, where was Oliuia , the Queene, the King and Queene of Hungaria , the Prince of Sparta , with his yong married Queene Clarina Daughter to the King of Hungaria , the Lorde Remus , who had latelie married Isabella : and manie other. When Pollipus was entred, humbling himselfe vpon his knee before the king, he vttered these speeches. Most high and mightie King, I bring you newes of the safetie of your highnesse Daughter Laurana : who at this instant, with her espoused lord, remaineth in good health, humbly saluting your maiestie, in all dutie by me. They are by this time on the plaines of Pharsalia , addressing themselues towards this noble Citie, where within short space, they will arriue. Dionisius hearing his message, tooke him by the hand, and imbraced him. Knight (quoth he) thou hast brought mee such pleasant newes, that I can hardly beleeue I may be so happie as to liue to see them: neither be thou offended at my incredulitie, for my misfortune hath beene such, as I cannot any way relie vpon the certaintie of any thing. With which wordes, the teares stood in his eyes. Pollipus lifting vp his Beuer, said. My Lord, vpon mine honour, that which I report, is most true. Dionisius knowing him, with great ioy imbraced him: the Queene and all the rest, could not sufficiently on the suddaine expresse their ioy, but yeelded all kinde and honourable welcomes that they could deuise, to welcome him withall. Which newes was soone bruted through the Court and Cittie, and the King, and almost all in generall, went out presently to meete them. The Courtiers they reioyced, the Cittizens, they caused bonfiers to be made, the belles rung, the Drummes and Trumpets sounded: yea, such myrth and reioycings, beganne on all sides, as if the people had beene newlie risen from death, in respect of the sadnesse yt possest their harts, before these happy news came. Dionisius , with great ioy, rode to meet his children, beeing accopanied by the King of Hungaria , the Prince of Sparta , and many other Knights, and gentlemen, belonging to the king of Hungaria , yt attended Clariana , & they had not roade far out of the citie but they met them. Where Dionisius louinglie imbraced Parismus and Laurana (who reuerently kneeled at his feet) and with teares, proceeding from the excesse of exceeding ioy welcomed their returne: whe Dionisius vttered these speeches. Welcome my deere sonne, your happie arriual hath banisht my former hearts sorrow, and as by your departure & newes of your misfortunes, our heauinesse increased, so by your prosperous arriuall our hearts are refreshed, wih ioy. I see your vertues still ouermaister aduerse miserie, & whosoeuer is in your custodie, is safelie protected fro calamitie: my gladnesse for your returne I cannot expresse, for yt I feele my self surprised with exceeding delight. When he had ended his speeches, he tooke Laurana by the hand, & embraced her with exceeding reioicings. Each noble personage hauing saluted Parismus , & welcommed their returne in courteous sort, they entred the citie, whether they were welcomed with such exceeding gladnesse on all sides, as could possiblie be deuised, & the true hearts of louing subiects express. The streets, windows, house tops, & euerie place weare so befraught with abundance of people, as there was almost no passage, left for them to get to the Pallace. Violetta amongst all the rest beheld her carefull father, standing in his dore, weeping to see the myrth, al else inioyed but himselfe, who continued in great heauinesse for the losse of his daughter: which sight attainted her heart, which such greefe, that the passage of her Christall teares, issued with such abundance, yt all the companie woondred therat, when all else indured great pleasure, being come to the Pallace, they were on all sides welcomed with vnspeakeable kindnesse. Dionisius caused most costly meate to be prouided, for their repast, and in the meane time caused Parismus to sette downe by him, and Laurana by her mother, accompanied by Clariana & Isabella , three of the fairest creatures that euer eie beheld. When Parismus at the request of the King repeated the whole manner of their misaduenture, from the beginning of their shipwracke, vntill their returne, with such exceeding commendations of the noble valour, and perfect kindnesse hee had foud in Pollipus , that al admired and applauded his victories, yt he vttered these speeches. Most noble father, by ye valour of my freende Pollipus , haue we escaped the great dangers wee fell into: therefore I beseech your highnesse, esteeme of him, as the onelie preseruer of your childrens liues, whose noble wisdome hath stil preserued vs, and his prowes mightily defended vs, without whome, we had neuer inioyed this happie hower to see your honorable presence. Dionisius hearing his speeches, rose from his seate, and embraced Pollipus with great kindenesse, yeelding him many thanks. Thus repleat with exceeding ioy, on all sides, they spent the rest of the day, in kinde salutations, and pleasant communication each freend with other, Except Pollipus , whose heart longed till he had visited old Andrugio , he found him sitting in a chaire, bewailing his owne misfortune, which strooke such exceeding sadnesse to Pollipus hart, that he could indure no companie, nor inioy no quiet. Tellamor there found his sister, in whose search, he had indured so many miseries. Barzillus was honourablie welcommed by Dionisius , and richlie rewarded by Parismus , besides all the treasure that he had taken at the Iland of rocks. Leda was kindlie welcommed by her fellowes. Parismus spent his time in pleasant discourses, with the King his father in lawe, the King of Hungaria , and Prince of Sparta. Laurana in companie of Clariana and Isabella , and many other gallant Ladies, related her happie escape from misfortune. Pollipus onely gaue his minde, to all sorrow & pesiuenesse, induring the absence of Violetta , with woonderfull greefe: And seeing that he could heare no newes of her abode, determined the next day without faile to depart in search of her. How Pollipus intending to depart in search of Violetta , was by her staied: and how she discouered her selfe vnto him. What ioy Parismus and Laurana tooke for her safetie, and the manifold honors they did her, and how afterwards she was affianced to Pollipus . Earlie the next morning, Pollipus armed himselfe, causing his horse to be prepared in readinesse, and comming where Dionisius was seated in his royalty, accompanied by the noble and gallant states that were in his court, humbled himself vpon his knee, and said. Most mightie king, I cannot reder you thanks sufficient for the least fauour I haue receiued at your hands. Neuerthelesse, I am now bolde to presume into your presence, to request consent to a matter, that much concerneth me: which peraduenture, you wil rather iudge to proceede from follie, then wisdome. For so it is, most noble King, that I haue made a vow to trauaile in search of a freende. In which trauaile, I am determined to sped the rest of my wearisome life, without whose presence, my life wil be hateful vnto me. Then I beseech your highnesse to show mee that fauour, as I may obtaine your free consent to depart at this instant, for my heart hath vowed neuer to rest in any place, vntill I be assured of my freendes prosperitie. Dionisius hearing his request, was sorie so soone to leaue him, therefore, taking him vp most kindelie by the hand, he answered. Most woorthie knight, to whome both my selfe and all mine are much bound, it were a hard matter I would denie you: but in this, let me intreat you to stay some fewe dayes with vs, that we may make you some small recompence for your paines, and not so soone leaue vs, who are much delighted with your companie; and rather let me perswade you to leaue off this resolution, for the daungers incident to trauaile are many, and your selfe haue latelie, sufficientlie tried, and if that in short space you doo not heare tidings, according to your content, you shall haue all the furtherance I can giue you, to doo what seemeth best to your selfe. My Lorde (replied Pollipus ) my staie in this place cannot pleasure you, but rather bee offensiue, for that my sorrowes without some hope of comfort, will exceede the limittes of reason: neyther will it (I hope) delight your maiestie to see my greefe, which I can by no meanes auoide. Therefore, I beseeche your highnesse, not to intend me any further honour, but let me haue your licence to depart, that haue alreadie sufficiently tasted of your bountie. Parismus seeing his intention, vsed all freendly perswasions to disswade him from his purpose, but hee as earnestlye intreated his consent: for his heart was oppressed with that care, that no other thought coulde take place in his fancies, but very shortlie, determined to begin his trauailes. Violetta seeing that now or neuer was the time to work his and her owne content, resolued to manifest her selfe, and with all diligence, attended him all that daye, fearing least hee shoulde depart secretlie, and at night when hee went to his bed (not with intent to sleepe, but to powre forth his vsuall lamentations) Violetta likewise, was with him, shewing a sad countenance to see his sorrow. But whe she had tenderly coucht her selfe by his manly side, she could not deuise how to grow into coferece with him, being strooke with such a delightful fear, to discouer her self, as she had neuer felt the like. At last she said, most noble knight, I am sure now you giue no credit to my woordes, because you finde not Violetta heere according as I promised you shuld: neither haue I any comfort to attaine the fauour at your handes I expected, because your pensiuenesse will not permit me. But might I bee so bolde as to craue one request at your hands, which if you please to vouchsafe mee, I promise you, that you shall find my words before spoken true (for that I know where Violetta is) and promise you againe to doo more for you with her, then any liuing, but her selfe. Tush boye (quoth Pollipus ) do not go about to delude me with thy fond speeches, for thou canst not performe any thing, that can further me herein. My Lord said she, doo but trie me once more, and if I faile then, lette me indure the most heauie doome of your euerlasting displeasure. Adonius (quoth he) if it be to pleasure thee any way, I will gladly do it, for the friendship I haue found in thee: then I pray thee as thou louest me, & tenderest the sorrowes I indure, do not delay me with thy speeches, for I know they proceed from kindnes, to make me forget my sadnes, & not to do me any benefit in the thing thou speakest of, for I shall neuer be so happie as to be beloued of her, who I feare me, left her fathers house to shun my companie. But notwithstanding the little hope of comfort I conceiue by thy meanes, to pleasure thee before I depart, tell mee what it is thou demandest, and if it bee in my power thou shalt obtaine it. Violetta was ashamed to vtter her minde in that place, but beeing sure hee could not behold her blushing Cheekes, sayde: the request that I make is this, that you will giue me your faithfull promise, that at such time as it is your hap to meete Violetta , and obtain her good will, that the first night you will not offer to doo any thing, that may tend to her dishonour. Uppon mine honour saide Pollipus , I will not doo any thing whatsoeuer, disagreeable to her will, for so deere doo I esteeme her, that I would rather destroy my selfe, then she should be any way displeased with me. Then know woorthie knight (quoth shee) I am that Violetta you so earnestly enquire after, I am the partie that haue so long time procured your discontent, and I am shee whose absence you haue so oft bewayled, and nowe I am constrained to manifest my selfe vnto you, desiring you to pardon my hardhartednesse that haue so long concealed my selfe, and thereby procured your disquiet. Pollipus hearing her speeches, could not tell what to say, being halfe perswaded it was she, by remembring her countenance, and the behauior she had vsed in all their trauels: as also calling to mind her kindnes, & nowe at length her own speeches, could not resolue what to do, for that his fancie still perswaded him it was not Violetta . And on the other side he had a mightie perswasion it might be she: at last he said. I know not what to coniecture, nor howe to behaue my self, nor whether I should call you Adonius , or Violetta , considering how vnlikely it is she should be so kind to me, and how certaine I am that Adonius hath done me manifold pleasures. Then sweete Violetta (if you are she) resolue me of this my doubt, being therby driue to that hopefull dispaire, that I know not whether my fortune be better or worse then it was. Violetta shrinking a little back, said. Pardon me deere Pollipus , for I am your vnworthie friend Violetta , that haue in this disguise, made trial of my fortune, & your friendship. Pollipus then tooke her most louingly in his arms, not offering other then his former promise did permit. Yet he was in a doubt still, & could not bee quiet, vntill he had vsed such kind meanes (yet far from dishonour) as thereby he found shee was a virgine, and no Page, and therfore assured himselfe it was Violetta : and foulding her delicate and tender body in his manlike armes (which he had oftentimes before imbraced, but not with such kindnes, banishing all sadnesse from his sorrowfull heart) with sweete and delightfull content, hee imbraced her with that kindnesse that long parted louers enioy, when they so pleasantly meete, spending the rest of the night in pleasing and delightfull communication, and remembraunces of theyr former kindnesses, which augmented theyr ioyes to an exceeding height. Oftentimes Pollipus would haue exceeded the limits of his former promise, but shee reserued that fauour, for the more honourable delight of theyr nuptiall bedde, but with many pleasures, such as true and loyall kindnes yeeldes. Thus these two kind friends spent the time, Violetta accounting her selfe most happie to enioy so constant a friende, as shee hadde founde him by certainties in theyr trauell, and hee esteemed him selfe as happie, that he was beloued of Violetta , that had not refused to hazard her selfe in manie dangers for his sake. At last, their mindes being both at quiet, and satisfied with blisfull content, these two faythfull louers fell fast a sleepe. Parismus enduring much heauinesse for his friendes departure, could scarcely entertaine a minutes rest to his troubled head, therefore he was early vppe, with intent to perswade Pollipus (if hee coulde) from vndertaking that iourney: and presently after these louers were a sleepe, hee entred his Chamber, where contrarie to his premeditated expectation, hee founde him fast a sleepe: and Adonius in most louing sort, laying one hande vnder Pollipus head, and the other imbracing his manly breast: seeming in his conceit, the delightfullest sight that euer hee beheld: the supposed page being so beautifull, that had hee not knowne him, hee would haue iudged Venus her selfe hadde beene there, to comfort Pollipus with her sweete imbracings. But seeing his deare friend in such quiet and sweete rest, hee withdrew himselfe, to meditate how to worke his friends comfort, and stay his iourny. By which time, the sun had lightned al the Chamber with his golden brightnesse, the clearenesse of whose splendor, shining ful vpon these louers, awaked Polipus , but Violetta still lay sweetely slumbering, and Pollipus shadowing her with the curtains, arose, and soone found Parismus walking at his chamber doore, who seeing him, said. My deare friend Pollipus , I had thought to haue found you ready armed to depart, according to your resolutio yesterday, but I hope you are rather determined to alter that purpose, and stay with vs, who desire nothing more the your companie: & were not Adonius well knowne to me. I shuld think you had imbraced some diuine goddesse in that kinde sort: but notwithstanding, lette me intreat your stay some longer time with vs, which was the onely cause of my comming vnto you at this instant. And I desire you for all the friendship that hath passed betwixt vs, bring me so much more in your debt, by obtaining this fauour at your handes. My Lorde (quoth Pollipus ) I must confesse I am too sluggish to be founde sleeping at this instant, while my minde shoulde bee busied with more weightie matters. Indeede, according to your saying (my Lorde) I thinke I haue either imbraced some goddesse, or a more diuine creature: for my former resolution of trauell is quite dissolued, and my hart at more quiet then it hath bin: for my deare Violetta hath beene so kind as to visit mee this night, shewing my heart that cause of ioy, as for euer while I liue, I shall account my selfe bound to her: and because your honor hath both bin acquainted with my loue, and all my intents, & haue vouchsafed me that fauor that I shall neuer requite, I wil shew you the cause of my gladnesse. Violetta hath disguised herself, and bin with vs in all the time of our trauels, & Adonius is now changed to Violetta , and hath discouered her selfe vnto me, which was more strange to mee then it may seeme to you. Parismus hearing his speeches, called her fauor to remembrance, & perfectly knew that it was Violetta , wondering that in so long time as she was in the disguise of Adonius , he could neuer perceiue the same, nor once suspect it, which affected his heart with exceeding ioy: and taking Pollipus by the hand, they walked together to Laurana , who greatly reioyced at this happie news, & presently commanded Leda to carrie apparrell vnto her, and all things that were necessarie, which shee presently executed, and at her comming founde Violetta newly awaked, and tolde her that Laurana had sent her that apparrell, which Violetta was wel contented with, Parismus, Pollipus , and Laurana , by this time were come where she was, who stood with a blushing coutenance like Venus , intrapt in Vulcans net, but Parismus took hir by the hand, & said: Blush not vertuous damosel, for it reioiceth my hart to see you here, could you be so vnkind as in all the time of your trauell, neuer to make your selfe knowne till now? Wel, I see you haue wisdome in making your choyse, and well haue you deserued to be beloued of Pollipus , who I am sure will performe no lesse, neither neede you any more triall of his loue, for that you haue beene priuie to manie infallible proofes thereof. Violetta kneeling vttered these speeches. I thanke your honour, that vouchsafe mee this extraordinarie fauour, as to visit me, that haue shewed my selfe vnworthie thereof: but I trust I neede not now stand vpon nice tearmes to this worthie knight, for that I may be fullie assured of his fidelitie: neither can I seeme straunge, hauing beene so long time acquainted with his loue. But if my boldnes hath not caused his misconceyte of mee, I here offer my selfe for euer to bee at his disposition: desiring you (most worthie knight) to pardon whatsouer you haue found amisse in me, or disagreeing to a maidens chaste behauiour, and with a fauourable opinion, censure of my rashnes, both to trie your vertues, as also to disguise my selfe, wherein I haue done (so neere as I could) nothing that might any way disgrace my chastitie, or dishonour my name. Pollipus taking her in his armes, saide: Sweete and kinde loue, should I be so barbarous, as to misdeeme your vertues, or beare any other then the most courteous conceite of your kindnesse? then I might bee accounted the most inhumane creature liuing: but contrarie to my desert, I account my selfe so inriched and honoured by your loue, that for euer I shall endeuour to be thankfull vnto you for the same: and beseech you thus to esteeme of mee, that it will be more greeuous vnto mee then death, to bee out of your fauour. Then I desire you let your heart repose that good trust in me, that no miserie, calamitie, death, nor affliction, shall cause me once, in worde or deede to be disloyal to your selfe, that vouchsafe me the heauenly happinesse I desire. Laurana all this while, diligently beholding Violettaes modest countenance and bashfulnesse, came vnto her, and embraced her in most familiar sort, saying. Most vertuous damosell, be not discomforted nor abashed at your disguise, for it cannot be taken otherwise then vertuous: for by the same, you haue shewen a great token of wisedom, to make so vnfallible a triall of the constancie of your friend, neither trouble your selfe with any misconceited opinion of your chastitie, for none can bee so discourteous, as to disallow the same. And my selfe am so fully assured of your vertue, that I shall for euer hate them, that shall once thinke otherwise then honourable of you, and hereafter make account to finde mee your faithfull friende, for at all times I will esteeme you as my Sister, and whatsoeuer lyeth in my power to doo you good, shall bee readie at your commaunde. Violetta kneeling downe, most humblie thanked her for her honourable kindnesse. Laurana taking her by the hande, led her downe into the great Hall, where shee was welcommed by the King and Queene, and all the rest of the states, with maruailous kindnesse: who hauing knowledge of her, exceedingly commended her vertues, and beeing informed of the truth of all that had passed betweene her and Pollipus (by his owne report), grewe into such good liking of her, and so much esteemed her wisedom, that they accounted him the most fortunatest knight liuing, to make choyse of so vertuous a wife. Presently her father was sent for, who with great ioyfullnesse welcommed his daughter. Within fewe dayes, by the appoyntment of Dionisius , shee was solemnely married to Pollipus, with great royaltie, to both their exceeding contentations, and the reioycing of all that were there present. Afterwardes all Thessalie remained in great tranquilitie, and these kinde friendes continued in Dionisius Court many daies, vntil Parismus once again desired to see his natiue country of Bohemia , where within short time after his departure from Thessaly he safely arriued, as shall be declared in the second part of this Historie, which shalbe christned by ye name of Parismenos , wherin shal be shewen the maner of his bringing vp by his nurse, that fled with him from Andramarts castle, in the Iland of Rocks, with the rehearsall of many strange aduettures, he atchieued, before he came to his parents. Thus coureous readers, you see the first fruits of my greene labours, rudely put into your courteous handes: which if you please to grace but with a fauourable opinion, I will in the next Hystorie, endeuour to make you some part of amendes: But if this shal not be kindlie accepted, you shall for euer discourage me, from bestowing any more ydle time, in these, or any other such like exercises. FINIS. welwiller to learning will denie) then let me intreate you in the behalfe of my friend, (the Author hereof) to affoord him your kinde acceptaunce of this his first labour, which I am the more earnestly to craue at your courteous hands, because I animated him vnto the same. For coming one day into his Chamber, I found (amongst other things) this Historie of Parismus , roughly penned by him, and carelesly cast by in loose papers, as minding that it shoulde neuer haue come to the presse. But I gathering them together, and reading them, found the inuention so prettie, the matter so delightfull, and the stile (though plaine) yet so pleasing, as I (liking it) requested him to suffer it to come abroade, assuring him, that it could not but be generally wel liked of the better sort. And therefore since hee hath through my perswasions performed the same, do not you (I pray
