 Os dignum aeterno tinctum quod fulgeatauro Si mallet laudare deum: cuisordida monstra Pr aetulit, & liquidam temer avit crimine vocem; Haud aliter, qu am cum rastris qui tentate burnis Canosum versare solum, &c. \--- In English thus, A wit most worthy in tryed Gold to shine, Immortal Gold! had he sung the divine Praise of his Maker: to whom he preferr'd Obscene, vile fancies, and prophanely marr'd A rich, rare stile with sinful, lewd contents; No otherwise, then if with Instruments Of polish'd Ivory, some drudge should stir A dirty sink, &c.--- This comparison is nothing odious, and it is as true , as it is apposite ; for a good wit in a bad subject, is (as Solomon said of the fair and foolish woman ) Like a jewel of gold in a Swines snowt , Prov. 11. 22. Nay, the more acute the Author is , there is so much the more danger and death in the work . Where the Sun is busie upon a dung-bill , the issue is always some unclean vermine . Divers persons of eminent piety and learning (I meddle not with the seditious and Schismatical ) have, long before my time, taken notice of this malady ; for the complaint against vitious verse , even by peaceful and obedient spirits , is of some antiquity in this Kingdom. And yet, as if the evil consequence attending this inveterate error , were but a small thing, there is sprung very lately another prosperous device to assist it in the subversion of souls . Those that want the Genius of verse , fall to translating ; and the people are (every term ) plentifully furnished with various Foraign vanities ; so that the most lascivious compositions of France and Italy are here naturalized and made English : And this (as it is sadly observed) with so much favor and success, that nothing takes (as they rightly phrase it) like a Romance . And very frequently (if that Character be not an Ivybush ) the buyer receives this lewd ware from persons of honor : who want not reason to forbear, much private misfortune having sprung from no other seed at first, then some infectious and dissolving Legend . To continue (after years of discretion) in this vanity , is an inexcusable desertion of pious sobriety : and to persist so to the end, is a wilful despising of Gods sacred exhortations , by a constant, sensual volutation or wallowing in impure thoughts and scurrilous conceits , which both defile their Authors, and as many more, as they are communicated to. If every idle word shall be accounted for , and if no corrupt communication should proceed out of our mouths , how desperate (I beseech you) is their condition, who all their life time, and out of meer design, study lascivious fictions : then carefully record and publish them, that instead of grace and life , they may minister sin and death unto their readers? It was wisely considered, and piously said by one, That he would read no idle books; both in regard of love to his own soul, and pity unto his that made them, for (said he) if I be corrupted by them, their Composer is immediatly a cause of my ill: and at the day of reckoning (though now dead) must give an account for it, because I am corrupted by his bad example, which he left behinde him: I will write none, lest I hurt them that come after me ; I will read none, lest I augment his punishment that is gone before me . I will neither write, nor read, lest I prove a foe to my own soul: while I live , I sin too much; let me not continue longer in wickedness, then I do in life . It is a sentence of sacred authority, that he that is dead, is freed from sin ; because he cannot in that state , which is without the body , sin any more; but he that writes idle books , makes for himself another body , in which he always lives , and sins (after death ) as fast and as soul , as ever he did in his life ; which very consideration, deserves to be a sufficient Antidote against this evil disease. And here, because I would prevent a just censure by my free confession , I must remember, that I my self have for many years together, languished of this very sickness ; and it is no long time since I have recovered. But (blessed be God for it!) I have by his saving assistance supprest my greatest follies , and those which escaped from me, are (I think) as innoxious, as most of that vein use to be; besides, they are interlined with many virtuous, and some pious mixtures. What I speak of them, is truth; but let no man mistake it for an extenuation of faults, as if I intended an Apology for them , or my self , who am conscious of so much guilt in both , as can never be expiated without special sorrows , and that cleansing and pretious effusion of my Almighty Redeemer: and if the world will be so charitable, as to grant my request, I do here most humbly and earnestly beg that none would read them. But an idle or sensual subject is not all the poyson in these Pamphlets. Certain Authors have been so irreverendly bold, as to dash Scriptures , and the sacred Relatives of God with their impious conceits; And (which I cannot speak without grief of heart) some of those desperate adventurers may (I think) be reckoned amongst the principal or most learned Writers of English verse . Others of a later date , being corrupted (it may be) by that evil Genius , which came in with the publique distractions, have stuffed their books with Oathes, horrid Execrations , and a most gross and studied filthiness . But the hurt that ensues by the publication of pieces so notoriously ill, lies heavily upon the Stationers account, who ought in conscience to refuse them, when they are put into his hands. No loss is so doleful as that gain , that will endamage the soul; he that prints lewdness and impieties, is that mad man in the Proverbs , who casteth firebrands, arrows and death . The suppression of this pleasing and prevailing evil , lies not altogether in the power of the Magistrate ; for it will flie abroad in Manuscripts , when it fails of entertainment at the press . The true remedy lies wholly in their bosoms, who are the gifted persons, by a wise exchange of vain and vitious Subjects , for divine Themes and Celestial praise . The performance is easie, and were it the most difficult in the world, the reward is so glorious, that it infinitely transcends it: for they that turn many to righteousness, shall shine like the stars for ever and ever : whence follows this undenyable inference , That the corrupting of many , being a contrary work , the recompense must be so too; and then I know nothing reserved for them, but the blackness of darkness for ever ; from which (O God!) deliver all penitent and reformed Spirits ! The first, that with any effectual success attempted a diversion of this soul and overflowing stream , was the blessed man, Mr. George Herbert , whose holy life and verse gained many pious Converts , (of whom I am the least) and gave the first check to a most flourishing and admired wit of his time. After him followed diverse,--- Sed non passibus aequis ; they had more of fashion , then force : And the reason of their so vast distance from him, besides differing spirits and qualifications (for his measure was eminent) I suspect to be, because they aimed more at verse , then perfection ; as may be easily gathered by their frequent impression , and numerous pages : Hence sprang those wide, those weak, and lean conceptions , which in the most inclinable Reader will scarce give any nourishment or help to devotion ; for not flowing from a true, practick piety, it was impossible they should effect those things abroad, which they never had acquaintance with at home; being onely the productions of a common spirit, and the obvious ebullitions of that light humor, which takes the pen in hand, out of no other consideration, then to be seen in print. It is true indeed, that to give up our thoughts to pious Themes and Contemplations (if it be done for pieties sake) is a great step towards perfection ; because it will refine , and dispose to devotion and sanctity And further, it will procure for us (so easily communicable is that loving spirit ) some small prelibation of those heavenly refreshments , which descend but seldom, and then very sparingly, upon men of an ordinary or indifferent holyness ; but he that desires to excel in this kinde of Hagiography , or holy writing, must strive (by all means) for perfection and true holyness , that a door may be opened to him in heaven , Rev. 4. 1. and then he will be able to write (with Hierotheus and holy Herbert ) A true Hymn . To effect this in some-measure; I have begged leave to communicate this my poor Talent to the Church , under the protection and conduct of her glorious Head : who (if he will vouchsafe to own it, and go along with it) can make it as useful now in the publick , as it hath been to me in private . In the perusal of it, you will (peradventure) observe some passages , whose history or reason may seem something remote ; but were they brought nearer , and plainly exposed to your view, (though that (perhaps) might quiet your curiosity ) yet would it not conduce much to your greater advantage . And therefore I must desire you to accept of them in that latitude , which is already alowed them. By the last Poems in the book (were not that mistake here prevented) you would judge all to be fatherless , and the Edition posthume; for (indeed) I was nigh unto death , and am still at no great distance from it; which was the necessary reason for that solemn and accomplished dress , you will now finde this impression in. But the God of the spirits of all flesh , hath granted me a further use of mine , then I did look for in the body ; and when I expected, and had (by his assistance) prepared for a message of death , then did he answer me with life ; I hope to his glory , and my great advantage : that I may flourish not with leafe onely, but with some fruit also; which hope and earnest desire of his poor Creature , I humbly beseech him to perfect and fulfil for his dear Sons sake, unto whom , with him and the most holy and loving Spirit , be ascribed by Angels , by Men , and
