 short time, to remit their fury. For this purpose, having considered many expedients, I find in the records of ancient times, that Argus was lulled by music, and Cerberus quieted with a sop; and am, therefore, inclined to believe that modern criticks, who, if they have not the eyes, have the watchfulness of Argus , and can bark as loud as Cerberus , though, perhaps, they may not bite with equal force, might be subdued by methods of the same kind. I have heard how some have been pacified with claret and a supper, and others laid asleep by the soft notes of flattery. the united attacks of this virulent generation, yet I have not hitherto persuaded myself to take any measures for flight or treaty. For I am in doubt, whether they can act against me by lawful authority, whether they have not presumed upon a forged commission, stiled themselves the ministers of delegation, and uttered their own determinations as the decrees of a higher judicature. claim to decide the fate of writers, was the eldest daughter of Labour and of Truth : she was, at her birth, committed to the care of Justice , and brought up by her in the palace of Wisdom . Being soon distinguished by the celestials, for her uncommon qualities, she was appointed the governess of Fancy , and impowered to beat time to the chorus of the Muses , when they sung before the throne of Jupiter . accompanied by Criticism , to whom, upon her descent from her native regions, Justice gave a scepter, to be carried aloft in her right hand, one end of which was tinctured with ambrosia, and inwreathed with a golden foliage of amaranths and bays; the other end was incircled with cypress and poppies, and dipped in the waters of oblivion. In her left hand, she bore an unextinguishable torch, the manufacture of Labour , and lighted by such a manner as immediately to shew every thing in its true form, however it might be disguised to common eyes. Whatever Art could complicate, or was, upon the first gleam of the torch of Truth , exhibited in its distinct parts and original simplicity; it darted through all the labyrinths of sophistry, and shewed at once all the absurdities to which they served for refuge; it pierced through the robes, which rhetorick often sold to falsehood, and detected the disproportion of parts, which artificial veils had been contrived to cover. survey the performances of those who prosessed themselves the votaries of the the torch of Truth , and when her examination had convinced her, that the laws of just writing had been observed, she touched it with the amaranthine end of the scepter, and consigned it over to immortality. inspection, there was some imposture attempted; that false colours were laboriously laid upon particular parts; that some secret inequality was found between the words and sentiments, or some dissimilitude of the ideas and the original objects; that incongruities were linked together, or that some parts were of no use but to enlarge the appearance of the whole, without contributing to its beauty, its solidity, or its usefulness. faults were committed, Criticism refused the touch which conferred the sanction of immortality, and, when the errors were frequent and gross, reversed the scepter, and let the drops of Lethe distil from the poppies and cypress, a fatal mildew, which immediately began to waste the work away, till it was at last totally destroyed. when the strongest light was thrown upon them, their beauties and faults appeared so equally mingled, that Crticism stood with her scepter poised in her hand, in doubt whether to shed the drops of oblivion, or ambrosia, upon them. These, at last, increased to so great a number, that she was weary of attending such doubtful claims, and, for fear of using improperly the scepter of Justice , referred the cause to be considered by Time . caprices excepted, conformable to Justice : and many, who thought themselves secure by a short forbearance, have sunk under his scythe, as they were posting down with their volumes in triumph to futurity. It was observable that some were destroyed by little and little, and others crushed for ever by a single blow. last so well satisfied with his conduct, that she withdrew from the earth with her patroness Astrea , and left Prejudice and False-Taste to ravage at large with Fraud and Mischief contenting herself thenceforth to shed her influence from afar upon some select minds, fitted for its reception by learning and by virtue. formed the ambrosial end, were caught up by Flattery , and those that had been infected with the waters of Lethe were, with equal haste, seized by
