 consonants are less harmonically conjoined, and, by consequence, the flow of the verse is longer interrupted. always harsh, This, with regard to our language, is evidently true, not because monosyllables cannot compose harmony, but because our monosyllables being of Teutonic original, or formed by contraction, commonly begin and end with consonants, as, \---Every lower faculty Of sense, whereby they hear, see, smell, touch, taste . vowels and consonants, will be sufficiently conceived by attending to the following passages. Immortal Amarant \---there grows And flow'rs aloft, shading the fount of life, And where the river of bliss thro' midst of heav'n Rolls o'er Elysian flow'rs her amber stream ; With these that never fade, the spirits elect Bind their resplendent locks inwreath'd with beams . verses of this passage, may be repeated between the last lines of the following quotations. Under foot the violet, Crocus, and hyacinth, with rich in-lay Broider'd the ground, more colour'd than with stone , Of costliest emblem. Here in close recess, With flowers, garlands, and sweet-smelling herbs, Espoused Eve first deck'd her nuptial bed: And heav'nly choirs the hymenean sung . MILTON , Whose ear had been accustomed, not only to the musick of the antient tongues, which, however vitiated by our pronunciation, excel all that are now in use, but to the softness of the Italian , the most mellifluous of all modern poetry, seems fully convinced of the unfitness of our language for smooth versification, and is therefore pleased with an opportunity of calling in a softer word to his assistance; for this reason, and I believe for this only, he sometimes indulges himself in a long series of proper names, and introduces them where they add little but musick to his poem, \---The richer seat Of Atabalipa , and yet unspoil'd Guiana , whose great city Gerion's sons Call El Dorado ,--- The Moon---The Tuscan artist views At evening, from the top of Fesole Or in Valdarno , to descry new lands.--- and does not often offend by collisions of consonants, or openings of vowels upon each other, at least not more often than other writers who have had less important or complicated subjects to take off their care from the cadence of their lines. later poets, is the elision of one vowel before another, or the suppression of the last syllable of a word ending with a vowel, when a vowel begins the following word. As Knowledge--- Oppresses else with urfeit, and soon turns Wisdom to folly, as nourishment to wind. many other languages antient and modern, and therefore the critics on Paradise Lost have, without much deliberation, commended Milton for continuing it. But one language cannot communicate its rules to another. We have already tried and rejected the hexameter of the antients, the double close of the Italians , and the Alexandrine of the French ; and therefore the elision of vowels, however graceful it may seem to other nations, is not consequently suitable to the genius of the English Tongue. our vowels, and that the silent e which our ancestors added to most of our monosyllables, was once vocal. By this detruncation of our syllables, our language is over-stocked with consonants, and it is more necessary to add vowels to the beginning of words, than to cut them off from the end. MILTON therefore seems to have somewhat mistaken the nature of our language, of which the chief defect is ruggedness and asperity, and has left our harsh cadences yet harsher. But his elisions are not all equally to be censured; in some syllables they may be allowed, and perhaps in a few days may be safely imitated. The abscision of a vowel is undoubtedly vicious when it is strongly sounded, and makes, with its associate consonant, a full and audible syllable. \---What he gives, Spiritual, may to purest spirits be found No ingrateful food, and food alike these pure Intelligential substances require. Fruits,--- Hesperian fables true, If true, here only , and of delicious taste. \---Evening now approach'd For we have also our evening and our morn. Of guests he makes them slaves. Inhospitably , and kills their infant males. And vital Virtue infus'd, and vital warmth Throughout the fluid mass.--- God made thee of choice his own, and of his own To serve him. I Believe every reader will agree that in all those passages, though not equally in all, the music is injured, and in some the meaning obscured. There are other lines in which the vowel is cut off, but it is so faintly pronounced in common speech, that the loss of it in poetry is scarcely perceived; and therefore such compliance with the measure may be allowed. Nature breeds Perverse, all monstrous, all prodigious things, Abominable, inutterable ; and worse Than fables yet have feign'd \---From the shore They view'd the vast immensurable abyss. Impenetrable , impal'd with circling fire. To none communicable in earth or heav'n already; and though in long Poems they may be sometimes suffered, yet it never can be faulty to forbear them. MILTON frequently uses in his poems the hypermetrical or redundant line of eleven syllables. \---Thus it shall befall Him who to worth in woman over-trusting Lets her will rule.--- I also err'd in over-much admiring unpleasing or dissonant, they ought not to be admitted into heroic poetry, since the narrow limits of our language allow us no other distinction of epic and tragic measures, than is afforded by the liberty of changing at will the terminiation
