 to events or opinions, of which they could not possibly have any knowledge. The barbarians of remote or newly discovered regions often display their skill in European learning. The god of love is mentioned in Tamerlane with all the familiarity of a Roman epigrammatist; and a late writer has put Harvey 's doctrine of the circulation of the blood into the mouth of a Turkish statesman, who lived near two centuries before it was known even to philosophers or anatomists. MILTON 's learning, which acquainted him with the manners of the antient eastern nations, and his invention, which required no assistance from the common cant of poetry, have preserved him from frequent outrages of local or chronological propriety. Yet he has mentioned Chalybean Steel , of which it is not very likely that his chorus should have heard, and has made Alp the general name of a mountain, in a region where the Alps could scarcely be known. No medicinal liquor can asswage, Nor breath of cooling air from snowy Alp . He has taught Samson the tales of Circe and the Syrens , at which he apparently hints in his colloquy with Dalilah . I know thy trains, Tho' dearly to my cost, thy gins and toils; Thy fair enchanted cup , and warbling charms No more on me have pow'r. phoenix in the last scene, which is faulty, not only as it is incongruous to the personage to whom it is ascribed, but as it is so evidently contrary to reason and nature, that it ought never to be mentioned but as a fable in any serious poem. \------Virtue giv'n for lost Deprest, and overthrown, as seem'd, Like that self-begotten bird In the Arabian woods embost That no second knows nor third And lay e'er while a holocaust, From out her ashy womb now teem'd, Revives, reflourishes, then vigorous most When most unactive deem'd, And tho' her body die, her fame survives, A secular bird ages of lives. general character of the poem. The seriousness and solemnity of tragedy necessarily rejects all pointed or epigrammatical expressions, all remote conceits and opposition of Ideas. Samson 's complaint is therefore too elaborate to be natural. As in the land of darkness, yet in light, To live a life half dead, a living death, And bury'd; but O yet more miserable! Myself my sepulchre, a moving grave Bury'd yet not exempt By privilege of death and burial From worst of other evils, pains and wrongs. associated are doubtless unsuitable to a species of composition which ought to be always awful though not always magnificent. The remark therefore of the chorus on good and bad news seems to want elevation. A little stay will bring some notice hither. Of good or bad so great, of bad the sooner; For evil news rides post , while good news baits . verbal conceits, which depending only upon sounds lose their existence by the change of a syllable. Of this kind is the following dialogue, But had we best retire? I see a storm. Fair days have oft contracted wind and rain. But this another kind of tempest brings. Be less abstruse, my ridling days are past. Look now for no inchanting voice, nor fear The bait of honied words; a rougher tongue Draws hitherward, I know him by his stride, The Giant Harapha \--- kindness is commended by the chorus Fathers are wont to lay up for their sons Thou for thy son are bent to lay out all;--- SAMSON 's complaint of the inconveniencies of imprisonment is not wholly without verbal quaintness. \---I a prisoner chain'd, scarce freely draw The air imprisoned also, close and damp. language, which in imitation of the antients is through the whole dialogue remarkably simple and unadorned; seldom heightened by epithets, or varied by figures; yet sometimes metaphors find admission, even where their consistency is not accurately preserved. Thus Samson confounds loquacity with a shipwreck. How could I once look up, or heave the head Who like a foolish pilot have shipwreck'd My vessel trusted to me from above, Gloriously rigg'd ; and for a word, a tear, Fool, have divulg'd the secret gift of God To a deceitful woman?--- And the chorus talks of adding fuel to flame in a report. He's gone, and who knows how he may report Thy words , by adding fuel to the flame? in the parts allotted to the chorus, which are often so harsh and dissonant, as scarce to preserve, whether the lines end with or without rhymes, any appearance of metrical regularity, Or do my eyes misrepresent? can this be he That heroic, that renown'd, Irresistable Samson ; whom unarm'd No strength of man, or fiercest wild beast could withstand; Who tore the lion, as the lion tears the kid--- critical integrity require that I should endeavour to display his excellencies, tho' they will not easily be discovered in short quotations, because they consist in the justness of diffuse reasonings, or in the contexture and method of continued dialogues; this play having none of these descriptions, similes, or splendid sentences with which other tragedies are so lavishly adorned. either as containing sentiments of passion, representations of life, precepts of conduct, or sallies of imagination. It is not easy to give a stronger representation of the weariness of despondency than in the words of Samson to his father. \---I feel my genial spirits droop, My hopes all flat, nature within me seems In all her functions weary of herself; My race of glory run, and race of shame, And I shall shortly be with them that rest. striking description of the stratagems and allurements of feminine hypocrisy. \---These are thy wonted arts, And arts of ev'ry woman false like thee, To break all faith, all vows, deceive, betray, Then as repentant to submit, beseech, And reconcilement move with feign'd remorse, Confess and promise wonders in her change; Not truly penitent, but chief to try Her husband, how far urg'd his patience bears, His virtue or weakness which way to assail: Then with more cautious and instructed skill Again transgresses, and again submits. Dagon , he first justifies his behaviour to the chorus, who charge him with having served the Philistines by a very just distinction; and then destroys the common excuse of cowardice and servility which always confound temptation with compulsion. Yet with thy strength thou serv'st the Philistines . Not in their idol worship, but by labour Honest and lawful to deserve my food Of those who have me in their civil power. Where the heart joins not, outward acts defile not. Where outward force constrains, the sentence holds, But who constrains me to the temple of Dagon , Not dragging? The Philistine lords command. Commands are no constraints. If I obey them, I do it freely, vent'ring to displease God for the fear of man, and man prefer I Set God behind. the tragedy is equally addressed to the passions and the fancy. The enumeration of his miseries is succeeded by a very pleasing train of poetical images, and concluded by such expostulations and wishes, as reason too often submits to learn from despair.
