 that, she arose out of the grave, and would have smyten with her fist Howleglas upon the cheke, but she missed him and smote one of the simple persons that played one of the thre Maries; and he gave her another; and than toke she him by the heare [hair]; and that seing his wyfe, came running hastely to smite the priestes leaman; and than the priest seeing this, caste down hys baner and went to helpe his woman, so that the one gave the other sore strokes, and made great noyse in the churche. And than Howleglas seyng them lyinge together by the eares in the bodi of the churche, went his way out of the village, and came no more there  3 ." As the old Mysteries frequently required the representation of some allegorical personage, such as Death, Sin, Charity, Faith, and the like, by degrees the rude poets of those unlettered ages began to form compleat dramatic pieces consisting intirely of such personifications. These they intitled Moral Plays , or Moralities . The Mysteries were very inartificial, representing the scripture stories simply according to the letter. But the Moralities are not devoid of invention; they exhibit outlines of the dramatic art: they contain something of a fable or plot, and even attempt to delineate characters and manners. I have now before me two that were printed early in the reign of Henry VIII; in which I think one may plainly discover the seeds of Tragedy and Comedy; for which reason I shall give a short analysis of them both. One of them is intitled Euery Man 4 . The subject of this piece is the summoning of man out of the world by death; and its moral, that nothing will then avail him but a well-spent life and the comforts of religion. This subject and moral are opened in a monologue spoken by the Messenger (for that was the name generally given by our ancestors to the prologue on their rude stage:) then God 5 is represented; who, after some general complaints on the degeneracy of mankind, calls for Deth , and orders him to bring before his tribunal confusion and terror. When death is withdrawn, Every-man applies for relief in this distress to Fellowship , Kindred , Goods , or Riches, but they successively renounce and forsake him. In this disconsolate state he betakes himself to Good-dedes , who, after upbraiding him with his long neglect of her  6 , introduces him to her sister Knowledge , and she leads him to the "holy man Confession ," who appoints him penance: this he inflicts upon himself on the stage, and then withdraws to receive the sacraments of the priest. On his return he begins to wax faint, and after Strength , Beauty , have all taken their final leave of him, gradually expires on the stage; Good- dedes still accompanying him to the last. Then an Aungell descends to sing his requiem: and the epilogue is spoken by a person, called Doctour , who recapitulates the whole, and delivers the moral, "C. This memoriall men may have in mynde, Ye herers, take it of worth old and yonge, And forsake pryde, for he disceyveth you in thende, And remembre Beaute, Five Witts, Strength and They all at last do Every-man forsake; [Discrecion, Save his Good Dedes there dothe he take: But beware, for and they be small, Before God he hath no helpe at all." &c. From this short analysis it may be observed, that Euery Man is a grave solemn piece, not without some rude attempts to excite terror and pity, and therefore may not improperly be referred to the class of tragedy. It is remarkable that in this old simple drama the fable is conducted upon the strictest model of the Greek tragedy. The action is simply one, the time of action is that of the performance, the scene is never changed, nor the stage ever empty. Every-man , the hero of the piece, after his first appearance never withdraws, except when he goes out to receive the sacraments, which could not well be exhibited in public; and during his absence Knowledge descants on the excellence and power of the priesthood, somewhat after the manner of the Greek chorus. And indeed, except in the circumstance of Every- man's expiring on the stage, the Sampson Agonistes of Milton is hardly formed on a severer plan. The other play is intitled Hick-Scorner 8 , and bears no distant resemblance to comedy: its chief aim seems to be to exhibit characters and manners, its plot being much less regular than the foregoing. The prologue is spoken by Pity represented under the character of an aged pilgrim, he is joined by Contemplacyon and Perseverance , two holy men, who, after lamenting the degeneracy of the age, declare their resolution of stemming the torrent. Pity then is left upon the stage, and presently found by Frewyll , representing a lewd debauchee, who, with his dissolute companion Imaginacion , relate their manner of life, and not without humour describe the stews and other places of base resort. They are presently joined by agreeably to his name scoffs at religion. These three are described as extremely vicious, who glory in every act of wickedness: at length two of them quarrel, and Pity endeavours to part the fray; on this they fall upon him, put him in the stocks, and there leave him. Pity then descants in a kind of lyric measure on the profligacy of the age, and in this situation is found by Perseverance and Contemplacion, who set him at liberty, and advise him to go in search of the delinquents. As soon as he is gone, Frewill appears again; and, after relating in a very comic manner some of his rogueries and escapes from justice, is rebuked by the two holy men, who, after a long altercation, at length convert him and his libertine companion Imaginacion from their vicious course of life: and then the play ends with a few verses from Perseverance by way of epilogue. This and every Morality I have seen conclude with a solemn prayer. They are all of them in rhyme; in a kind of loose stanza, intermixed with distichs. It would be needless to point out the absurdities in the plan and conduct of the foregoing play: they are evidently great. It is sufficient to observe, that, bating the moral and religious reflection of Pity, &c. the piece is of a comic cast, and contains a humorous display of some of the vices of the age. Indeed the author has generally been so little attentive to the allegory, that we need only substitute other names to his personages, and we have real characters and living manners. We see then that the writers of these Moralities were upon the very threshold of real Tragedy and Comedy; and therefore we are not to wonder that Tragedies and Comedies in form soon after took place, especially as the revival of learning about this time brought them acquainted with the Roman and Grecian models. II. At what period of time the Mysteries and Moralities had their rise, it is difficult to discover. Holy plays representing the miracles and sufferings of the saints appear to have been no novelty in the reign of Henry II. and a lighter sort of interludes were not then unknown  9 . In Chaucer's Time "Plays of Miracles" in lent were the common resort of idle gossips  10 . Towards the latter end of Henry the VIIth's reign Moralities were so common, that John Rastel, brother-in-law to Sir Thomas More, conceived a design of making them the vehicle of science and natural philosophy. With this view he published 'C. A new interlude and a mery of the nature of the iiii elements declarynge many proper points of phylosophy naturall, and of dyvers straunge landys, 11 &c. It is observable that the poet speaks of the discovery of America as then recent; \--- "Within this xx yere Westwarde be founde new landes That we never harde tell of before this," &c. The West Indies were discovered by Columbus in 1492, which fixes the writing of this play to about 1510. The play of Hick-Scorner was probably somewhat more ancient, as he still more imperfectly alludes to the American discoveries, under the name of "the Newe founde Ilonde," sign. A. vij. It appears from the play of The Four Elements, that Interludes were then very common: The profession of Player was no less common; for in an old satire intitled Cock Lorelles Bote 12 the author enumerates all the most common trades or callings, as "Carpenters, Coopers, Joyners,  &c. and among others, Players , tho' it must be acknowledged he has placed them in no very reputable company. " Players , purse-cutters, money-batterers, Golde-washers, tomblers, jogelers, Pardoners, &c." Sign. B. vj. It is observable that in the old Moralities of Hick Scorner, Every-man, &c. there is no kind of stage direction for the exits and entrances of the personages, no division of acts and scenes. But in the moral interlude of , written under Edw. VI. the exits and entrances begin to be noted in the margin  14 : at length in Q. Elizabeth's reign Moralities appeared formally divided into acts and scenes, with a regular prologue,  &c. One of these is reprinted by Dodsley. In the time of Hen. VIII. one or two dramatic pieces had been published under the classical names of Comedy and Tragedy  15 , but they appear not to have been intended for popular use: it was not till the religious ferments had subsided that the public had leisure to attend to dramatic poetry. In the reign of Eliz. Tragedies and Comedies began to appear in form, and could the poets have persevered, the first models were good. and Gascoigne, in 1566, exhibited Iocasta, a translation from Euripides, as also The Supposes, a regular comedy, from Ariosto: near thirty years before any of Shakespeare's were printed. The people however still retained a relish for their old Mysteries and Moralities  17 , and the popular dramatic poets seem to have made them their models. The graver sort of Moralities appear to have given birth to our modern Tragedy ; as our Comedy evidently took its rise from the lighter interludes of that kind. And as most of these pieces contain an absurd mixture of religion and buffoonery, an eminent critic  18 has well deduced from thence the origin of our unnatural and Comedies, Moralities still kept their ground: one of them intitled The New Custom 19 was printed so late as 1573: at length they assumed the name of Masques 20 , and with some classical improvements, became in the two following reigns the favourite entertainments of the court. As for the old Mysteries, which ceased to be acted after the Reformation, they seem to have given rise to a third species of stage exhibition, which, though now confounded with Tragedy or Comedy, were by our first dramatic writers considered as quite distinct from them both: these were Historical Plays, or Mysteries in representing a series of historical events simply in the order of time in which they happened, without any regard to the three great unities. These pieces seem to differ from Tragedy, just as much as Historical poems do from Epic: as the Pharsalia does from the  Æneid. What might contribute to make dramatic poetry take this turn was this; soon after the Mysteries ceased to be exhibited, there was published a large collection of poetical narratives, called The Mirrour for Magistrates 21 wherein a great number of the most eminent characters in English history are drawn relating their own misfortunes. This book was popular and of a dramatic cast, and therefore, as an elegant writer  22 has well observed, might have its influence in producing Historic Plays. These narratives probably furnished the subjects, and the ancient Mysteries suggested the plan. That our old writers considered Historical Plays as somewhat distinct from Tragedy and Comedy, appears from numberless passages of their works. "Of late days, says Stow, instead of those stage-playes  23 have been used Comedies, Tragedies, Enterludes, and Histories both true and fained." Survey of London.  24 .---Beaumont and Fletcher, in the prologue to The Captain, say, "This is nor Comedy, nor Tragedy, Nor History ."--- Polonius in Hamlet commends the actors, as the best in the world "either for Tragedie, Comedie, Historie , Pastorall,"  &c. And Shakespeare's friends, Heminge and Condell, in the first folio edit. of his plays, in 1623, have not only intitled their book "Mr. William Shakespeare's Comedies, them under those three several heads: placing in the class of Histories , "K. John, Richard II. Henry IV. 2 pts. Henry V. Henry VI. 3 pts. Richard III. and Henry VIII." This distinction deserves the attention of the critics: for if it be the first canon of sound criticism to examine any work by those rules the author prescribed for his observance, then we ought not to try Shakespeare's itself be vicious or not, is another inquiry: but certainly we ought to examine a work only by those principles according to which it was composed. This would save a deal of impertinent criticism. III. We have now brought the inquiry as low as was intended, but cannot quit it, without entering into a short description of what one may call the oeconomy of the ancient English stage. Such was the fondness of our forefathers for dramatic entertainments, that not fewer than Nineteen Playhouses had been opened before the year 1633, when Prynne published his Histriomastix  25 . From this writer it should seem that "tobacco, wine, and beer 26 " were in those days the usual accommodations in the theatre as now at Sadlers Wells. With regard to the players themselves, the several companies were retainers, or menial servants to particular noblemen, 27 who protected them in the exercise of their profession: and many of them were occasionally strollers, that travelled from one gentleman's house to another. Yet so much were they encouraged, that, notwithstanding their multitude, some of them acquired large fortunes. Edward Allen, master of the playhouse called the Globe, who founded Dulwich college, is a known instance. And an old writer speaks of the very inferior actors, whom he calls the Hirelings, as living in a degree of splendor, which was thought enormous in that frugal age  28 . At the same time the ancient prices of admission were often very low. Some houses had penny-benches.  29 The "two-penny gallery" is mentioned in the prologue to Beaumont and Fletcher's Woman-Hater. And seats of three-pence and a groat seem to be intended in the passage of Prynne above referred to. Yet different houses varied in their prices: That playhouse called the Hope had five several priced seats from six-pence to half-a-crown  30 . But the general price of what is now called the Pit , seems to have been a shilling  31 . The day originally set apart for theatrical exhibition appears to have been Sunday; probably because the first dramatic pieces were of a religious cast. During a great part of Queen Elizabeth's reign the playhouses were only licensed to be opened on that day:  32 But before the end of her reign, or soon after, this abuse was probably removed. The usual time of acting was early in the afternoon  33 , plays being generally performed by day-light  34 . All female parts were performed by men, no English actress being ever seen on the public stage  35 before the civil wars. And as for the playhouse furniture and ornaments, tho' some houses were probably more decorated than others, yet in general "they had no other scenes nor decorations of the stage, but only old tapestry, and the stage strewed with rushes, with habits accordingly  36 :" as we are assured in a short discourse on the English stage, subjoined to Flecknoe's Love's Kingdom , 1674. 12mo. England, but they appear to have been exhibited here very soon after the conquest. Mat. Paris tells us, that Geoffery afterwards Abbot of St. Albans, a Norman, who had been sent for over by Abbot Richard to take upon him the direction of the school of that monastery, coming too late, went to Dunstable, and taught in the abby there; where he caused to be acted (probably by his scholars) a  MIRACLE-PLAY of St . Catharine , composed by himself.  37 This was long before the year 1119, and probably within the 11th century. The above play of St . Catharine was, for aught that appears, the first spectacle of this sort that was exhibited in these kingdoms: And an eminent French Writer thinks it was even the first attempt towards the revival of Dramatic Entertainments in all Europe; being long before the Representations of Mysteries in France; for these did not begin till the year 1398  38 . Again, the learned and ingenious historian of the council of Constance  39 ascribes to the English the introduction of Plays into Germany. He tells us that the Emperor having been absent from the council for some time, was at his return received with great rejoicings, and that the English fathers in particular did upon that occasion, cause a sacred comedy to be acted before him on Sunday 31. Jan. 1417; the subjects of which were: The nativity of our Saviour; the arrival of the eastern magi ; and the massacre by Herod . Thence it appears, says this writer, that the Germans are obliged to the English for the invention of this sort of spectacles, unknown to them before that period. But the fondness of our ancestors for this species of dramatic exhibition and some other curious particulars relating to the early history of the English stage, will appear from a large MS. containing the Establishment of the Houshold of Henry Percy 5th Earl of Northumberland  40 , Anno Dom. 1512. In the following extracts from this book it will be seen that the exhibiting of the old mysteries or scripture plays entered into the stated regulations of domestic oeconomy in the houses of our ancient nobility, and that it was as much the business of the Chaplain in those days to compose Plays for the family, as it is now for him to make Sermons. I shall give the extracts in the same order in which they occur in different parts of the book. viz. " Item to be payd ... for Rewards of Players for Playes playd in Christynmas by stranegers in my house after xx.  41 d. every Play by estimacion: sum xxxiij. s. iiij. d.  42 "My Lordes Chapleyns in householde vj. viz. the Almonar, and if he be a MAKER OF INTERLUDYS, than he to have a servaunt to the intent for writtynge of the parts: and ells to have none. The Maister of gramer, &c. " Item , my lorde usith and accustomith to gyf yerely when his lordship is at home to every Erles  PLAYERS that comes to his lordship betwixt cristynmas and candilmas if he be his speciall lorde and frende and kinsman---xx s. " Item , my lorde usith and accustomyth to gyf yerly when his lordship is at home to every Lordis Players , that comyth to his lordship betwixt cristynmas and candilmas,---x. s. " Item , My lord useth and accustomyth to gyfe yerely if is lordship kepe a chapell and be at home, them of his lordschips chapell, if they doo play the Play of the  NATIVITE uppon cristynmas day in the mornynge in my lords chapell before his lordship---xx. s. " Item , ... to them of his lordships chappell and other his lordshipis servaunts that doith play the Play before his lordship uppon  SHROF-TEWSDAY at night yerely in reward---x s. " Item , ... to them ... that playth the Play of  RESURRECTION upon estur day in the mornynge in my lordis 'chapell' befor his lordshipe---xx. s. " Item , My lorde useth and accustomyth yerly to gif hym which is ordeyned to be the  MAISTER OP THE REVELLS yerly in my lordis hous in cristinmas for the overseynge and orderinge of his lordships Playes, Interludes and Dresinge that is plaid befor his lordship in his hous in the xij dayes of Cristinmas and they to have a rewarde for that caus yerly ---xx. s. " Item . My lorde useth and accustomyth to gyf every of the Four Persons that his lordship admyted as his  PLAYERS to come to his lordschip yerly at Crystynmas and at all other such tymes as his lordship shall comande them for playing of Playes and Interludes befor his lordship in his lordshipis hous for every of their fees for an hole yere. ..." I shall conclude this subject with several little miscellaneous remarks, which I shall throw together in the form of a Note . 43 
