 were peculiar favourites of the Nine, and sometimes honoured with the company of learned, and polite patrons. Thyrsis, in the second scene of the first act, prevails with Amyntas to relate to him the story of his love by these arguments; \------Et e ben degna La fedele amicitia, et il commune Studio de le Muse, ch' a me scuopra Cio ch' a gli altri si cela------ "My faithful friendship well deserves the trust; and our converse with the Muses, which reveals objects to me that are concealed from vulgar minds." Thyrsis went to the court of Ferrara; he met with a kind reception there; and the society of that court had the following effect upon him: Sentii me far di mi stesso maggiore; Pien di nova vertu; pieno di nova Deitade: e cantai guerre, et heroi, Sdegnando pastoral ruvido carme. E se ben poi (come altrui piacque) feci Ritorno a queste selve, io pur ritenni Parte di quello spirto; ne gia suona La mia sampogna humil, come soleva; Ma di voce piu altera, e Piu sonora, Emula de le trombe, empie le selve. Act i. Scene 2. "On a sudden I grew greater than myself: I was sraught with new virtue and new inspiration. I sung of war, and heroes; and disdained the simple pastoral strain. And after my destiny had brought me back to these woods, I still retained a part of that spirit: nor has my pipe the humble sound it once had; but with a losty and sonorous tone, it emulates the trumpet, and makes the forest ring." Elpinus too, a principal character in this piece, had received very distinguished honours at court. He is represented as a great poet, and a great philosopher; the favourite of Apollo, and the counsellor of the afflicted. When Thyrsis is afraid that his friend Amyntas hath killed himself, he says; \------Io voglio irmene a l'antro Del faggio Elpino; ivi s'e vivo, forse Sara ridotto, ove sovente suole Raddolcir gli amarissimi martiri Al dolce suon de la sampogna chiara, Ch'ad udir trahe da gli alti monti i sassi; E correr fa di puro latti i fiumi; E stillar mele da le dure scorze. Act iii. Scene 1. "I will go to the cave of the sage Elpinus: there probably he will be, if he is yet alive: there his amorous pain hath often been soothed by the musick of the harmonious poet; whose pathetick flute draws the rocks from the mountains; makes the streams flow with milk, and honey drop from the oak." It is the province of the poet to transport us into an agreeable, and blooming region of his own creating: this is his birth-right; the appellation of poet, with which he is dignified, implies the privilege. If we view his most striking characters in all their parts, we shall find that there is not an original in nature which exactly corresponds with them. Without this liberty, which hath been allowed him by long prescription, the art of poetry would be annihilated. The poetical eloquence of a rough old Trojan, or Grecian warriour, would be no longer endured: a simple, untutored shepherd would not be suffered to observe, or to reflect: he must not deliver his sentiments in elegant, though simple verse; and his good rhyme kept up for many lines together, would be still more intolerable. In short, without improving, and embellishing the life of the swain by fiction, a pastoral could never have been produced. I have endeavoured in this translation, to express the sentiments of Tasso as he would have done had he been an Englishman, without a servile regard to his words: nay, in some places, I have added sentiments, and lines of my own; a liberty, which, I think, may be allowed in translating works of imagination, and amusement, though it is unpardonable in transfusing history and severer truth from one language into another. I have not, however, suppressed any part of the original; and where I have made additions to it, I thought the translation would have been flat without them. The Italian language is so liquid, and flowing, so poetical an organ of sentiment, that an Italian line, which is good poetry, will lose a great part of it's beauty, when translated into a English verse, however easy and harmonious. In such a case, an English translator must have recourse, if he can, to that vigour of thought which is so peculiar to his nation. England hath produced the greatest poets in Europe, not because our language, though a very noble one, is better adapted to poetry than any other; but because we have had sublimer geniuses than any people in the world. I am far from arrogating any excellence to myself: indeed it was not necessary in translating Amyntas. I have only endeavoured, where it was requisite, to tread in the steps of my countrymen. Poetry, and it's diction should always be considered as coherent, and inseparable. Many minute criticks, and  3 Mr. Hume amongst the rest, have, with much gravity, and discussion, sound out, that the finest passages of the most celebrated poets, have nothing in them striking, when divested of their animated expression, and harmony of numbers. This is only discovering to us, that poetry, when turned into prose, ceases to be poetry, and that man consists of a body as well as a soul. We often hear pastorals despised by those, who seem to think themselves great judges of literary productions. If they despise them because few have succeeded in composing them, every species of writing is liable to the same objection. But if they relish not the true subject of the pastoral poet, the scenes which he should paint, and the sentiments with which he should actuate his characters, they bring a heavy accusation against themselves. People of very profligate lives, in their still hours, after their minds have been tormented with the anxiety of vice, and their bodies jaded with it's debauchery, will have recourse to a book which presents better images than those to which they are accustomed, as to a temporary asylum; and endeavour to cheat themselves into a belief, that they are yet somewhat virtuous, because they are affected with the charms of virtue. But they who take no pleasure in viewing the objects of innoxious life; the humble cottage, and the quiet shade; the simplicity of the swain's manners, his honest labour, and his artless love; and in whom the poet who holds forth these objects to their view, excites ridicule, instead of tender feelings, are irrecoverably poisoned by the contagion of society; they are lost to a sense of peace, innocence, and virtue. I must, in justice to my author, inform the reader, that the original never departs more from the usual simplicity of a pastoral, than I have done in the additions which I have made, and which I have already mentioned. I am warranted, however, by the model of the poem, and I had the entertainment of my reader in view. I am thus frank and explicit, because I would rather be accused of errour than disingenuity. In short, they who are curious to be acquainted with Tasso himself, will read the original; and they who are not, may, perhaps, be satisfied with my translation. If they are, my intention is fulfilled, and my hopes are gratified. I beg leave to lay my humble attempt before the tribunal of candour, and sentiment. My translation is an English one; and I am only ambitious to please Englishmen. I shall despise the impertinent censure of any pedantick Italian, any word-catcher, who lives on syllables, who, full of cavil and envy, but destitute of judgment, and taste, having first caught his mother-tongue like a parrot, hath, afterwards, learned all it's inflexions by poring over a grammar; and has, at length compleated his mechanism of language by the dictionary of Crusca. 
