 [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021fcov2.jpg) \- external link  - Front Cover. ] [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021spin2.jpg) \- external link  - Spine. ] [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021edgf2.jpg) \- external link  - Front Edge. ] [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021bcov2.jpg) \- external link  - Back Cover. ] [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021edgb2.jpg) \- external link  - Bottom Edge. ] [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-225.jpg) \- external link  - Blank Page. ] [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-226.jpg) \- external link  - Halftitle page. ] [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-227.jpg) \- external link  - Blank Page. ] [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-228.jpg) \- external link  - Title page. ] MODERN CHIVALRY: CONTAINING THE ADVENTURES OF A CAPTAIN, AND TEAGUE O'REGAN, HIS SERVANT. BY H. H. BRACKENRIDGE. QUID VETAT RIDENTEM DICERE VERUM......... HOR. PART II. VOLUME I .   PUBLISHED BY Jacob Johnson , AND FOR SALE AT HIS BOOKSTORES IN PHILADELPHIA AND IN RICHMOND, VIRCINIA. ALEXANDER & PHILLIPS, PRINTERS, CARLISLE . 1807. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-229.jpg) \- external link  - Copyright page. ] COPY RIGHT SECURED. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-230.jpg) \- external link  - Page 005. ] Hiatus valde deflendus, multa desiderantur. HERE is a great gap. Not a word said of the Captain, from the packing up of Teague, and sending him off to France, until after the termination of the French revolution, and the armistice or convention of Amiens. Though the fact is, that he had been, all this time, travelling, and Teague had rejoined him, in the capacity of a pediseque, or foot-boy, as before. As to Duncan, the Scotch waiter, he had, long since, left the service, and taken a job of weaving in the neighbourhood, and was doing well. The Captain had endeavoured to persuade him to take to preaching, as many do in this country who are less qualified, but he refused, alleging, that though it was good work that pleased the customer, yet he had some scruples of conscience in undertaking the charge, not having been regularly called by ordination to the office. Teague had been landed at Nantz, and being a real sans culotte, was liberated, and caressed by the multitude. With considerable eclat, he made his way to Paris. We hear of him at a very early period as made use of, by Anacharsis Cloots, the orator of the [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-231.jpg) \- external link  - Page 006. ] human race; this was in a procession, in which representatives of all nations, were introduced in their respectie garbs, addressing the convention. Teague was in the character of an Esquimaux Indian, and passed his aboriginal Irish, for the native dialect of that people. An Irish officer that was present discovered the imposition, but the guillotine forbad him to speak, and he was silent. This ultramarine person, (Teague) was a good deal distinguished during the reign of Robespierre, and was employed on many occasions, and discharged a variety of functions, so that though his morals were not much amended, nor his address much improved, yet he had contracted French phrases, and could interlard his dialect with a que voulez vous; and je demand pardon. At length he found himself in the conciergerie, a destination from which no talents, virtues, or even vices could exempt. And it was only on the fall of that monster of whom we have just made mention, that he was vomited with others from the caverns in which he had been secluded. How he ever got to America again, it is difficult to say. We shall leave that to those who may take from his own mouth the memoirs of his travels. It is sufficient for our purpose, that he did get back, and that he is once more in the train of the Captain. The fact is, that he had joined him in a most unexpected manner, in a short time after Duncan the Scotch servant had begged to be dismissed, to apply himself to a profession more congenial with his education. We shall go no farther back upon the steps of the Captain, with the bog-trotter at his heels, than where we find them within a mile, or less of the village, where his home was, and where he had resided some years, before he had set out on his peregrinations. Passing through a wood just as he approached the town, he saw at some distance before him the semblance of [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-232.jpg) \- external link  - Page 007. ] men suspended on the limbs of trees, or at least the exuvioe of men, coats, waist-coats, breeches, and hats. What can this be, said the Captain? Is it probable, that hearing of your return, Teague, the wags of the village have been making what are called paddies, and have set them up on these trees, knowing that this way we should come. By St. Patrick, said Teague, I will paddy dem wid dis shalelah. I will tache dem to make paddies, and hang dem up for sign posts in de wood here. Dis is not St. Patrick's day in de morning neider: bad luck to dem, it may be some poor fellow dat dey have hang'd up in reality, for shape staling as dey do in Ireland. I see nothing, said the Captain, but the emptyings of ward-robes, jibbeted through the grove; stretched on trees, or suspended from them, a phenomenon, which I am unable to comprehend, or explain; for I see no corn growing underneath, from which, a priapus, or scare-crow might affright the birds; nor can they be the vestments of people at work, near hand, or stripped to bathe, as I see no water pond, or river, but a dry grove. The fact is, these habiliments were of the people of the town, who had hung them up to the dew, in order to take off the musk of a pole-cat which had affected them from the perfusions of one of these animals. For, not long before this, a typographist, had set up a paper in the village, and in the capacity of editor had chosen to assume the symbol, or hieroglyphic of the Porcupine. A happy nature had fitted him for a satyrist, and felicity of education was not wanting to quality him for the office. He had not the pleasantry of Horace, nor the pungency of Juvenal, but an original stricture of his own that supplied the place of them. The truth is, he had been bred in the barracks, and had at his finger ends, the [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-233.jpg) \- external link  - Page 008. ] familiar phrases of the common soldiery, with that peculiar species of wit, which is common with that occupation of men, and in that grade. Doubtless we see something like it among the plebeians of all classes and denominations; The women that sell fish at a certain stand in London, have a species of it, known by the name of Billingsgate, either because there is a gate of that name near the place, or formerly was one. The miners and coal heavers have a good deal of it. The scavengers and chimney sweepers are adepts, though without the least scholastic education, or knowledge of letters. I have known even in our own country, where we are remote from the seats of the muses, a good deal of it possessed, by way travellers, or boat men on our rivers; a kind of unshackled dialect; fettered by no rule of delicacy, or feeling of humanity. I have been turning in my mind what word in our English language, best expresses it, and I have found it to be that which has been given it by Thomas Paine, black-guardism . The editor of the Porcupine had scored the village not a little. I do not say rubbed. For that is a translation of the phrase of Horace: urbem defricuit; and conveys the idea of tickling, or causing a sensation pleasant, yet hurting a little. That was not the case here. For what man without indignation can bear the touch of the slanderer, more especially if that slander is of a private, and domestic nature and alludes to what cannot be explained or defended. Not that it is true, but a man in the just pride of standing in society, would scorn to appeal to the public or bring it before a court! There was in the village a man of understanding, and sensibility who had been the subject of caricature and not chusing for reasons that weighed with himself, to take it in good part, thought of retaliation. But what could he do? The same language was unbecoming a gentleman. The like strictures of [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-234.jpg) \- external link  - Page 009. ] folbles or of faults on the part of an adversary, could only become the character of a subordinate. Nor was it so much his object to repress the licentiousness of this buffoon, as to correct the taste and judgment of the public who did not all at once distinguish the impropriety of countenancing such ribaldry. This they continued to do by receiving his papers. With a view to this having taken a pole-cat on the mountains, he had put it in a cage and hiring an office contiguous to that of the Porcupine, he kept it there, suffering the boys of the village to provoke it, and the dogs to bark at it through the bars. It was in vain to complain; the owner called himself Paul Polecat, and when Porcupine expostulated and justified his gall on the freedom of the press , Paul fortified himself on the liberty of the Express . But it was not Porcupine alone, nor his unoffending wife and family that had reason to complain of this nuisance. The children running home to their parents, and the dogs with them brought the perfume to the houses of the village. The wearing apparel of almost every one was affected with the musk; the women buried their dresses; the men in some instances did the like and in others, hung them up to the action of the air, and the dews of the adjoining wood. The vestiges of these were the phenomena, which the Captain saw, in his approach to the town. He had now got within sight of the main square, when a tumultuous assembly struck his eye; some with fists raised; others with sticks, and all in a menacing attitude. He could also hear tongues of people altercating with one another and using opprobrious epithets. The fact was, that the village had become divided. Those who had been the subjects of the obloquy of Porcupine, justified the emission of the cats, and were of opinion that the one had as good a right to be [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-235.jpg) \- external link  - Page 010. ] borne as the other. Council had been taken and learned opinions given. But this making the matter no better, the dissention had increased, and the people had come together in a rage. Teague at a distance seeing this, stopp'd short: said he, what means all this paple in de street? It is as bad as dat of St. Anthony in Paris, or de place de greve where dey have de gillotine. The devil burn me if I go farther, till your honour goes on and sees what is de matter. The Captain advancing to the populace was recognized by them, and his appearance contributed not a little to a longer suspension of hostilities. Countrymen and fellow-citizens, said he, is this the satisfaction that I have, in returning amongst you after an absence of several years, to see man armed against man, and war waged not only in the very bosom of the republic, but in the village which I have instructed by many precepts? What can be the madness that possesses you? are not the evils of life sufficient? but you must increase them by the positive acts of your own violence. You cannot wholly preserve yourselves at all times free from the maladies of the body, or the distresses of the mind. But it is in your power greatly to assuage these, by the virtues of temperance and moderation. What fury can prompt you, to this degree of apparent resentment, and approaching tumult. Is it local or general politics? Is it any disagreement with regard to your corporate interests, or is religion the cause? Has any flagrant instance of moral turpitude, or exceeding knavery in an individual, roused you to this excess of violence, and exclamation? Captain, said a middle aged man stepping forward, companion of his years, and who had long lived with him in the village; it is not only pleasing to see you return in apparent good health, but more especially, [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-236.jpg) \- external link  - Page 011. ] at this particular moment when your interference cannot but be of the greatest use, to the citizens; not only on account of that confidence which they have in your judgment and discretion, of which they have a lively recollection but as they must naturally think that your travelling must have given you knowledge, and brought you home full fraught with learning and information. Your humanity is also, well remembered by them, that man, woman or child was never injured by you, in life, estate, or reputation; that on the contrary, it was always your study to do good, and compose differences. Now a misfortune has happened to the village; If I can call it a misfortune, which was at first thought a good; a printer came to this place and set up a paper, or gazette, by taking subscriptions from those that were willing to give them. His device was the Porcupine; scarcely a month had gone over his head before he began to lampoon; searching into the secrets of families, and publishing matters of individuals, with which, whether true or false, the public had nothing to do; and this in so low and disorderly a manner, that the more intelligent have disapproved of it; but the bulk read, and it seems to increase rather than curtail his subscribers. A young man on the other hand that has had an academic education, meaning to burlesque his manner of writing, having gone to the mountain with a dog, or a trap, and having taken a pole-cat, he puts the beast in a cage; hires that frame building that you see, one story high, and but a room on a floor, and calls it his office. Here he places the pole-cat with a man to attend it. What a running of boys; what a barking of dogs we have had! and when the children run home, and the dogs after them; what a putting of the hand upon the nose, by the servant girls and the mistresses, at the smell that accompanies. The young man justifies himself under [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-237.jpg) \- external link  - Page 012. ] the pretence that it is but retaliation of the odour that proceeds from the press of Porcupine; for, as this affects the organ of smelling, that disgusts the judgment of the mind. The people are divided, as will always be the case, if for no other cause, yet for the sake of division; because the pride of one man forbids him to think just as another does. The adversaries of the oppossum, or what else it is, insist that it shall be put down as a nuisance, and have met with clubs, staves and knives, to carry the threat into execution. The advocates of the animal on the other hand have convened to oppose them. But said the Captain, did I not leave you a regular corporation? Have you not power to make bye laws? and is not this done upon notice given by the chief or assistant burgesses? why such hurry scurry as this? moreover it is a weighty question that agitates the public mind; a question of right: and where the rights of the citizen come in question, I hold it a most delicate thing to decide; in a free government, more especially, where the essence of liberty is the preservation of right; and there is the right of conscience, the right of property, and the right of reputation. This is a right of property; for if this animal which is ferae naturae, has been reclaimed by the owner, he has a right to put it to such use as suits his trade, or accords with his whim, provided that it does not affect the rights of others. The limit, boundary, or demarcation of this use, is a question of wise discussion and examination; and not in a tumultuous assembly, heated with wine, but with the ardency of their own spirits. I advise therefore, and so far as my weak judgment deserves to be regarded would recommend, that each man lay down his shalelah, baton, or walking-stick, and retire for the evening; and convene to-morrow in a regular town meeting, where the adversaries and advocates on both sides [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-238.jpg) \- external link  - Page 013. ] may have an opportunity of being heard. To-morrow when you meet with the chief burgess in the chair, to keep order, and preserve decorum, assign the proper times of speaking, and call to order on a deviation from the subject, as is usual in deliberative assemblies, the business can be taken up, and conducted as is proper in town meetings. I am now just from my journey; somewhat fatigued; but more moved by the consideration that I am on horse-back, and it is not becoming that I take a part in your debates as if my horse were to speak also; for though it is true that some of you may speak with perhaps as little sense as he could, were he to open his mouth and attempt utterance; yet the decency of the thing forbids, and even the exercise of the right might be questioned; for the faculty might exist, yet he could not be considered as legitimately franchised to this privilege, at least not having a right to vote in town meetings. For though in the congress of the United States, the representatives of the territories, not yet organized into independent states, and made regular members of the Union, have a right to speak, but not to vote, this is not to be drawn into precedent in subordinate corporations; for that is a special provision of the constitution. And it is even indecorous for myself to sit here and speak, mounted, as occupying a more elevated station; and should I descend from my cavalry, my servant whom you see yonder, is kept at bay, by an apprehension of your swords, and refuses to come up so that I am without an attendant to hold the beast; all things considered therefore, I move, a chairman not yet being appointed, who might put the question, that you adjourn, or dissolve until to-morrow about this time, when the matter may be taken up as we now have it, and the affair canvassed as becomes members of the same community, and inhabitants of the same village. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-239.jpg) \- external link  - Page 014. ] It cannot be difficult to conceive that these words had a favourable effect upon the audience; as oils compose a storm. For as the waves of the ocean rise and fall suddenly, so the passions of men; and in no instance more than where they are just coming to blows; for, approaching anger disposes to peace, every one having felt half a blow already on his head; and the difficulty only is to get an excuse, for returning, or sheathing the weapon. They are much obliged to the man that councils concord; and advises the putting down the brickbat, or putting on the coat. Even in duelling it holds the same, and the principal is a friend to the second ever after, that manages the matter so wisely that no blood is shed  . It was moved and seconded that in the mean time the keeper, or as he called himself the editor of the pole-cat, should keep his charge within the claustrum, or bars of his cage, and covered with a matting, so that access might not be had to him, by man or beast, or egress on his part, of that offensive odour, which had been the cause of the disturbance. This, the partizans of the skunk, were willing to admit and sanction with their acquiescence, on condition, nevertheless, that the Porcupine in the mean time, should also restrain his quills; in other words, suspend the effusions of his press, and cease to distribute papers for a day or two during the pendency of the debate. This was thought reasonable, and carried by the multitude holding up their hands. CONTAINING PROCEEDINGS OF THE TOWN MEETING. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-240.jpg) \- external link  - Page 015. ] THE day following, a meeting being held, and the chief burgess in the chair, an advocate of Porcupine took the ground and spoke. Gentlemen, said he, the press is the palladium of liberty. "The image that fell down from Jupiter." The freedom of the press is essential to liberty. Shackle the press, and you restrain freedom. The constitutions of the states have provided that the press shall be free. If you muzzle this, you muzzle the mouth of man. It is not the freedom of the press, said one interrupting him, it is the abuse of it that is in question. The chief burgess called to order, and the speaker went on. That is the point said he, to which I meant to come. What shall be said to be the abuse of the press? In order to determine this, we must consider its use. This is, 1\. The amusement of the editor. For as some men amuse themselves, shooting, fishing, or chasing wild beasts, so men of literary taste, find their recreation in penning paragraphs for a paper, sometimes containing information, or observations on the state of [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-241.jpg) \- external link  - Page 016. ] empires and the characters of men; at other times by descending, or not rising at all, but confining themselves to the subordinate affairs of indiduals, and private persons. 2\. The profit of the editor: and this depends on the number of subscribers. It is not every one that has a taste for refined writing. Guts and garbage delight bears; and swine swill the trough in preference to the running stream. Scurrility is the gout of many. Nay, it is the more prevailing taste; "The world is naturally averse To all the truth it sees or hears; But swallows nonsense and a lie, With greediness and gluttony." In Britain, or some other countries, delicacy may succeed. But the coarse stomachs of the Americans crave indecency, at least a portion of it. Rough like their own woods, and wild beasts, they digest scurrility. Well said, Porcupine! said a pole-cat man, taking the ground in his turn: But this furnishes a ground to justify the introduction of the pole-cat. You talk of the freedom of the press. Here is the freedom of the express. Nay the word expression which is common to both institutions, the artificial one of the types, and the natural one of the cat, shews the original to be similar, and the comparison to run on all-fours . If the ink cast into black letter, and carrying with it pain and pungency from the ideas communicated, is tolerated; much more the volatile alkali of the animal that is now set up, is to be borne, as not more offensive to body or mind. Shall the bark of trees made into powder, and this powder into a liquid, impregnated with thought, and put upon paper, and carried to the press, be accounted harmless, notwithstanding the violence of the decoction, yet the wild cats that [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-242.jpg) \- external link  - Page 017. ] inhabit these trees, and are denizens of the forest, be prohibited because of a bag under their tails which contains an unsavoury distillation, and may be occasionally spurted upon men? A lawyer spoke on the side of Porcupine. The principles of the common law embrace this case. It is unlawful to exercise trades in towns that occasion noisome smells; they are abateable as nuisances. Grant it, said a juris-consult, on the pole-cat side; but when it is in retaliation, or in self-defence against an editor whose defamation is more offensive to the feelings of the mind, than the hogo of a civet to the sense of smelling; or when it is used in burlesque, and by way of analogy and symbol to explain the impropriety of encouraging personal abuse, by taking papers, it may correct by leading to reflection. The mind may be insensible to abstract lessons, but a paradigm, or object set before it may affect. As to this man exercising his trade by the smell of a cat, it is an occupation which can be carried on to advantage only in a town; for it is in towns chiefly that editors, assemble; and it is by setting up under our noses, and affecting the readers, that the impression is made. For if the public will receive libels into their houses for the use of themselves and families, let them take a little of this hartshorn with it and if they will have the one, bear the other. A ground of the common law is general reason adapted to particular cases. I grant that it even goes so far as to make the keeping hogs in a pen near my window, in towns, a nuisance; but this is a town incorporated, and can by a bye law regulate a new trade. I hold it to be a matter of vote whether this quadruped shall be tolerated or excluded. The advocate for the press rejoined. The common law, said he, protects the press. It is the right of the tongue transferred to the hand: it ought to be as free as the air that we breathe: The privilege, as [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-243.jpg) \- external link  - Page 018. ] unfettered as the organs of articulation. But what is there in the common law to protect from the aspersion of this animal? The pole-cat man replied. It is on principle and by analogy, said he, that it is protected. Does not the law of water courses apply to this. If a man divert a stream from my meadow, or obstruct one running through it, so as to dam it up, and drown the grass, have not I a remedy? shall this man at much expence and charge bring a beast from the mountains, tame it, or reduce it under his dominion, and apply it to a purpose in civilized and domestic life, and shall we say that the common law does not protect him in the enjoyment of its musk? The advocate on the side of Porcupine rejoined. So use your own said he, that you trespass not upon another man's. If you keep your smell, and hogs at home to your own nose, there is no objection. But in the nature of the thing it cannot be; for the air is the natural conductor; and therefore it cannot but exist a nuisance. Surrejoinder; but after all, is it more a nuisance than the press, which it has in view to correct? At this instant a commotion was perceivable amongst the multitude: not on account of what was said, or meaning any disturbance like debate; but the rumour was that a fresh cat had been brought from the hills above the town, and was on its way to the college-man who had offered a reward for an additional puss to increase his stock; and as it was conjectured, meant to play it off under the pretext that the prohibition contained in the armistice extended only to the individual beast that he had before in his possession. The Captain, at this, rising, said; this is not fair. It is within the reason, if not the express words of the convention, that all annoyances by steam, vapour or [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-244.jpg) \- external link  - Page 019. ] effluvia proceeding from a pole-cat shall be suspended during the pendency of this question; and it is an evasion to substitute another badger, and by that means attempt to elude the stipulation. The Pole-cat man got up to explain. It is far from me, said he, to elude or evade the performance of the stipulation. The fact, is, that hearing, a day or two ago, that Porcupine, was about to enlarge his sheet, and for that purpose had employed a journeyman, more, I thought it not amiss to extend the scale of my vapour and employ two conduits instead of one. For that purpose had sent to the woods, for another cat, which is now on the way, but in a leathern bag by my directions, and not to have regress, or egress, until this assembly shall dissolve, nor for a reasonable time after, that eundo, and redeundo, or going as well as coming, you may be safe, let what will be the issue of the controversy; whether I am to break up stock, or be suffered to go on. This explanation gave satisfaction, and composed the assembly. Another speaker had now occupied the ground. I cannot say the floor, for there was no floor. I am, said he, for supporting the press. The objection is, that it is a blackguard press. But while there are blackguards to write, must they not have a press? Is it only men of polished education that have a right to express their sentiments? Let them write in magazines, or have gazettes of their own, but not restrict the right that people of a more uncultivated understanding have to amuse themselves and others with their lucubrations. You call us the Swinish Multitude, and yet refuse us the food that is natural to us. Are there not amongst us those that have no relish for disquisitions on the balance of power or form of governments, agricultural essays, or questions of finance; but can relish a laugh raised at the expense of the [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-245.jpg) \- external link  - Page 020. ] master of a family; or a public character in high station; if for no other reason, but because it gratifies the self-love of those who cannot attain the same eminence? Take away from us this, and what have we more? What is the press to us, but as it amuses? I think, said another rising, that the gentleman means to be ironical. But let us take the matter seriously. I am on the same side with him, but not for the same reasons. I take it, that scurrility may be useful to those that hear it, and are the subjects of it. It may bring to a man's knowledge and serve to correct foibles that he would not otherwise have been conscious of, or amended. Men will bear from the buffoon or the jester, things they would not take from a friend, and scarcely from a confessor. It was on this principle that in the middle ages of Europe, a profession of men was indulged, in the houses of the great, called the Joculators. So late as the time of James I. we had one of these of the name of Archy. The Duke of Buckingham having taken offence at something that he said, had him whipped. It was thought beneath a man of honour to have taken notice of it; and inflicted punishment. I consider the bulk of our editors as succeeding to the joculators of the early periods; and as the knights of character and dignity of those times were not bound to notice the follies, however gross of jesters; so now a gentleman is not bound to notice the defamation of gazettes; nay, as in the former instance, it was deemed uncourteous, and unbecoming to resent what the fool said, so now what a printer chuses to publish. Selden in his table talk remarks, "That a gallant man, is above ill words. We have an example of this in the old Lord of Salsbury, who was a great wise man. Stone had called some Lord about the Court fool. The Lord complains, and has Stone whipped. Stone cries, I might have called my Lord of Salsbury often enough, fool [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-246.jpg) \- external link  - Page 021. ] before he would have had me whipped." As in the case of the Merry Andrew, even when there was no wit, it was taken for wit; so now, when an editor means to divert, however dull his abuse, it ought to be the mode to laugh, to keep those who know no better in countenance. The captain rising and putting himself in the attitude of speaking, seemed to claim the attention of the audience. I would wish to know, said he, how the ancients managed these matters in the republics of Greece and Rome especially. For since I have been abroad, and heard public speeches, I find that it is no unusual thing to draw illustrations from the sayings and doings of antiquity. In deliberate assemblies talking of governments, they tell you of the Amphytrionic Council; the Achean league, the Ionian confederacy. What was the freedom of the press at Athens or at Rome? The fact is, said an academician, there was no press at these places, or in these times. The invention of printing is of later date. But they had what they called the style, and they impressed their thoughts upon wax. They made use of ink in copying upon vellum and parchment. But notwithstanding the want of a press, they were not without satyric salt in their writings. Nor are we to suppose that they were altogether free from what we denominate scurrility. They could call a spade a spade. Aristophanes was a blackguard. His Comedy of the Clouds is a sufficient specimen. Lucilius, amongst the Romans was a rough man. Cum lutulentus flueret, &c. Do we suppose that nature was not then the same as it is now? On board the Roman gallies was there no low humour? In the Roman camps none? In the Forum no occasional ribaldry? Would not this naturally get up into higher walks? Would it not creep into corporations? sometimes in verse; sometimes in prose. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-247.jpg) \- external link  - Page 022. ] The poet speaks of the fesscenine verses. Amongst the Romans the Saturnalia, or days of Saturn became a festival, in which it was allowable to exercise their faculties in all intemperance of language. This is all wide of the question, said an unlearned man, holding his hand upon his nose; it is shall we tolerate the pole-cat in this village?---For, maugre all the pains that may have been taken to restrain the pett, and confine it by a matting. I feel a portion of the fetor this very moment, come across my nose, by a puff of wind from that quarter, where it is. I move that the question be taken, whether, whatever becomes of the press, the nuisance of this beast, be suffered in the vicinity. For what can a newspaper do, compared with this? It is sent us and we read the publication. But this is involuntary, on our part, and there is no saving ourselves from the exhalation. I move the previous question said a friend to the baboon; I move that the press be put down. There is hardship both ways, said an elderly inhabitant. In a community different interests will exist. Family interests; family attachments; party conceptions; and party interests. To have a printer all on one side, is an inequality. What if we prevail upon the owner, or as he would call himself the publisher of the pole-cat, to give up or sell out his establishment, dismiss the wild beast, or return it to the mountains, and institute in its place, a counter press of types and black-ball that may be a match for Porcupine. The Captain, rising hastily; a thing unusual with him; for he was naturally grave and sedate; but suddenly feeling the impulse of the congruity, he started from his seat, and seconded the proposition of another press; for said he, the very kind of editor qualified for such a press, is at hand; a waiter of mine. A bog-trotter, taken, not on the Balagate, but, on the Irish mountains: an aboriginal of the island; not your [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-248.jpg) \- external link  - Page 023. ] Scotch-Irish, so called, a colony planted in Ulster, by king James the first of England, when he subdued the natives; but a real Paddy, with the brogue on his tongue, and none on his feet; brought up to sheep-stealing from his youth; for his ancestors inhabiting the hills, were a kind of free-booters, time immemorial, coming down to the low grounds, and plundering the more industrious inhabitants. Captured by traps set upon the hills, or surrounded in the bogs, attempting his escape, he had been tamed and employed, many years, digging turf, before he came to my hands. I bought him from an Irish vessel, just as a curiosity, not that I expected much service from him; but to see what could be made of a rude man by care and patience. The rogue has a low humour, and a sharp tongue; unbounded impudence. And what may be a restraint upon the licentiousness of his press, should he set up one, he is a most abominable coward; the idea of cudgeling will keep him in bounds; should he over-match Porcupine, and turn upon his employers. He has all the low phrases, cant expressions, illiberal reflections, that could be collected from the company he has kept since he has had the care of my horse, and run after my heels in town and country for several years past. What is more, he has been in France, and has a spice of the language, and a tang of Jacobinism in his principles, and conversation, that will match the contrary learning carried to an exorbitant excess in Porcupine. I do not know that you can do better than contribute to a paper of his setting up. He may call it the Mully-Grub, or give it some such title as will bespeak the nature, of the matter it will usually contain. The academician at this came forward. I am far, said he, from a disposition to spoil sport; but when the useful is mixed with the jest, I count every point gained. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-249.jpg) \- external link  - Page 024. ] Omne tulit punctum--- I never had intended more, said the pole-cat man, than to reach the sensations of the multitude, and bring them to their senses. It is only by an appeal to the sense of feeling that the mind sometimes can be awakened. The public have now some idea that the licentiousness of the press, is not more a nuisance in the moral, than offensive smells are in the physical world. I will agree that the cut be removed, and as a substitute, shall subscribe to the Mully-Grub. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-250.jpg) \- external link  - Page 025. ] THE day after the town meeting, the Captain began to reflect, that he could not avoid being implicated in the character of the paper about to be established. O'Regan was known to be his servant; at least to be under his influence, and he would be considered the real editor; Teague the ostensible, and though the fact was known at home, that he had nothing to do with it, yet abroad, it would bear a different construction, and refutation would be difficult. Having supported the character of a gentleman, and being still willing to support that character, how could he endure to have the volumes of scurrility, that would appear, imputed to him; or supposed to be admitted with his approbation. Uneasy with this upon his mind, he could see no way to get out of the labyrinth in which he had involved himself, by inadvertently proposing Teague. He thought it however his duty, to disclose to the bog-trotter, the office to which he was destined. Maintaining good faith, he was unwilling to make use of his influence to dissuade from the undertaking; or to deter by representing the danger that existed, and the consequences that might ensue. This he could easily have done, by suggesting the guillotine, or even a cudgeling, the more [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-251.jpg) \- external link  - Page 026. ] common mode of punishment, in this republic. But good faith forbade. But what was the amazement of every one, when news was brought, that Porcupine, had decamped in the mean time. Whether it was that the talents of Teague had been magnified; and he did not choose to engage in competition with one so much his superior, lest he should lose by comparison, the reputation he had acquired; or what is more likely, the constables were after him for debt, his press and types having been seized the day before, and sold for rent, and new demands, of a smaller nature coming against him, fines and penalties also hanging over him for libels; and damages recoverable in actions of defamation; but so it was, that he had disappeared. The Captain was relieved from the embarrassment which he had endeavoured to conceal, because he now saw a way open to set aside the idea of a press, which he had reason to apprehend his bog-trotter would not be competent to conduct with reputation. Townsmen, and fellow-citizens, said he, seizing an opportunity to speak, the reason has ceased upon which we had proposed to act: the setting up the bog-trotter in the capacity of an editor as a match for Porcupine, for he has disappeared; and what need we buff at the bear when there is no bear to buff at. Unless indeed we could set him up, expecting from him a chaste and pure paper containing solid information, and strictures useful to the republic. But that from his education and manners, we have no reason to expect. It is true, if he had sense to collect the ideas, and give them expression, he has had opportunities to observe what if known and digested, might essentially serve to preserve from extremes in a free government. He has [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-252.jpg) \- external link  - Page 027. ] seen the folly of the people of France, if, those occasionally thrown into the representative assemblies, could be called the people. He has seen the folly of these in reducing all things to the first elements instead of accommodating to existing establishments; of deracinating from the foundation church and state, and bandying the term liberty until ignorance and usurpation terminated in despotism. For though at the commencement of a revolution, active and uninformed spirits, are useful, or perhaps absolutely necessary, like the subterranean fire throwing up continents; yet as in this case, the fostering dews and the breath of the atmosphere, are necessary to give soil and impregnate with vegetation; so after the stirrings of mens minds, with a political convulsion, deliberate reason, and prudent temperament are necessary, to preserve what is gained, and turn it to advantage. But this sans culotte, for so he was called in France; and well he might; for he was without femorals when he went away, and when he came back; this sans culotte is not a Mirabeau. He has kept no journal: he has made no observations except of mens heads chopped off by the guillotine. He has brought back little with him, but ce que dit; que ce vous la; donnez moi, and such like. I think we are well off with him and let him go to his vocation. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-253.jpg) \- external link  - Page 028. ] Scotch-Irish, so called, a colony planted in Ulster, by king James the first of England, when he subdued the natives; but a real Paddy, with the brogue on his tongue, and none on his feet; brought up to sheep-stealing from his youth; for his ancestors inhabiting the hills, were a kind of free-booters, time immemorial, coming down to the low grounds, and plundering the more industrious inhabitants. Captured by traps set upon the hills, or surrounded in the bogs, attempting his escape, he had been tamed and employed, many years, digging turf, before he came to my hands. I bought him from an Irish vessel, just as a curiosity, not that I expected much service from him; but to see what could be made of a rude man by care and patience. The rogue has a low humour, and a sharp tongue; unbounded impudence. And what may be a restraint upon the licentiousness of his press, should he set up one, he is a most abominable coward; the idea of cudgeling will keep him in bounds; should he over-match Porcupine, and turn upon his employers. He has all the low phrases, cant expressions, illiberal reflections, that could be collected from the company he has kept since he has had the care of my horse, and run after my heels in town and country for several years past. What is more, he has been in France, and has a spice of the language, and a tang of Jacobinism in his principles, and conversation, that will match the contrary learning carried to an exorbitant excess in Porcupine. I do not know that you can do better than contribute to a paper of his setting up. He may call it the Mully-Grub, or give it some such title as will bespeak the nature, of the matter it will usually contain. The academician at this came forward. I am far, said he, from a disposition to spoil sport; but when the useful is mixed with the jest, I count every point gained. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-254.jpg) \- external link  - Page 029. ] less offending the self-love of men than what has the appearance of immediate and direct instruction. Nor, will the publication of the foregoing hints on the illiberality of the press  , be thought, even now altogether useless; for though since the death, or departure, of the two monsters just named, there has been an ebb of this flood of scurrility, yet dropping the figure, the American press, has not been wholly free from the stains of the like paragraphs. The application therefore may not be wholly without an object, and, in the painting there may be seen some existing resemblances. For though, as the almanac-makers, say "it is calculated for a particular meridian, yet it may without sensible variation, serve other latitudes." No man can have a higher opinion of the dignity of station occupied by the editor of a paper under a free government, than I have. I think it one of the most honourable, as well as the most useful in society. I am unwilling therefore that it be degraded, and I am happy to observe that the example of the two monsters mentioned, has had the effect to disgust the public. I take the pulpit, the courts of judicature, and the press, to be the three great means of sustaining and enlightening a republic. The Scripture is replete with the finest sayings of morality. With a scholar of the Latin and the Greek school, it is delightful to quote in conversation, or writing, the classical sentences of antiquity, aptly applying them to the occasion: enriching the discourse with apposite thoughts; pleasing the hearer, or the reader, and doing credit to the person himself; drawing out from his treasury, things new and old. But these writings of an oriental cast, contain pithy observations upon life and manners, than which there can be nothing more delightful to remember and quote, and more profitable to carry into practice. Reading the Scriptures by young [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-255.jpg) \- external link  - Page 030. ] people; hearing them explained and introduced by quotation, sermon and lectures from the pulpit, raises the affections to virtue, and helps the judgment in the conduct of life. The courts of judicature, are a school of justice, and honour. A great ground of the law, are the principles of universal justice. The discussion of council; the verdicts of juries, the decision of the courts, have respect to the great principles of moral honesty. But the sphere is confined, compared with that of the press, which has an extensive range; and for this reason ought to preserve the greater delicacy in language and sentiment. Even the war of the sword has its laws.---It is not allowable to poison springs, or the means of life. In a paper war nothing is justifiable that does not tend to establish a position, or determine a controversy; that which outrages humanity, is the cruelty of a savage who puts to death with torture, or disfigures, to gratify revenge. To know what may be said in a paper, or in what manner it may be said, the editor whom the public alone knows, need only consider what would become a gentleman to say, in promiscuous society. Whether conversing in the manner he writes, or in which, what is inserted, is written, he would be heard with respect, and treated with civility. Good breeding is as necessary in print as in conversation. The want of it equally entitles to the appellation of an ill-bred-man. The press can have no more licence than the tongue. At the tribunal of common sense, it has less, because an expression might escape a man, which might receive pardon, or excuse, as the offspring of inadvertence; but writing is deliberate, and you may turn back and strike out the allusion, or correct the term. National character is interested in the delicacy of the press. It is a disgrace to a people to have amongst [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-256.jpg) \- external link  - Page 031. ] them volumes of scurrility circulated through their post-offices, with a peculiar privilege of centage, placed upon the benches in our public houses, or sent home to our private dwellings. Is this the occupation to which it ought to be an honour to belong; to which a father would wish to put a son, having educated him with the best advantages, and giving him, as he had thought, a duty as sacred as the priesthood, and with a more exclusive sphere of action than the barrister; having it in high commission by the constitution of his country, "to canvass the conduct of men in public offices," and inform the public, "where the matter is proper for public information." It does not follow, that because a man takes a paper, that he approves of all that is in it. It is certainly censurable to continue our subscription to a paper, the prevailing tenor of which is defamatory of individuals; but were we to reject a paper because it is occasionally so, there are few papers that we should take at all. The American press, has been abominably gross, and defamatory, and there are few publications of this nature, that have been at all times unexceptionable. A man will be astonished sometimes to hear of himself, or of others, what has not the slightest foundation, but in the invention of the paragraphist. There may be some prototype, filmy origin to the unsubstantial fabric; perhaps not even a vapour, but in the breath of the defamer. Is the assassin odious, and not the author of anonymous abuse? Yet such is the evror of opinion with some, that they think it not dishonourable to attack anonymously. It is cowardice in a free country, where the law is equal; where no Caesar exists to make it necessary to conceal the author of the pasquinade. A brave man will scorn subterfuge, and shade. An honest man will avow himself and his opinions. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-257.jpg) \- external link  - Page 032. ] NOTWITHSTANDING the Captain thought he had got quit of Teague, in the matter of the press, he had still some trouble. For the bog-trotter was dissatisfred. He had an hankering after the editorship, and talked of taking up subscriptions. To put him off, the Captain suggested the publishing his travels. Teague, said he, if many a man had what you have in your power, he would make a fortune by it. You have been in the Conciergerie. That of itself, might make a chapter that would fill a volume. If you take up subscriptions, why not for such a work as that? It will sell for a ready penny these times; I would advise you to go about it. Och, on my shoul, said Teague, but it would make a book as big as the praists' bible, if I was to tell all dat I saw on toder side de great water. In dat great country, old France; where de paple talk all at once wid de brogue on deir tongues, and say nothing. De devil burn me, but deir footres, and parbleus, would make a book, as big as a church staple. Well done Teague, said the Captain; you must then set about it. The first thing it will behoove you to consider, is the manner in which it will be written; whether your narration shall be in the first person, as, [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-258.jpg) \- external link  - Page 033. ] "I did this," and "I said that;" or whether in the third person, as it were one speaking of you, as, "O'Regan having done so, and made an observation to this effect." And whether it shall be in the way of continued narrative, with chapters, or in the shape of a journal, or be cast in the way of letter. For all these modes of writing are used as best suits the traveller; or may be thought most pleasing to the reader. One advantage you will have, that you need not stick pertinaciously to the truth; for travellers have a licence to deviate; and they are not considered as on oath, or upon honour in giving their accounts; embellishment is allowable. Some illumination of the narrative: though, confining yourself to the truth strictly, I make no doubt, your story will be sufficiently extravagant, and of course, border on the marvellous. The fact was, that the bog-trotter had incidents sufficient to enliven his history. He had been in the suit of Anacharsis Cloots, and personated an Esquimaux Indian; he had been taken up in a balloon some distance from the earth, and let down by a parachute, instead of a sheep. It is true, this was not with his own consent, but by force; the Parisians thinking it of little account whether the experiment was made with him or a less valuable animal. It is true, to make amends for this, a royalist lady fell in love with him, thinking he had a resemblance to the young Duke of Orleans. He had made a fortunate escape in the conciergerie. A prisoner in the next cell, No. 1, finding the letter G, put upon his door, which stands for guillotine; exchanged for a few louis's with O'Regan, No. 2 --- But an order came to reprieve No. 1, and to take No. 2, meaning the bogtrotter. The consequence was, that the Frenchman was put into the cart, and our sans culotte escaped. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-259.jpg) \- external link  - Page 034. ] It would make a book, to exhaust these particulars, and many more that occurred. The Captain having recommended the work, was concerned to have it accomplished with some credit to those concerned, and therefore thought it advisable to give the author some hints before he entered on the task. Teague, said he, the first thing to be thought of, is a place to write. The extremes are two, the cellar and the garret. The cellar was chosen by an orator of Greece, to write his orations, or at least to prepare for the writing them; for in this, he is said to have copied over eight times the history of Thucidydes. Whether it is the darkness, or the solitude of the cavern, that is congenial to the talent of writing, may be a question. I should think, however, that the aerial mansion of a garret is most favourable to the lighter species of writing, such as madrigals; or paragraphs in magazines, or novels. But as yours is a serious work, it may be above the subterranean, and below the firmament. Perhaps a middle story may suffice. It will depend, however, on your head. If you find yourself light, go down; if heavy, mount; and thus adjust your apartment to your feelings. The wasps chuse the garret; but the spider is found in the cellar; and his weaving is an emblem of the composition of an author. As to stile, just write as you would speak, and give your account with simplicity, without affectation; understanding your subject well, and using no more words, than is necessary to express your meaning. As to paper, whether common or woven; or as to type, whether single or double pica; these are terms I do not understand. I see them in the advertisements, and that is all I know about them. Whether duodecimo, octavo, or folio, will depend upon the bulk of what is to be printed. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-260.jpg) \- external link  - Page 035. ] THE Captain had now been more than a month at home, making enquiry into the history of the village; what changes in the domestic affairs of his neighbours; what good or bad fortune had happened to individuals, at the same time walking through the town, and observing the improvements or dilapidations in the buildings or streets. It was obvious that little attention had been paid, for some time, to public works; the pavements were neglected, and the ways and water-courses suffered to fill up. An aqueduct begun, to bring a spring from the hill, was left unfinished. What can be the reason of all this, said he, to the citizens? It was answered, that the chief and assistant burgesses had been extravagant; that the works, which, by the charter of incorporation they had a power to project, were extensive, and the consequent taxes which they had a right to impose, and which became necessary, were thought oppressive. The people had left out these officers at the annual election, and chosen new. That these wishing to preserve popularity, had let all matters rest, and had neither made improvements, nor raised taxes. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-261.jpg) \- external link  - Page 036. ] And will this please always. They have turned out one set for doing too much; and they will turn out the other next for doing nothing. But why not hit a medium, said the Captain? A difficulty occurs, continued the speaker. In the works projected, the people insist that no man shall be consulted in his own occupation. The mason shall make out the bills of scantling; and the carpenter determine the arches of a stone bridge. That is, said the Captain, as in a city that I passed through in my travels. The physicians claimed a right to judge of laws, and the lawyers of physic. Reversing the maxim, that every man is to be trusted in his own profession. This is republicanism run mad. The sovereign people would do well to imitate other sovereigns, at least in this; that they trust even foreigners in the arts, and not by an unreasonable jealousy, loose the advantage of judgment, which it is not in the nature of things, that they themselves can possess. Political divisions will always exist. It is inseparable from the nature of a community. And it is not in the nature of things that the power can be long on one side. The duration depends upon the judgment of using it  . The people will revolt from themselves when they find they have done wrong, and that side which was now the weakest will become the strongest. Accounts were received, and Teague himself occasionally announced that he had succeeded in taking up subscriptions for his commentaries. But it had never occurred to any one that the bog-trotter could [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-262.jpg) \- external link  - Page 037. ] neither read nor write. But the difficulty now presenting itself, a school-master offered his services to be his amanuensis. But amongst the advertisements on the tavern and shop doors, the Captain observing one day a notice of the want of a suitable person in the academy to instruct in the French language, he was led to reflect, that after dictating his publication, Teague would be out of employment, and that a vacancy of this kind might tally with his faculties, having been in France, the very country where the language was vernacularly spoken; that his attainments must be much superior to those who had acquired the tongue only from dead books, the ear not accustomed to the sounds of familiar conversation. Losing no time he waited on the Principal of the Academy, and gave him an account of the pedeseque, and of his pretensions. The Principal was astonished; but concealed his surprize. He could easily comprehend the incompetency of this man to teach the language in a school of learning, where it is expected to be taught grammatically; and the absurdity of taking his lingo, for French, if he had the brogue in that pronunciation as he had in English. But it might not be so easy a matter to convince the Captain of this who appeared to have an undue opinion of his acquirements. Nevertheless he endeavoured to make himself intelligible on this subject, by observing that there was a wide difference between a public professor in a college, and a private tutor who attends pupils occasionally: that in a seminary of learning the rudiments of a language were usually taught by rules; and it was an object to understand the parts of speech into which the tongue was divided; the use of the articles, if there were any; the inflexions of the cases, the [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-263.jpg) \- external link  - Page 038. ] variations of the genders, the conjugations of the verbs; the concords of syntax; and after all this the idiom, or peculiar phrases, and structure of the sentence: that from what the Captain had informed him, and what he himself had gleaned from others, of the characteristics of this subordinate, the academy was not his province, but the village. He might employ his talents to advantage, instructing young gentlemen and ladies in the knowledge of the French tongue, at their own houses; with a grammar, and without a dictionary; or without a grammar; and with the voice and diction only. For in fact it was of little consequence how they were taught; for they would learn nothing: and barbers and tumblers that had come in and undertaken to instruct; had done as well as wiser masters; for they had amused their pupils; and amusement was all that pupils would be willing to receive. Enough if they can get a word or two that sounds like French, to throw out to a lady in a dance; as parlez vous madame; or s'l vous plais. It may be a digression, said the Captain; but it is a profitable lesson. Do you conceive that the American youth are too hastily manufactured, and come forward too soon into life. Unquestionably, said the Principal. Education here is unnaturally hastened. Our minority is too short to make a great man. We "overstep the modesty of nature," and suffer our young men to come forward into councils that require the heads of age. Hence our juvenile speeches in debates. Hence the wild fire in our councils. The young gentlemen of the village are above learning; as soon as they have got on a pair of pantaloons, and half boots. They are out of their education, and men before their time . We had an election the other day; for a chief burgess. It was a matter of astonishment to those of the old [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-264.jpg) \- external link  - Page 039. ] school, to see a youth come forward, born after his competitor had been ranked with the sages of the village, and claim the suffrages of the citizens. It had an unfavourable effect upon the very dumb creation. It was not enough that the lads under age, began to raise their voices, and vociferate; but it seemed that the young of animals had gained upon their growth, and were old before they had attained maturity. The young dogs barked more; whether it was from an impression of the atmosphere; or an imitation of the sounds of men. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-265.jpg) \- external link  - Page 040. ] TO give the bog-trotter time to write his history, the Captain turned his attention for a while to other objects. There was an old lawyer in the village that had left off practice, and accompanied by a blind fidler, gave lectures occasionally, at what he called his inns of court, on the practice of the law, of which he pretended to have had great experience; and in fact he had been a long time at the bar; and from age was now unfit for the circuit, especially being blind, and unless in a carriage, which the roads did not well admit, could not conveniently go abroad; and the small practice of the village, scarcely sufficed for the occupation of his time, or the means of his support. The want of sight rendered him incapable of conveyancing, and all he could do was to give council, or argue a cause by which he made a penny; but to fill up his time, and put his learning to account, he had set on foot lectures for young students, and amused himself at intervals with a tune on the violin which the fidler played, and for which the by standers threw in a five-penny bit of silver, such of them as did not attend to the law lecture, or could derive any benefit from it. Thus, clubbing their talents, and joining in amusement, and in business as [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-266.jpg) \- external link  - Page 041. ] joined in the loss of vision, they made a living; the scraper receiving his six cents and a half for his tune on the instrument, and the lawyer the same money for his breath on the abstract subject of the study and practice of the law. It may be asked how it came to pass, that he could lay down the principles of a successful practice in a profession, and at the same time not to have become enriched by it himself, so as to be above the necessity in his old age, of making money, by the best means in his power to procure his support, the profession being lucrative itself, especially where any one excels in the knowledge of it, and is ordinarily industrious in the pursuit. But the answer is easy; that the making money and keeping it are two distinct things: for so it was, that this lawyer now blind, had let a great deal of business go through his hands, without making much by it; from a want of skill to make money stick. He thought always more of gaining the suit and the praise of managing it well, than of the fee. Hence it was that he had credit as a pleader, but not as the maker of a great estate. It is doubtless a general rule that the way to be rich is to excel in your profession, and whoever excels may in general be rich, and it is a folly not to make this use of it. But we see that with all the lovers of the arts, painting, music, statuary, eloquence, there is a neglect of riches, the mind carried off from the love of money, and placed upon the art itself. The main chance is overlooked; and it is only late in life that the folly is discovered by the person himself, though others had been remarking it all his life long. But though not profitable to the professor, to cultivate an art for its own sake, yet it is useful and pleasing to the world; and Quintilian who has left us a book on the eloquence of the bar, is more valued, [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-267.jpg) \- external link  - Page 042. ] because he has given more pleasure to those who have come after him, than others who had made perhaps more by their practice, but whose memory has gone with themselves, at the same time that their estates went to others. As a sample of the lectures of the blind lawyer, we shall give the following. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-268.jpg) \- external link  - Page 043. ] IT is necessary to comprehend perfectly the facts of the case, and this to enable; 1\. To frame the action; trespass, or trespass on the case; &c. 2\. To frame your declaration: that is, to put a precise statement of the cause of action upon the record. 3\. To examine the witnesses, preparatory to the trial. I say nothing of the science necessary to draw a declaration; though there is great delicacy and beauty, in making a legal statement of your cause of action with brevity, perspicuity, and technical correctness. Nor do I mean to touch on the vigilance on your part or liberality, to your adversaries, in conducting the cause to issue and trial, taking rules and giving notice. This is not the stage where all advantages are fair. These are preliminaries to the contest, and as in the wager of battle the combatant makes oath, that he uses no enchantment; so a liberal lawyer will disdain to avail himself of an oversight, or take a catch which has no effect upon the merits of a cause. If he observes a defect which it becomes necessary to amend, in civil cases, he will point it out and give leave to do it. This I grant he is not bound to do; but it is for the credit of the profession that such liberality should be cultivated, and justice will lose nothing by [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-269.jpg) \- external link  - Page 044. ] it. Strict rules of pleading, strictly pursued, are not inconsistent with this liberality! Professional men, can understand the boundaries and distinctions. It is not within my present compass to go into them. Preparatory to the trial; a great point is, the examination of the witnesses to be adduced by your client; such of them as are willing to say what they know, prior to their being called in court. It is of moment for you to know what you can prove by any one of them, that you may bring them to the point immediately; and save the time of the court from impertinent relation. It is necessary for the sake of your client to sift them well, and know the testimony they are about to give. The council above who has thus sitted them, should undertake to examine. When the conduct of the cause, rests with me, and the responsibility, I would suffer no assistant to ask a question of my witnesses Let him take his turn, and fill up his part in cross examining the witnesses of the adversary. When the testimony is closed in a jury trial, the cause is usually lost or won: and a single question injudiciously put, may have been the cause of losing it. Yet there is nothing more difficult for a leading council than to restrain the impetuosity of his associates, and their avidity to ask questions. It is a matter of great judgment when a witness has answered well, to let the answer rest. It is favourable to truth to let it rest; for by putting it again, and again, you confuse the mind, and you may get the very reverse of what he had before said; or at least you may get it so disturbed, as to be unintelligible, and do you no good. If it occurs to an assistant council who has not previously examined; that a question may be put with advantage, he can suggest it to the leading, or examining council, and leave him to judge. The wish of [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-270.jpg) \- external link  - Page 045. ] seeming to be doing something for his money is the cause of that propensity to interrogate that prompts improperly to take up the examination. The taking down the testimony is so managed as to consume time unnecessarily in our courts. All concerned in a cause, must take down and wait for all. The testimony must be taken down as if it was to be read again to the court, or sent to the jury in the style of a written deposition. Unnecessary matter is taken down; for there are seldom more than a few sentences in the testimony of a witness that are material to the cause. But it is to seem very busy, and doing something for the client, where in fact nothing is done that leads to an ostentation of taking down, even where there is nothing to take. I have actually known this to take place at the bar. Well; what do you know of this matter? Why, in fact, I know little about it. Stop, stop a little, let me take that down. Well; you say you know little about the matter. Nothing at all---only--- Stop, stop, let me take down what you have said--- A thing like this exhausts the patience; yet it is difficult for a court to correct it. It must depend upon the good sense of the council themselves, to select, and confine their notes to what is of substance in the evidence. The greatest effort in the management of a cause, is the taking exception to evidence. For this purpose, it is necessary that from the commencement of the trial, the leading council lies by; thinks much; says little; bends his whole mind, to preserve himself unruffled: sets forward the junior, and assistant council to spar where it may be necessary; to make prolusions, and gain time. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-271.jpg) \- external link  - Page 046. ] As for instance; a piece of evidence is offered. It strikes the leading council, that exception lies against it. But he is not clear; nor is he prepared to support the exception. An assistant council takes the exception. It is run down and completely answered. Not a word more: but the leading council has had time to consider. If he had not thought proper to give it up; he would have risen in full force. And if he had been answered with some shew of reason, the assistant would have rejoined, and done justice to the argument. For let it not be thought that though I mark the parts of the assistant council, I do not well know that the greater lawyer, may have the subordinate part assigned him; or may fall into that place, in the management of a cause, on the trial. The greater general may happen to have the command of a detachment only; or be employed to bring on, or relieve, in the course of an engagement. For law is an image of war; and as in war, the greatest praise, is to discharge your duty wherever it may be assigned; so, on a trial. A column standing still, and never brought forward, or discharging a shot, but simply keeping ground, may have done the real execution, and gained the battle. A thought suggested is sometimes more than an argument. But, nevertheless elocution has its place, and noble praise. It is delightful to hear one speak well where he ought to speak. "The words of the wise are like nails; fastened in sure places." Great indulgence must be made, for young pleaders; but I have it not in view to treat, not of what is to be indulged; but of what is to be approved. Brevity is the soul of eloquence, and amplification, the usual fault. Few err in saying too little. Tediousness is the more common extreme: padding, and beating on the point. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-272.jpg) \- external link  - Page 047. ] After a passion is excited, there is danger of "tearing it to rags." The opening of the case, before the evidence is introduced, is a matter of some delicacy; and a principle is brevity; and stating the proper proof, rather below what it will turn out. When disappointed in the expectation raised, the mind is dissatisfied, and with difficulty can do justice to what is proved. It is in the application of the evidence that eloquence finds her province at the bar. And yet here it is that less harm can be done by weak or unskilful advocates, than in any part of the contest. The court and jury are attached to the evidence. The mind is stedfast upon this, and if a flourisher runs off; he may talk; it is only a loss of time. It is here that less experienced council may be suffered to amuse themselves; and can do little harm, more especially if there is some one to follow to review the facts, apply the law, and clench the argument. The harm that can be done, is to weary the mind, and relax the spring of attention. This is mischievous; but cannot well be prevented. The council must be heard. But there is much less danger to a cause, in this, than from an injudicious touch in the conduct of it, through the evidence. With regard to reading authorities in the opening, or reply; or in the conduct of the trial generally, I have but a single observation. It is better to adduce no authority, at all, than one which has a doubtful application, because it brings in question the discernment of the council; and gives an opportunity to the adversary, to flourish and run down. General reason, is a safer ground, than doubtful decisions. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-273.jpg) \- external link  - Page 048. ] A great uproar had, in the mean time taken place in the village. The doctrine of abating nuisances, had been much in conversation, since the town meeting in the matter of the pole-cat. It came so far, that an incendiary proposed to abate, or burn down the college. Because, said he; all learning is a nuisance. A town meeting had been called on the occasion; and whether from a wish to see a bon-fire; or from the hatred of the ignorant, to all that places the informed above them; the proposition however unreasonable and illegal had its advocates. It had been actually carried, and a person was now on his way with a brand lighted to set fire to the building. The alarm was given; and the more considerate rushed out to endeavour to prevent conflagration. Force was vain; and reason avails little with a mob. The only way to oppose their resolution is indirectly by turning the current of their thoughts aside and to the attaining the same thing in another way. The principal and professors had harangued in vain. It was threatened that if they did not stand out of the way, they would burn them, with the college. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-274.jpg) \- external link  - Page 049. ] The Captain had come up; and venturing to speak; gentlemen, said he, it is not for the college that I am about to speak; it is for yourselves; your object is to put down learning; and do you not know that it is put down already. Why will you do a useless thing? It is calling in question your understanding, to do a needless mischief. Is not learning put down already? the methodists are the best preachers. Take a horse jockey and in two weeks from the jump, he is in a pulpit. No need of Latin, Greek, Hebrew; a poilyglot bible; systems of divinity; a commentary, a treatise, an essay, or a dissertation: all is plain sailing now. All this tends to put learning down, so that you have all the advantage of this, without the trouble. Why burn the college? The building will serve useful purposes, when the professors are driven out of it. Politicians say, that though they have no learning, they feel no want of it. Is it to be supposed that a workman does not know whether he wants tools? All this ends when learning and law are put down. Trial by battle must regulate society. We shall then want barracks and hospitals. This building will accommodate invalids. I do not know, said a sedate man among the crowd, whether after all, a little learning may not be in some cases, useful. It is a great help to weak people . I have seen a book, entitled, Hukes, and e'en to had up crippled Christians breeks  . That is hooks and eyes to hold up breeches. Alluding, by the bye, to hooks and eyes which were in use before buttons. What are called gallowses, have succeeded to the assistance of buttons, but have not altogether superseded them. Not that I mean to insinuate that the disuse of hooks and eyes, lead to the gallows in the proper sense of [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-275.jpg) \- external link  - Page 050. ] the word, any more than that learning does. Though many a man that wears buttons has been hung. Perhaps more without buttons than with them. But I mean to say that a young man, before he comes to the years of discretion may as well be employed in learning to make marks upon paper, as playing at nine-mens-morrice, and it does him no more harm to try to read Greek, than to trace partridge tracks. The mind must be employed in something to keep it out of harm's way, and reclusion in a seminary is useful, if for nothing else at least to keep young people within doors, which the academician could not easily do, unless, the device of books was used to beguile the hours of study. And though a great part of their learning, is but the knowledge of hooks and crooks , yet the exercise of the mind renders them more expert in thinking;  and though Latin is of no more use to raise the devil than English, now a days; yet it is a gentle exercise to learn it, and makes the boys grow faster. It keeps them from their mothers who are apt to spoil their offspring by too much indulgence. The idea of getting a task, accustoms the mind to obedience. Now there are some branches of science that are really useful, such as speaking and writing intelligibly, and casting up accounts. Nor is the time altogether thrown away in learning mathematics, especially the theory of the mechanical powers. Some are of opinion that this study has been of great use in navigation, and water works. The ancients lound their account in it, in the construction of the Catapult. But, at least, what harm, in letting pedants chop logic, and boys laugh, in the seminaries? A berring pickle, or a Merry Andrew, is allowed to amuse people, and we do not pull down their stalls. A ventriloquist is suffered to take his dollar from us, and we make no remonstrance. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-276.jpg) \- external link  - Page 051. ] Lectures, on moral philosophy are at least as innocent as this. I do not know any better recreation for a lad of mettle than to listen to a dissertation on eloquence, or a discourse on chronology, and history. It sharpens his wit to talk over affairs with his equals. But there is one reason that serves for a hundred. It is not every one that is born a genius, and can do without the help of education. I am therefore for continuing these crudities a little longer. When we can afford it better, we can pull down the college. This speech had a good effect, and the mob retired. But before they were aware, the flame had broken out in another direction. The mob retiring, had entered into altercation amongst the mselves, and began to blame one another. Some, for not going on to burn the college, and others, for having thought of it at all. In opposition to the last, the first grew outrageous, and began to exclaim, and to curse and to swear, and said, damn them, but if they had not burned a college, they would burn or pull down, a church. They had actually prepared faggots, and were on their way a second time, to execute a new mischief. The alarm was given, the chief burgess, and assistants, and respectable inhabitants assembled! Great reliance was had upon the Captain, from his success, in the former instance; and when the two forces, that of the mob, and that of the community stood face to face, and were in opposition, ready to fall on, the one to commit waste, and the other to defend, he was called upon to come forward and harangue. He obeyed instantly, but was well aware that a stratagem in war cannot succeed a second time, and therefore instead of attempting to decoy and turn aside their passions, thought proper to attack them directly by the opposite, fear. Madmen, said he, what do you mean? Is it to rob, plunder and murder that you [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-277.jpg) \- external link  - Page 052. ] have assembled? Come on; but in coming you must meet with this weapon, brandishing his hanger; I am alone; but a legion is behind me and will be with me speedily. But as I am at all times averse from the use of force until it becomes necessary; I am willing in the mean time to hear reason. Why is it that you would pull down a church, and abolish the christian worship in the village? It is not our intention to abolish christianity, said a grave man amongst them, but to put down the preacher at this place; who is not an American republican, but quotes the English commentators in his sermons, Henry's annotations on the Bible; Burket on the New-Testament; Pool's Synopsis, Tillotson and Baxter, and many others. We wish to abolish these, and have nothing but our own commentaries. Are we to be drawing our proofs from under a monarchy, and refering to tracts and essays published in Great Britain? Have we no sense of our own to explain texts of Scripture, and apply doctrines? It is time to emancipate ourselves from these shackles, and every man be his own expounder, or at least confine our clergy to the Bible and the Psalm book, or such of our divines, as have written amongst ourselves, and are of our own manufacture in a republican government. Religion, said the Captain, is of no government. Wines are the better for being brought over seas, and our best brandies are from monarchies. Where was the cloth of that coat made? Will you reject a good piece of stuff because it came through the hands of an aristocratic weaver? These are false ideas of what is right, and useful to mankind. The common law is not the worse for having been the common law of England, and our property and birth right which our [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-278.jpg) \- external link  - Page 053. ] ancestors brought with them; nor is our Bible the worse for having been translated under James the first of England, which translation we still use, and from which we repeat all sentences of Scripture. Nor are systems of theology, or harmonies of the evangelists the worse for having been written in another country. Why do we use the English language? Is it not because we cannot easily substitute another; or have no better to substitute. The Shanese, or Delaware, or Piankisha, may be softer, but not so copious or of equal energy and strength. But even if in all respects superior, can we by an act of volition, transfer it into common use and make it all at once, our vernacular tongue? The grave man made no answer; but the more violent were still disposed to pull down the church. At the alarm created by the uproar, the pedagogue, and the pedeseque, who had in the mean time been engaged in composing the book, had run out, and left the manuscript in hands, on the table. A wag stepping in, had written an addition to a chapter. And coming back, the school-master had resumed his labour, without observing it. The chapter in hands was that which gave an account of his ascent in a balloon; and the addition was as follows: \---"Passing a cloud, I put out my hand, and took a piece of it, and squeezed it like a spunge, and the water ran out. The sun went north about; but never set. At the distance of about fifty leagues above the earth, we saw a white bird sitting on the corner of a cloud. We took it to be one of Mahomets [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-279.jpg) \- external link  - Page 054. ] pigeone. If we had had a gun we could have shot it. Passing by the moon we saw a man selling lands at auction. He wished us to give a bid; but we told him, we had not come to buy land in the moon. We came across a comet, but it was asleep. It looked like a tarapine; but had a tail like a fox. The balloon struck a wasp's nest, and we were in danger of the stings. Coming near a hail bank, we filled a hat: the hail stones were about as large as a pigeon's egg. A thousand miles above the earth we passed through a field of turkey buzzards. This would seem to be their region; and accounts for the circumstance, that no one has ever found a nest of one of these. Their rookeries are out of sight, in the atmosphere. As we approached one of the heavenly bodies---It appeared like an island. We struck upon a planet, but Blanchard got out and pushed off the balloon. We supposed it to be Mercury, as we heard orators haranguing, and a multitude of tongues. There were marriages going on in Venus, and in Mars, we heard the drums beat. In Jupiter we heard swearing, Proh! Jupiter; O! Jupiter! by Jupiter. We meant to have a pull at one of Saturn's rings, but were blown off the coast, and found ourselves in the latitude of Herschell. Provisions failing, we thought proper to shape our course to the earth again. The first thing we saw was the forest of Ardennes, which appeared like a shamrock; the Pyrenean mountains seemed a bed of parsley, and the Atlantio Ocean, was about as large as Loch Swilly. Within about a furlong of the earth, Blanchard gave me the parachute, and I came down. It was in a field of corn among reapers. They took me for a [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-280.jpg) \- external link  - Page 055. ] sheep, and thought to have mutton; but finding their mistake, they invited me to breakfast. Teague with his amanuensis returning, resumed his memoir, not observing the interlopation which, in the mean time had been made. Some have thought it was the best chapter in it. At least it is the most extravagant. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-281.jpg) \- external link  - Page 056. ] HAVING now a little time upon his hands, the Captain thought of repeating his visit to the blind lawyer, and fidler; and happening at an interval of the blind man's lectures he drew him into conversation, on the subject of the law. What is this common law, said he, which you speak of, and why cannot it be abolished? The common law of England! why not a common law of our own; now that we are an independent government? It is our own common law, said the lawyer. We derive it from a common source with the inhabitants of Britain. Shall the people on that side the water alone possess this jurisprudence, which our common ancestors possessed, just because we have left the island? It was because our birth-right to this law was questioned that we resisted in war, and declared our independence. The right to representation is a principle of the common law, and this right was denied to the colonies. The right of trial by jury is a principle of the common law, and this in some cases, was abridged, in others, taken away altogether. On what ground were these defended; on the ground that they were our inheritance by the common law. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-282.jpg) \- external link  - Page 057. ] But why called common law? It was so called as distinguished from the laws of particular places. It was a system common to the whole people. The term came into use after the heptarchy. A ground of this law is reason; or the principles of universal justice. The application of these principles to particular cases, forms a great part of the common law: the application of the principles of justice to that infinity of cases, which arise on the intercourse of men in a state of society: obligations independent of contract, or contracts themselves. We read the decisions in such cases, because the reason of those who have gone before, is a help to those that follow. Rules of pleading, rules of evidence, the practice of courts, are the result of experience, and our own; or adopted by us, as a part of the common law. This law forms a system begun in the woods of Germany; taking its rise amongst our Saxon ancestors, it was brought with them into Britain; receiving accessions from what it found good in the island to which it came. Abolish the common law? why not abolish the art of medicine, because it has been cuitivated in Great Britain? Sydenham, Harvey and Mead, are thought to have added to the science. The British chymists, have increased the materia medica. Why not make war upon the apothecaries, because they sell English drugs? [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-283.jpg) \- external link  - Page 058. ] Just at that instant a hurly burly was heard half a square distant; people rushing into an apothecary shop, and jugs thrown out at the window. It was a mob collected to break up the Doctor. A Latin master from the college, lifting up his hands in the attitude of a man attempting to ring a bell, was endeavouring to appease the multitude, in such address as was on his tongue from the classic authors: cives, cives, quis furor vos agitat! vesania quae versat! quae dementia cepit! Infelix pecus! oh! heu! proh hominum. Insanire decet, ratione, modoque. It availed nothing. The outrage was continued. Glass and earthen ware, broken; powders and liquids filled the atmosphere with vapour, and a variety of smells. Ah! said an orator, it is full time to return to the simplicity of early times, when men had recourse, in case of internal diseases, or external wounds, to the barks of trees, or the plants of the fields, and had not yet become acquainted with extractions and decoctions put in phials, and called drops, to make the well sick, and poison the living. It would have made a good drawing in a picture, to have seen the apothecary at work, in the mean time, endeavouring to clear the shop, with a cudgel, sometimes pelting a rioter; at other times breaking the head of one of his own jugs. A preacher stood by exhorting to carry on the work. He had taken a text. "There is a time to build, and a time to pull down." He thought this a pulling down time. The greater part of his audience appeared to think him orthodox, and were shewing their faith, by their works, at the expence of the dispensary. Good God, called out the son of Esculapius, will no one assist? shall I be ruined? The industry of years dissipated in a day: all my [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-284.jpg) \- external link  - Page 059. ] laudanum, my pepper-mint, sulphur, vitriol, oils, acids, my tartar, and arsenic; all gone to pot, or rather the pots gone with them, jars, jugs, and glister-pipes: what devastation! what havock! Is it for sport, or for profit? Oh; the folly, the fury, the madness of the populace! They are indeed the swinish multitude. A herd of swine in a century, would not have done so much damage. At this point of the game, whether by design, or accident, a cry of fire had been raised; and the fire company with their engine and buckets were up, and began to play upon the building, throwing the water in at the windows, and at the door, so that the people in the house, and the Doctor himself were as wet as rats, and occasionally the pipe carried round with a sweep, came upon the by-standers without. The preacher got his Bible wet, and his Psalm book; and the Latin master called out "Jam satis terris;" or that there was rain enough; and the orator, thought it a new way, of quelling mobs. The Captain said he had seen something of the kind attempted in repressing bees, when they swarmed, throwing water on them, and that the riots of men were analogous. But what can they mean, said a peace officer by attacking this mans boluses? Do they mean to put an end to the practice of physic? among the savages they attribute aches, and pains in the flesh and bones, to a bad spirit that has got into the muscles, and the tendons, and by rubbing with the hand, and pressing the parts they endeavour to expel it. The chaffing has sometimes a good effect, and if there thould not [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-285.jpg) \- external link  - Page 060. ] be an evil spirit to drive out, it eases and relieves from the complaint. But though exercise and temperance may preserve health, and cold and warm bathing, and friction of the joints may relieve from a rheumatic pain, yet in a multitude of cases the specifics of pharmacy may be found useful; especially in a society of close population, where we have not woods and forest to run in, and where sedentary occupations keep people sitting half their time. And though after all, the diagnosis, or distinguishing diseases, is in many cases, but a guess, and the means of cure still more conjectural, yet still there is something in the province of science, and the skill of the well read and experienced physician. Why then do you not put the law in force against such an attack upon the druggist, said an orator? You see his chest of medicine broken open, before your eyes, and his shelves pulled down, and the tables under foot, and yet no one bound over, or the riot act read. Soft and fairly said the peace officers, all in good time. Take sail from the mast when there comes too strong a blast. A madness prevails at present. It will be but of a fortnights continuance. When the people get a thing into their heads, the best way is to let them go on. They will come to themselves by and by. But in the mean time they will do a great deal of harm, said the Captain. It is in the atmosphere said the orator! is it imported, or of domestic origin, said a thinking man among the croud. It may be imported, or it may be of domestic origin said a simple man; for both abroad and at home, we [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-286.jpg) \- external link  - Page 061. ] have instances of such madness occasionally breaking out, owing to some subtil gas in the holds of vessels, or that breeds in our own streets. It may come from France or Ireland: but what is there to hinder it springing up here, where there are as good materials to work upon, as on the other side the water. Human nature is the same every where. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-287.jpg) \- external link  - Page 062. ] THE memoir of the bog-trotter had now made its appearance, and was read with avidity by all ranks, and classes of the community. The novelty of the matter made the stile agreeable and it was called up as a model of fine writing. In fact the school master who was the real author, Teague furnishing only materials, had some knowledge of the English grammar, and had read the Pilgrims Progress, the Seven Champions of Christendom, Reynard the Fox, the Siege of Troy, and had a diction not unpleasing, and tolerably correct. The place of a professor of rhetoric in the college, being vacant, it was suggested that the new author might be an acquisition to give lectures on eloquence, and Teague was, as usual, elated, with the proposition, and solicited the Captain to countenance the matter, with the trustees of the seminary, that, if he had failed in the political, he might have a chance of clevation in the literary world. The Captain accordingly lent his aid, and though, with some reluctance, undertook to press the matter with the friends of the institution, still doubting in his own mind the capacity of the candidate for a chair in a university. It is true, he had heard tell of lectures on taste and [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-288.jpg) \- external link  - Page 063. ] criticism, by those, who had not much taste, and were no great critics themselves. But this was considered as abuse, and not to pass into precedent. However, he consented and did broach the matter. It was likely to be carried and would have been carried, but for the other professors, who said it would be a burlesque on them, and threatened to resign if the thing was pushed any farther, as in their opinion, however great the fame of this phenomenon might be, he was in fact, but an illiterate person, and fitter for a professor of gymnastics, than of letters in an academy. A professor of gymnastics, then let him be, said the Captain. It is true he has not read Salzman on the athletics of schools, or Strutt on the games and pastimes of England; nevertheless he can play, at prison best, barley-bret; blind-mans-buff; the hindmost of three, and fool in the corner. He is no slouch at swere-arse; is a pretty good hitch at a wrestle; and can run and leap abundantly well. So saying, he turned about, and walked away, with his stick in his hand, to look for the bog-trotter, and to bring him forward for the professorship; but had not walked far, before he fell in with the remains of the Doctor's shop that had been thrown out upon the street; and where was Teague in a stall turned doctor, and selling drugs to the multitude, arsenic for worm-powder, and laudanum for wine-cordial. He had picked up the phials when the apothecary had run off fearing the multitude, and the people thinking this man his deputy, or substitute, selling off at a low price, were willing to take a bargain while they could get it. The Captain was irritated on the score of humanity, and for the first time, made a stroke at the bogtrotter. The cudgel lighting on a box of Spanish flies that was going off at twelve and a half cents, dis [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-289.jpg) \- external link  - Page 064. ] A dialogue ensued, and much But the result was, that the vendue and it came to be understood, that not the real owner of the ware-house, and  purchasers might be called upon to pay for the drugs a second time. This last consideration had an effect and the bidding ceased. At this time John Murdoch came up, a shrewd man, though not in any office, and being well acquainted with the Captain, and the history of the bogtrotter, made free to speak upon the occasion, and addressing himself to the Captain; for the bog-trotter had run off, whether fearing the stick, or to spend the money he had gathered. Captain, said he, Nemo omnibus horis sapit; no man is wise at all times. You have been a long time seeking to get your man into place, and now that he had got into place without you; for accident often does more for a man than his best friends; you have been unwilling that he should stay in it. Nay, you have driven him from it. He had just got into a good way in an honourable and lucrative profession, and you have stopt his career with your batabuy, or shalelah, a weapon which, from his infancy he had been taught to dread. Do you think the greater part of doctors are better read than he was; or even if better read, does their reading turn to more account? Will the people employ them sooner, because they are learned in their profession? Or, even if learned, is their skill the more to be depended on? One of the faculty has said; ars nostra conjecturalis est. Hoffman ran down [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-290.jpg) \- external link  - Page 065. ] Boerhaave; Cullen, Hoffman; Brown, Cullen; and the system now among the physicians, is a hotch potch, or mixture of all. O'Regan might have been a quack; but the faculty tell us that medicine is much indebted to quacks. Mercury was brought into use by them, and it is now the panacea, the specific for all diseases, the consumption itself . Gravity is the most practical qualification. Could not Teague assume a grave appearance; a sober physiognomy, a measured step, with a cane in his hand; a steady look straight bebefore; a nod to those that pass by, as if from a thinking man? Could not he feel a pulse, and speak mysteriously, if he could not speak learnedly, not having given clinical lectures, or attended them? Or could he not hold his tongue a long time, and say nothing; which would answer the purpose just as well; for silence is obscurity, and obscurity is sublimity. When the patient is dead, it was the disease killed him, not the doctor. Dead men tell no tales. Facilis descensus averni. I have heard the blind lawyer discoursing to this effect, that in the profession of the law, which is an ostensible profession, and more likely to expose a man's parts, or faculties of mind than almost any other, yet it is not always understood who is the real lawyer; and a man may have made an estate at the bar, before it is found out that he is a fool . If he loses the cause by his mismanagement, he lays it on the jury: or if the court decide on a point of law contrary to the advice he had given, what can I help it, says he, if a commission cannot give sense  . It is the law of the books, though it is not the law of their heads. The client submits, and is better pleased with his counsel, than with an honest fellow who had told him in the first instance; or would tell him in the last, that his cause was none of the best; and the verdict, or judgment right. If [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-291.jpg) \- external link  - Page 066. ] this is the case in a profession, that, in comparison of the other, is visible, and tangible; that you can reach it in its exhibition, what must it be in an art which is less in view; where the ignorance of the practitioner is capable of more concealment; and the man dies who is most hurt, and carries his complaint before Minos, and Rhadamanthus, who wait until the doctor comes  to give him a fair hearing? It is not that I had any doubt, said the Captain, of his getting into practice, that I had been opposed to his empiricism. My apprehension rather was, that he would get too much practice, and have too many lives to answer for morally and in conscience, if not legally. For what did he know of drugs, or of their effect upon the constitution? If you go to conscience and morality with it, I have done, said Mr. Murdoch. You leave no reasoning for me. I was speaking as a man of the world, and the making a living: if you feel yourself entramelled with that sort of doctrine, you are on the other side the line: I have no concern with you: You belong to the old school. The doctor, in the mean time had come back, and was examining the depredations. An inventory was taken under the direction of the Captain that what remained might be compared with the original stock, and the loss ascertained, that it might be compensated to the poor man by subscription. As to what had been purloined by Teague in the way of sale, he undertook himself to make up that, having been somewhat accessary to it by introducing the bog-trotter to the village. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-292.jpg) \- external link  - Page 067. ] FROM what has been stated of the activity of mind among the inhabitants of this village, and especially from the samples that have been given of their attention to politics it will not be a subject of wonder, that there was a village coffee-house, on a small scale in this place, and that the people sometimes met here, to smoke a pipe, and take a glass of beer and read a news paper. It might be called a beer house, if what was drank in it gave the name; for more ale was drank than coffee; but in imitation of the larger towns it was called a coffee house. It happened that the Captain wishing to learn the news of the coffee-house, took a walk there. Teague, with what he had collected from the sale of the drugs, had been here before them; and taking on himself the air of a politician, had called for pipes and tobacco, and was looking over a gazette; not that he could read; but to induce people to believe that he read; occasionally also, as if unconscious of those around him, throwing out a sentence, in French; a little of which he had acquired as a parrot would language: such phrases, as save qui peut: tam pis pour lui; a la guillotine. Nor did he neglect the shrug of the shoulders, a habit of expressing the [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-293.jpg) \- external link  - Page 068. ] emotions of the mind, which remained still in some degree among the republicans, though it had been contracted under the monarchy, when people were afraid to speak out, and raised the back, when they did not dare to lift the voice; and dumb signs served instead of a viva voce declaration. This suited the bog-trotter and enabled him to conceal his ignorance. Not that he had the prudence to intend this; but imitating what he had seen abroad, he took up the character at home. The attention of the benches was attracted by his physiognomy, and attitude; and in the opinion of some, he was taken for a French minister or consul; by others for an emigrant of distinction that had lost his property, for the sake of his title of nobility. The Captain hearing these surmises, impelled by the natural candour of his mind, could not avoid explaining. It is neither French minister, nor consul, said he; but my bog-trotter, that I had detected some time ago, selling drugs, and passing himself for a physician. He might be qualified to be a horse doctor, but certainly not to practice on the human constitution. But what particularly excited indignation, was his purloining the medicines, taking and carrying away, what did not belong to him, and was aggravated by the circumstance, of the things being thrown into the open air, by the rioters who had broken the house, and dispersed the shop, to the great injury of the poor apothecary whose property they were. I had taken it on myself to chastise him, considering myself under obligation to restrain him, having been accessary to his coming to the village. And if you will give me leave gentlemen, and excuse the time and place, I will take the liberty to deal a few blows at this instant, as he cannot conveniently escape from the boxes before my stroke overtakes him. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-294.jpg) \- external link  - Page 069. ] Not giving time for reflection, or reply on the part of those present, he raised his baton, and was about to strike; Teague on the other hand, had up his heart of oak, also, if not to offend, at least, to defend, and parry the stroke; his countenance in the mean time arguing submission: his words also, whether from fear, or respect, softening and conciliatory. God love your soul, said he, and be aisy; and not be after beating me before dese paple dat know nothing o' de matter; that will take you for an ould fool, beating and fighting for nothing: Just for making a copper out o' de offals of a farrier, selling dem to de paple when de mountebank himself ran off. It is a good job to be making a penny in hard times. If your honour will give me lave, I will introduce your honour, to dese paple dat have taken me for a French minister. I tought I had looked more like a papish Praist. But as dey know best, it is all de same to me. I will drink your honour's health in a tankard of ail if your honour will plase to call for it. Dese shivil looking strangers, dat I never saw before, will like your honour better than kicking and cuffing wid your shalelah and putting yourself in a passion wid a bog-trotter, dat never meant you any harm. The address seemed reasonable; and those present interfering, the Captain consented to let him off, advising more honesty and fair dealing for the future. But, in his apology to the company, for what might seem an impropriety in behaviour, he was led to give the history of the Hibernian, and the circumstance of his being in France, which accounted for his affecting the French manner, and occasional attempts at the language. This in the mean time led to a general conversation on the affairs of France, and the history of the revolution. Observations were made [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-295.jpg) \- external link  - Page 070. ] above the ordinary stile of beer-house conversation; and of which, though expressed in a desultory manner, as each one took the pipe from his mouth, or listened to the suggestions of others, it may be worth while to give a sample. One of these who had a considerable fluency of tongue, and ready memory, observed, "That the loss of liberty in the course of that revolution was owing to the unskilfulness of those who conducted it." But in like situations, said another, is it reasonable to expect more skill? The mass of the people conducted the revolution, and is it in the nature of things, for them to stop at a proper point? It is in the nature of things, said another; but it is a rare felicity . It is natural to distrust him who proposes to stop short of what seems a complete reform. The sovereign people is as liable to the impulse of passion, and as open to the insinuations of flatterers as an individual tyrant. The courtier devoid of principle, in the democratic hall, gets the ear of the populace, as he would that of a Prince, and abuses it. I do not know well what a man can better do, said another, than just to fall in with the current of opinion and when it changes, change with it. We are right, say the people. You are right, says the man of prudence. We were wrong, say the people. You were wrong, says the same man. Who is ever displeased with a person that has been in the same error with himself? That is true said the Captain: but is there no such thing as public spirit? Is there not a spice of virtue to be found in a republic? Who would not devote himself for the public good? Were Phocion, and Philopoemen time servers? I grant that it is not the way ultimately to make friends of them, and to have their confidence. Let school boys propose to rob a [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-296.jpg) \- external link  - Page 071. ] hen-roost, they will respect him who dissuaded, though it was not popular, but incurred the imputation of cowardice, and a want of spirit, at the time. Let them rob a garden, and be brought to punishment, they will revere him who had told them it was wrong but was hurried along with them, and suffered by their fault. It is by these means that amongst savages, strong minds obtain the ascendancy and are trusted by the nation. Great is the force of truth, and it will prevail. It requires great courage to bear testimony against an error in the judgment of the multitude; as it is attended with present disreputation. Yet courage is virtue, and is its own reward. The great mischief of democracy is party, said an orator, who had taken the pipe from his teeth. It is the great advantage of it, said his neighbour, It is the angel that descends at a certain season and troubles the pool of Bethsaida, that the lame person may be made whole. Were it not for party, all things would go one way; the commonwealth woudl stagnate. But let one party obtain the ascendancy, and does it not come to the same thing. All things will go one way then; or rather stand still. Not so, said the captain; no party can maintain power long. The ascendancy carries its overthrow along with it. The duration depends upon the judgment of the leaders of the councils. But the leaders, will find that they cannot lead always. While they were struggling up the ascent, every one was willing to be helped, and took advice. But on the top of the precipice, scampver and hoop, and there is no restraining them. A leader of judgment, will always find it more difficult to manage his own people than to combat his adversaries. They cannot be bruoght to halt [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-297.jpg) \- external link  - Page 072. ] at a proper point; and their errors bring them down again, as those in power did before them. However, this is wandering from the point, said a man in a black wig; we were talking of the French; who says that Bonaparte did not usurp the government? I am of that opinion, said the Captain; for there was no government to usurp. He put down the directory, who had themselves put down the councils. The banishment to Cayenne, is a proof of this. I agree with you, said an individual on the other side of the box, or bench, as it rather might be called. It was the Mountainards that runed the republic, at the very time they were running down others under the charge of incivicism, and conspiracy against the republic. Doubtless, said the Captain; It is in popular intemperance, that aristocracy, and despotism have their source. At this instant the blowing of a horn announced the arrival of the post; the late papers were brought into and all began to read. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-298.jpg) \- external link  - Page 073. ] THE Captain having a short space of time to spare from his avocations, and disposed to take the air, had walked out and coming near the small building which served as a hospital for the village, was disposed to visit it and see the state in which it was, with what new objects, since he had been absent on his peregrinations. He was shewn by the keeper an extraordinary object in a cell, a man who imagined himself a moral philosopher, delivering lectures. His observations were occasionally fraught with good sense. While the Captain stood, in the passage opposite his door, he made a note of some part of his discourse, and which, having had an opportunity of copying, we shall give to the reader. It was on the subject of the resentment of injuries. "It is a strange thing, said he that we cannot submit with equanimity to evils in the moral world, as we do in the natural. We expect a fair day, and there comes a foul. Is it any gratification to us, to beat the air, or stamp upon the puddle? Who would think of giving the cow-skin to a hurricane? Yet the greatest damage is sometimes done by a blast of wind. He would be thought a madman, and be sent to this [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-299.jpg) \- external link  - Page 074. ] place, who was deprehended buffeting a whirlwind, even though it had torn up by the roots, or broken down a fruit tree. He must be out of his senses indeed, that would have recourse to a bludgeon, in case of an attack by an inundation. It would be a laughing stock to see even a Turk giving the bastinado, to a hot season, or to cold weather. The knout to a Russian winter! Did the Pope ever excommunicate a storm on the ocean? What man is angry with a squall of wind? He considers it as an evil, and composes his mind to the loss of his merchandize. Is ingratitude less to be expected? And yet when it happens, we reprobate, and seek revenge. Sufferings from moral causes, are just as common as from natural. And yet when an injury is committed by a human creature, we are taken by surprise, and lose temper. Cannot we turn away, as from a sudden gust, and take shelter under some one willing to protect us, without thinking more of the enemy that had beaten us, with his fist, or abused us with a bad tongue? The pelting of a hail stone never induces you to use hard words, or to demand satisfaction of the atmosphere; and yet you will send a challenge, and risk your own life to punish a man that has barely slighted you in manner, or in words. Why not take the other side of the road, and pass him by as you would a pond of water, or a marshy place? Cannot we take the necessary precautions against calumny, as we would against foul air, without putting ourselves in a passion with the author of the defamation any more than with a vapour, or an exhalation? But there is such a thing, as will and intention in the moral agent. Is this any thing more than an idea, a matter of our own imaginations? It is the same thing to us whether there is a spirit in the winds, or no spirit when a house is blown down; or the roof carried [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-300.jpg) \- external link  - Page 075. ] away. What is it to us, whether the cause thinks, or does not think. We blame it the most sometimes because it does not think. We call in question the understanding of a man when he wrongs us; and say, if he had the reflection of a reasonable being, he would have conducted himself in a different manner. And yet the consideration that he had not reflection, does not mitigate, but increases our resentment. Oh! the inconsistency of human life and manners. I am shut up here as a madman, in a mad place, and yet it appears to me that I am the only rational being amongst men, because I know that I am mad, and acknowledge it, and they do not that they are mad, or acknowledge it." As far as my small judgment goes, says an orator, when he is about to express an opinion; and yet he does not think his judgment small . He would take it much amiss if any one took him at his word, and would say, true it is, your judgment is but small . All think themselves wise, wise, wise. But I say, fools, fools, fools. At this he threw himself down on his couch, and fell asleep. In the next apartment was an insane person, who stiled himself the "Lay Precher," who took his text as usual; and began to preach. Book of Judges, 21\. 25. "In those days there was no King in Israel; and every man did that which was right in his own eyes." That was right, said a mad democrat, who was confined in a cell across the passage. When we got quit of a king, the same thing was expected here, "that every man should do that which was right in his own eyes;" but behold we are made to do that which is right in the eyes of others. The law governs, and this law is made up of acts of assembly, and the decisions of the courts; and a kind of law they call [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-301.jpg) \- external link  - Page 076. ] the common law . A man's nose is just as much upon the grind-stone as it was before the revolution. It is not your own will that you must consult; but the will of others. Down with all law, and give us a free government, "that every man may do that which is right in his own eyes." Madman, said the Preacher; thou knowest not what thou sayest. It is not allowable that men should do that which is right in their own eyes. A man is not a proper judge of right in his own cause. His passions bias his judgment. He cannot see the right and justice of the case. The want of a king in Israel was accompanied with the want of laws. I do not mean to say that, without a king there cannot be laws. But kings are put here for government, that being the government, at that period known in the world. For even a mixed monarchy is an improvement of later times. The meaning is, there being no government, every man did that which was right in his own eyes; and ten to one, but it was wrong in the eyes of others:  A wild state of anarchy. A time for Sampson to live, that could knock down people with " the jaw bone of an ass ." What worse, said the democrat, than amongst us, where we see honest men knocked down with the jaw bones of lawyers , arguing a cause, and the judges that decide upon the case  . Passing on, the Captain came to the stair case, and ascended to the second story; he wished to see a mad poet who had been engaged in travestying his travels. He had the advantage of a commodious apartment, more so, than some of those who have surpassed him in his art in different places and periods of the world. The poet Dryden was not so well accommodated, at the time he wrote his St. Cecilia's Ode, which is thought to be the best of his [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-302.jpg) \- external link  - Page 077. ] compositions. The poet that we have before us, was a quiet man, and had the privilege of the hospital, to go and come as he pleased, but not to go without the walls. He was confined here by his relations merely as a matter of convenience, being so absent in mind, that he was incapaple of taking care of himself. The manuscript, in doggerel verse, would seem to be sufficient to compose a book, half as large as Hudibras. He was overjoyed to see the Captain, who was the hero of his poem; and the Captain was no less amused to see him, and the adventures of which he made a part turned into rhyme. His sensations were equally sublime with those of the Trojan hero, when he saw the war of Troy in the paintings hung up in the hall of the queen of Carthage. The circumstance was not less entertaining to him as the actor, or the speaker in the course of the adventures so recorded, and he consented to accept a copy, not that he meant to give it to the press, but to cast his eye over it, for his particular amusement: nevertheless, the manuscript having fallen into our hands, we shall select parts of it, and according as the reader seems to like that which he gets, we shall give him more. In the mean time we shall dismiss the Captain from the hospital, not but that there was much more to see and hear amongst the Bedlamites still, but affected with melancholy and weary of the scene. At the same time doubting with himself, whether those he saw confined were more devoid of reason than the bulk of men running at large in the world. He had no doubt of one being a lunatic of whom the keeper made mention, but whom he had not an inclination to visit, in the second story; for he was said to be employed looking at the moon, with a pair of spectacles which he took for a telescope. For lunacy means moon-struck, and this seemed to be the case with him. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-303.jpg) \- external link  - Page 078. ] HAVING turned his back on the hospital, there was a concourse of people: the cry was a new code of laws. A new code, said a grave man? Is not the old, the result of experience, a gradual accession of rules and regulations in society? Begin again, and you would come to the same result at last. But to form laws from abstract comprehension, fitted to all exigencies, is not within the compass of the powers of man. It is sufficient if he can form a schedule or plan of government; this is the outline, the interior gyrations, must be made up from repeated experiments. The words new code, were mistaken by some amongst the crowd, for no code. No code, was repeated through the multitude. What no laws at all, said the grave man? No laws, was the outcry immediately, and every vociferous person wishing to hear himself speak, and every timid person, afraid of being suspected of incivicism, began to call out, no laws. That will never do, said the grave man, it were better to have no judges than to have no laws, or at least as bad. For how can men judge but by laws. Arbitrary discretion is a blind guide. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-304.jpg) \- external link  - Page 079. ] The words no judges, had been heard more distinctly than the rest, and supposing it to be a substitute for no laws, voices came from every quarter in support of the amendment. I support the amendment; I agree to the substitute, no judges, no judges. The clamour became general, down with the judges. This puts me in mind, said the Captain, of the sermon of the Lay Preacher. I should have no objection to an amendment of the law, or to new judges but no laws, no judges, is more than I had expected to have heard in an assembly of republicans. A person standing by was struck with the good sense and moderation of this remark, and stepping forward, made his harangue. I will not say, said he, that I am for no judges; But this I will say, that new judges is a desideratum in the body politic. The grater part that we have are grown gray, and are as blind as bats: they cannot see without spectacles. I am for new judges. You talk of judges, said the grave man, as if it was as easy to make a judge of law as to make a bird-cage, or a rat-trap. What, said a merry fellow, shall we have new shoes, new pantaloons, and new every thing; and shall we not have new judges? We shall never do any good with the present set of judges on the bench. It was carried that there should be new judges. But having disposed of the old, it became a question whom they should elect for new. The bog-trotter was proposed for one, having had his name up before in the matter of the newspaper. What, my waiter, said the Captain? Yes, your waiter, said a wag, or a fool, I do not know which. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-305.jpg) \- external link  - Page 080. ] You astonish me, said the Captain. My waiter a judge of the courts. He will make sad work on a bench of justice. He will put down all law. He will silence all lawyers. He will have no law: no books; no cases; all plain sailing, with him. Every man his own lawyer, state his own cases, and speak for himself. No Hooks and Crooks; no Hawkins; no Bacons; or Blackstones; or Whitestones; no Strange cases; no law of evidence. Every man sworn and tell what he knows, whether he has seen it, or heard it, at second, or at first hand: interest or no interest; all the same; let the jury believe what they think proper; and the judge state the law from his thumbs ends without books. This is madness, and here I have more trouble on my hands with this bog-trotter, than I have ever had before. It is a more delicate matter to see him placed on the seat of justice, to administer the laws, than to be in the Senate House, and assist to make them. For in that case he would be but a component member of a great body, and his errors, might be lost in the wisdom of the other members. But in the capacity of judge he is sole, or with but a few, and it is an easier matter to frame a single law than to expound and apply a thousand. Gentlemen, said he, addressing himself to the multitude, you will ruin your administration. You will bring disgrace upon it. The people will not feel your error at once; but they will feel it by and bye, and will depose you who have been the most active in this cavalcade. That is, they will withdraw from you their confidence. The abuse of power leads to the loss of it. No party in a government, can exist long, but by moderation and wisdom. The duration of power, will always be in proportion to the discreet use of it  . I am shocked at your indiscretion. Have [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-306.jpg) \- external link  - Page 081. ] not some of you read Don Quixotte? In the capacity of judge, Sancho Panzo made some shrewd decisions; or rather Cervantes made them for him; for, I doubt much whether Sancho ever made one of them. But who is there of you, will make decisions for Teague. I doubt much whether he would take advice, or let any one judge in his behalf. Besides that of a judge is not a ministerial office, and cannot legally be exercised by deputy. You will make pretty work of it with Teague for a judge. It may be according to the light of nature; but not according to the law of nature that he will judge. At least, not according to the law of nations: for no nation under heaven ever had such a judge. Not even in the most unenlightened times. If he had a knowledge even of the old Brehon law, in his native country, it might be some help. But in matters of meum and tuum he has a certain wrong headedness that hinders him from ever seeing right. He thinks always on the one side; that is on his own side. But what he would do between suitors, I am not so clear, but I take it he would be a partial judge. The man has no principle of honour or honesty. He would be an unjust judge. Will not the commission make him a judge, exclaimed one of the multitude. But will it make him capable of judging, said the Captain? Why not, said a boisterous man. What else qualifies or makes fit. Can the most sensible man, or the most learned person, judge without a commission? Doubtless that is the authority, said the Captain. But still the capacity. Capacity! Said a man, with a bit out of the one side of the membrane of his nose, snivelling in his [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-307.jpg) \- external link  - Page 082. ] speech; capacity! Give me the commission, and I will shew you the capacity. Let me see who will dare to question my capacity. Such a burlesque, said the blind lawyer, tends naturally to the overthrow of justice. For able and conscientious men will withdraw from a degraded station. Intrigue, worse than, perhaps, the arm of flesh itself, will come to be employed in the management of causes. Security of person, property, and reputation, the great end of civil institutions, will be rendered precarious. The security of them depends upon fixed and known rules, as well as the application of them. It is not an easy matter to attain a knowledge of these rules. The laws of a single game at school, or of such as employ manhood, in an hour of amusement, is a thing of labour to acquire. The law parliamentary; or rules of a legislative body, is not learnt in a day. And yet without a knowledge of it, there is a want of order, as well as dispatch in business. The laws of municipal regulation in a community, laws of external structure, and internal police, are not attainable with the celerity of a moments warning. But when we come to the rules of property, the laws of tenure and of contract, a field opens, that startles the imagination. Even the study of years, makes but a sciolist. But, you will say, lay aside rules. Let all decisions spring from the dictates of common sense applied to the particular case before the judge. But the mere arbitrary sense of right and wrong, is an unsafe standard of justice. A free government, is a government of laws. A Cadi or a Mufti are tolerable only in despotic countries. You are destroying your republic by undermining the independence, and respectability of your judiciary. It is that branch of the government, on which liberty most essentially depends. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-308.jpg) \- external link  - Page 083. ] The multitude seemed to be but little moved by these observations, which made it necessary for the Captain to try what could be done with the bog-trotter himself, to dissuade him from accepting the appointment. Accordingly, taking him aside, he spoke to him as follows: Teague, said he, will there be no end of your presumption? I take it to be a great error of education in our schools, and colleges, that ambition is encouraged by the distribution of honours, in consideration of progress in letters; that one shall be declared the first scholar in languages, another in mathematics. It is sufficient that the fact be so without announcing it. The self-love of the student will find it out himself, without information, and his fellows will be ready to acknowledge it, provided that it is not arrogated, or a demand made that it be formally acknowledged. For this takes away the friendship of others, and corrupts the moral feelings of the successful competitor himself. Ambition springs up, that accursed root which poisons the world. Now, you cannot lay your ambition to the charge of schools or colleges: for, you have never been at any seminary whatever, as far as I understand, if I may guess from your want of attainments in academic studies; and yet notwithstanding you have never been in the way of the distinction of grades, and prizes, and literary honours; you have discovered an ambition of a full grown size, even at this early period of your life. It must be a bad nature that has generated this preposterous aiming and stretching at promotion. A wise man will weigh, what he undertakes; what his shoulders can bear, and what they cannot. He will consider whether the office is fit for him, or whether he is fit for the office. He will reflect that the shade is oftentimes the most desirable situation. Do you [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-309.jpg) \- external link  - Page 084. ] see that bird upon the tree there? It builds its nest with care, and endeavours to render it convenient. But does it build it on the topmost bough, exposed to the sun, and the heavy rain; or rather does it not choose an inferior branch in the thickest of the umbrage? Take a lesson from the fowls of heaven, and the brutes of the field. It is not the elevation of place, but the conveniency of accommodation that governs them. Ambition is an accursed germe of evil in the human mind. It is equally destructive of the happiness of the possessor and of that of others. You a republican, and yet destitute of republican virtue, the basis of which I take to be humility and self-denial . Were I the master of an academy, the first, and continual lesson would be, to attain science, and be learned; but as to seeming so, to consider it as of no account. Science would discover itself . The possessing knowledge would be its own reward. The concealment of all self-knowledge of this advantage, not only constitutes the decent and the becoming in life, but lays the foundation of emolument in the good will of others  . It may be pardonable in early age to have pride in the advantage of bodily form; but we call in question the modesty of a youth, male or female, who seems to set an inordinate value, on a limb or a feature. How much less tolerable, the pride of mental superiority  . But of all things under heaven the most contemptible, and the least sufferable, is that of incompetency to a trust, and the aspiring to a place, for which the candidate is not qualified; or, even if qualified, against modesty, and the claims of others. It brings a man to be the subject of a laugh, and ridicule. Do you know that the making you a judge, was but a farce, in the manner that Sancho Panzo was advanced to a government. You have read the Don Quixotte of Cervantes, I presume. But [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-310.jpg) \- external link  - Page 085. ] what do I say; you read Don Quixotte! you have read nothing; and yet you would be a judge. Ambition, I tell you, is an evil. You have read of Julius Caesar, in the Roman history. Again I forget myself. You have read nothing. But I may tell you of him. What was the purple to him compared with losing the affections of his countrymen? Though, by the bye, there is some reason to think that it was neck or nothing with him, and that self-preservation made it necessary to usurp the empire, things having come to that state at Rome, that if he did not usurp, another would. But a good republican, and a virtuous man, would rather fall, than save his life, at the expence of the rights of others. But it slips my memory that I am talking to a bog-trotter. There is no making a silk purse out of a sow's ear. Suppose you were made a judge; in this hurly burly of the public mind, would your standing be secure, even with the most perfect competency for the place? You would not stand two throws of a weaver's shuttle. Your chair, under you, would be like an old piece of furniture bought at a vendue, put together for sale; the glueing gone, and the joints broken. It would fall before it had felt half your weight, and leave you, with your backside upon the floor. New judges today, and the public mind would have desired new judges to-morrow Consider the physical consequence of being broken from the bench. Take my word it is not a common breaking this; it will affect your frame at every change of the weather. It will make an almance of your whole system. It will make your joints ache. It will be worse than a sprain in the ancle; or a rheumatism in the limbs; or a sciatica in the small of the back. It will give you a cholic every new moon, and take away your sleep at midnight. It will give you the jaundice; and hurt your [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-311.jpg) \- external link  - Page 086. ] complexion. Your eyes will become yellow, and your cheeks green. You will lose your appetite; and not be able to eat, even when you can get it. Why man; it will blister your feet, and break your shins. It will bring you to death's door, before you have lived half your days. By de holy poker, said Teague, I will be no judge, if dat is de way of it. Dey may judge for demselves; I will be no judge. De devil a judge will I be; I would sooner dig turf or be a horse jockey at fairs in Ireland, dan be a judge on dose terms; so dey may make whom dey please a judge for me. CONTAINING OBSERVATIONS. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-312.jpg) \- external link  - Page 087. ] TO speak seriously upon the subject, I doubt much, whether in the present commercial state of society, and where property is not held in common, people would be safe and prosperous without law altogether. I do not know whether, even lawyers are not a necessary evil. It is true, they take up more time, than is perhaps necessary, in their pleadings, and cite more authorities than are absolutely applicable to the point in question. The younger council read authorities, to shew that they have read, and the older to prove that they have not forgotten. I would allow ninety nine cases out of an hundred, that have nothing to do with the matter; but the citing five hundred cases, not one of which is any thing to the purpose, is carrying it to an excess which in strictness cannot be justified. It takes up time, and is not paying a proper respect to the common sense of the country. A little original reason and reflection of the advocate himself might answer the purpose in some cases. The reason of a man's own raising, may be as good as that which is bought at market. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-313.jpg) \- external link  - Page 088. ] \---What is't t'us, Though it were said by Trismegistus? Not that I mean to undervalue, much less to lay aside altogether, the assistance of borrowed reason, and the auxiliary deductions of other men, whether on this side the water or beyond it. But there is such a thing as being enslaved to authorities, or at least, loading the argument with too much incumbrance of quotations. It depends a good deal upon the countenance given by the court to such a lumber drawn from old books; yet the correcting it requires an infinity of care, lest you lose the advantages of recurring to first principles. Antiquos recludere fontes. The profound divine reads the commentators and thence assists the comments which he makes himself. The avoiding one error leads into a worse. \---Fuga Culpae, In vitium ducit. In tearing up the darnel, the wheat may come with it. The books must be read. Nocturna manu, versate diurna. But in an argument, I value more the judgment of selection, than the labour of collecting. It is a flattering thing to a court, to take it for granted, that they understand first principles; and even a jury are not displeased when you seem to suppose in the summing up the evidence, and the remarks upon it, that they themselves can see a thing that is as plain as a pike-staff. Hence, long speaking, and an over-minute investigation, is sometimes odious. Or to attempt to make them believe what cannot be believed, makes a man sick, provided he is not disposed to laugh. This depends a good deal on the natural playfulness of his mind or the mood in which he is, from the want of food, or sleep. I excuse the people [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-314.jpg) \- external link  - Page 089. ] shewing a dissatisfaction to the trial by jury, under the pleadings of advocates, when the harangues, in an evening are like to prove eternal. When the stream of the orator turns upon itself; visits the ground that it had left, and is unwilling to quit the enchanted borders of the argument. Yet, I think, all things considered, that there is some use in courts of justice; and that it would not consist with antient habits, to lay them aside all at once. Liberty has been accustomed to them. I do not find that she has ever done without them. Wherever she comes, she seems to call for them. There is a strange coincidence between liberty, and an established jurisprudence. Whether it be matter of accident, or a connection in the natural existence, may deserve investigation. To give the devil his due, there is a good deal of pains taken in the courts to secure a fair trial, in the empanneling the jurors, and the admissibility of evidence, whether oral or written. As to the protecting the suitors from each other, and what is called the consequential contempt , it is a matter too delicate to touch upon, and we shall pass it by. But it seems to me that the peace is better kept, than if there were no courts at all, and no protection given to the parties, relative to the matter in question, even out of doors. However, this I leave to the consideration of the prudent. Some are of opinion that it would be better to argue all matters of meum, or tuum, in the public papers, or in hand-bills posted upon trees. The principal objection I see to this, is that the suitors waxing warm in the controversy, would call one another names and come to blows. A great deal of ill-blood between neighbours might shew itself. How could you keep lawyers from writing in the gazettes, any more than from speaking at the bar? And here, their jargon [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-315.jpg) \- external link  - Page 090. ] reduced to paper, would spread wider, and have more permanence than floating on the atmosphere with which their breath had mixed it in the first instance. The theories of ingenious men are not to be discouraged; yet it is not to be taken for granted that every theory that is plausible, is practicable; and will be found to answer the expectations of the most deliberate projector. The independence of judges, is a favourite theme with the judiciary themselves. And doubtless there is some reason on their side. For the Scripture says, " the fear of man bringeth a snare; " and the man that has most influence, in elections, is likely to be most feared by an elective officer . It would not be a state conducive to justice; that in giving judgment, the judge should be under the temptation to be looking about, and turning in his mind, the probability of being turned out in consequence of the judgment he was then to give: whether John O'Nokes, or John O'Stiles were to be the next members of the Legislative body. But this supposes judges fallible, and subject to the weakness of human nature, which is not to be supposed at all. But if you confer independence any more than in a ministerial officer, the judge becomes impudent. Power corrupts. It is natural to count too much upon a man's standing. Every one overrates his own importance; much more his own services. Self-love, and self-consequence swells, and produces oedematous effects. The man that has given his vote at an election, or written a paper, will conceive that he has turned the election; that day light springs because he has croaked  . He will denounce the man that differs from him, as swerving from the faith; the orthodoxy of the creed; making no allowance for the different organization of the brain, and the conception of [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-316.jpg) \- external link  - Page 091. ] things. How much more intolerant is a man like to be, that conceives himself fixed in a seat for an interminable period. There is such a thing as tyranny in judges; and I am no enemy to the investigation of official conduct. But let the power paramount, the people take care that they exercise not tyranny themselves; or give way to passion, which even in a body politic, is possible. Let the sovereign, like that of all the earth, do justice; and consider that the possession of power is upheld by justice. But as to the notion of some, that law, lawyers, and judges, might be laid aside altogether; I doubt as already hinted, the good policy of this. At least the experiment may be premature. Republican principles have purified the world a good deal; but I do not know that it is just come to this, that men are universally virtuous. Some vestiges of that ironage yet remain. The old man of federalism enters yet a little into our dealings with each other. I admit that public offices are pretty well purged; but there are unfair transactions yet spoken of among the multitude. It may be too soon yet to abolish all law, and jurisprudence. I admit that courts of law are a check upon the freedom of the press, and I excuse the publishers of gazettes, in their zeal to have them overthrown, or at least reduced to fear and subordination. Because it is drawing all things to their own examination. But are they sure that they are good republicans in this? Or, indeed that they consult their own security in the event of this licence. For prostrate the courts, and the cudgel prostrates themselves. While they are pushing at a judge, they are preparing the way for some robust man in due time, to push at them. With different weapons it is true. For the weapons of the press, are spiritual, or of the mind; [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-317.jpg) \- external link  - Page 092. ] but that of the bludgeon is corporal, and made of wood, or some other material of a solid substance. It is not the interest of a printer that a judge be rendered timid, by persecution; for he stands between the cudgelist, or pugelist in a controversy with the man of types. Thus the freedom of the press, is supported by the laws, and by the due enforcement of them. Yet it is natural for a man at first view, to think, that if there were no courts, he could write with less restraint. He could make every man tributary to his opinion; or to his measures; for if he did not libel, he could threaten to libel, and compel a submission. It seems to me that a poor man is safer in a country of laws, than in one without laws. "For wealth maketh many friends;" and I do not hear any complaints that the rich are favoured in the courts. But, that may be owing to the mode of trial, which is in the face of the world, and where lawyers are suffered to make as free with the character and conduct of a rich rogue in a cause, as with one of a more circumscribed estate. This last is one argument I have just hit upon, in favour of lawyers; and I find myself well disposed to give them a lift when I can with propriety. For though I would be willing to muzzle them a little in their speeches; yet I do not wish to see them run down altogether. Fortitude is a requisite qualification in a judge. It requires resolution to preserve order at the bar; overawe petulance; arrest impertinence in manners, or in argument; suppress side-bar conversation; and render the practice tolerable to practitioners of mild and modest demeanor; of delicate and gentle disposition; of scrupulous honour, and liberality in the conduct of a suit, or management in courts. Resolution is necessary to decision unequivocal and satisfactory, unawed by forensic opinion or the influence of individuals. It is dangerous therefore to sap this [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-318.jpg) \- external link  - Page 093. ] spirit of independence, by the precarious tenure of the office, while at the same time the right of the citizen is examined, and the power of the court considered in its latitude and operation. All I mean to say, is, that the examination of the judicial conduct is a high trust, in the view of an enlightened public, and answerable to the present time, and to posterity, for the consequences. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-319.jpg) \- external link  - Page 094. ] WHAT is the reason of the fluctuations of parties in republics? The reasons are many. But one is the unskilful driving of the state carriage, by those who get possession of the curricle. Phaeton, you know, though he had the best advice from his father In medio tutissimus ibis. The middle way is the best; yet before the middle of the day, he had set the earth on fire. The people are always honest, but oftentimes the instruments of their own servitude; by distrust where they ought to have confidence, and confidence where they ought to have distrust. The bulk cannot have perfect information; and that reach of thought which observation, and experience gives. They must trust a good deal to others in the science of government, and the expediency of public measures; and it depends upon those whom they do trust, whether the power of a party is long lived, or short. All depends upon the wisdom, and integrity of those that lead. What ruined the federal administration, but the intemperance of driving. The upright disapproved, and the prudent forsook it. The unskilful pilots were not aware of an under current that had begun to set. Extremes [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-320.jpg) \- external link  - Page 095. ] will always beget the same effect; and like the tension of a chord, produce a return in a contrary direction. Judgment, how far to go, and where to stop, is the great secret. Trained shaft horses, that will back down the inclined plane of a hill, are excellent in a team. Younglings, though mettlesome, and generous, are apt to draw too fast, upon a declivity or even on a plain. For that reason, I cannot say, that I am favourable to a change of representatives every year, even when what has been done, does not altogether please me. Because experience is a great softner of the mind; it gives knowledge. A man after some times begins to understand the game, and to find out who it is that takes a lead with a view to some object of his own. That may be unfathomable in the early breaking of the business, and yet come out at last. Or a man may come to see his own error, and profit by the recollection  . But how will an honest man in a deliberate body, know what to trust but his own judgment? Nothing. Then let him think humbly, diligently, extensively, distrusting pre-conceived opinions, and laying his mind open to the light of truth. Yet there may be some rules to guide the judgment. Such as trusting the judgment of others who have had experience in the science, or establishment, relative to which, the question is agitated, or the measure proposed. Every one is to be trusted in that thing, of which he has some knowledge. That man is to be trusted who is free from the imputation of inordinate selfishness in private life. You will find an artist that is fonder of the art than the emoluments. There are men that connect the public good with their own happiness; generous spirits who manifest this by their disinterestedness in ordinary transactions. This is a good sign, and ought to [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-321.jpg) \- external link  - Page 096. ] inspire confidence in their agency, in public matters. The man that covets good will more than money, and the praise of benevolence, more than that of private gain  , has some soul in him, and other things equal, is to be trusted before him of a contracted spirit, and self-love in all his actions. But after all, things will take their course; and no party in a republic will retain power always, because they will abuse it; but the duration of power in an elective government will depend considerably upon the being able to distinguish between vigour and moderation. CONTAINING OBSERVATIONS. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-322.jpg) \- external link  - Page 097. ] THERE is a natural alliance between liberty and letters. Men of letters, are seldom men of wealth, and these naturally ally themselves with the democratic interest in a commonwealth. These form a balance with the bulk of the people, against power, springing from family interest, and large estates. It is not good policy in republicans to declare war against letters; or even to frown upon them, for in literary men is their best support. They are as necessary to them as light to the steps. They are a safe auxiliary; for all they want is, to have the praise of giving information. The study of political law, and municipal jurisprudence qualifies to inform, and hence at the commencement of the American revolution, lawyers were the first to give the alarm and assert the rights of the people. Shall we forget the recent services of lawyers in the framing the federal, and state constitutions? The name of lawyer ought not to be hunted down, because there are characters, unworthy of the profession, with whom the love of money is inordinate, and insatiable. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-323.jpg) \- external link  - Page 098. ] There is ground, for the regret, that literary institutions are not favoured; that it has become a popular thing to call out against learning, as not necessary to make republicans. The knowledge of our rights, and capacity to prosecute, and defend them, does not spring from the ground; but from education, and study. Under a federal government; we are peculiarly situated. We stand in need of law, learning, and legal abilities to support ourselves in a contest with the claims of the general government, which, as it bounds the state jurisdiction, must in the nature of things encroach upon it. It is of great moment, with a view to this very object that our judiciary be composed of able men, that under the concurrent jurisdiction of the courts, it may be able to hold its own; or more especially, that from a want of confidence in the abilities of the state judges, recurrence may not be had to the tribunals of the United States, by legitimate election, or by those collusions against which it is difficult to guard. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-324.jpg) \- external link  - Page 099. ] THE rumour had prevailed, that the judges had been broke. Is it upon the wheel? Said a learned man; for he did not think it could be with the bow-string that they had been punished; for that is the mode towards public officers, in the dominions of the Grand Seignior; nor did he think it could have been with the knout or bastinado; as that is usual only in Russia, and makes a part of the penal code, at the discretion of the Czar. Not upon the wheel, said a by-stander; they are not broke in that sense of the word. It is but a removal from office, that is intended by the word, broke; and not the breaking of the back, or the limbs, or any part of the body. Why break them? said the learned man, even in that sense of the word. That is remove. Because they gave a wrong judgment, said the by-stander. There could na be a better reason, said a Scotch gentleman, it is contrary to the very end o' their creation. Why not reverse their judgment? said the scholar. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-325.jpg) \- external link  - Page 100. ] Because it is better to reverse themselves, said the Scotch gentleman; and let them and their judgment a' go thegether. At saying this, a person came in who gave intelligence, that the 4th of July being about to be celebrated, the people had made choice of Teague O'Regan, the Captain's man, to deliver an oration, on this, the anniversary of our independence, and to draw up the toasts. Will absurdities never cease? said the Captain, in a free government. My bog-trotter chosen to deliver an harangue, in commemoration of the men, and measures, of our great national contest! It is for the celebration of the festival. Astonishing! Teague, said he, I could have put up with the great variety of functions to which you have been proposed; or have proposed yourself; even that of a judge of the courts of law; as being matters of a mere secular nature, and forensic concern; but to be the organ of the celebration of a festival, which has become in a manner sacred, by the cause to which it is consecrated, is beyond all endurance; and as to the drawing up toasts, or sentiments for the day, you are incompetent. You may be equal to the fabrication of a common place allusion to the prevailing cry, and make it the voice of the occasion, as for instance, to give a slap at the judges. But as to hitting off thoughts on the principles of government; or practical application in the measures of the administration, you are unequal to the task. With regard to Teague himself, he had as little thought of delivering an oration, or drawing up toasts as any one else could have. The apothecary who meant to sell medicines on that day, on a stage, had employed him to act in the capacity of tumbler; not that he could tumble; but that he could not tumble; [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-326.jpg) \- external link  - Page 101. ] and so, by preposterous attempts at agility would answer the purpose of moving laughter, and drawing the attention of the multitude, who being collected for that purpose, might be drawn into another, the purchase of worm powders, lozenges, and usual drugs. The celebration of our national anniversary, will no doubt, be continued while the union of these states exists. It may be continued by the parts probably after a dis-union; an event certain, and inevitable; but which, the wise and the good delight to contemplate as remote; and not likely to happen for innumerable ages The orations delivered on this day, may greatly contribute to postpone the event of a disunion, by patriotic, and conciliatory sentiments. For this reason, the best abilities, and the most virtuous hearts ought to be chosen to be the orators of the occasion. But the toasts, or sentiments given on the convivial libations; not in honor of imaginary deities, as amongst the Greeks and Romans; but in honor of deceased heroes, who have passed from a scene where they were mixed with us, and to a scene, where we shall be mixed with them; these expressions of the public mind, ought to be the peculiar care of the aged and the wise. They ought to be the lectures of wisdom. Taking up the matter in this point of view, what delicacy ought to be attached to the expression of sentiment. Let it be considered that on a single thought may depend the essence of liberty; health or poison may be communicated by a word. For the toasts of this day are considered as indications of the public will  , and yet without a due sense of the solemn obligations of honor and honesty, toasts are brought forward, perhaps by an individual, in accommodation to a local prejudice, and merely to accomplish the purpose of an election to a public body. For the fact [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-327.jpg) \- external link  - Page 102. ] is, that toasts are not always real expressions of the sentiments of even a majority of those who suffer them to pass; they are introduced by the mistake of those, who substitute the sentiments of the uninformed for that of the whole community. But all that is illiberal, on these occasions, ought to be avoided. All inhumanity, and injustice. All anticipation of judgment on cases depending; all expressions calculated to inflame the decision. For a popular clamour once raised is difficult to be resisted. Democracy has its strength in strict integrity; in perfect delicacy; in elevation and dignity of mind. It is an unjust imputation, that it is rude in manners, and coarse in expression. This is the characteristic of slaves, in a despotism; not of democrats in a republic. Democracy embraces the idea of a standing on virtue alone; unaided by wealth or the power of family. This makes "the noble of nature" of whom Thomas Payne speaks. Shall this noble not know his nobility, and be behind the noble of aristocracy who piques himself upon his honour, and feels a stain upon his delicacy as he would a bodily wound? The democrat is the true chevalier, who, though he wears not crosses, or the emblazoned arms of heraldry, yet is ready to do right, and justice to every one. All others are impostors, and do not belong to the order of democracy. Many of these there are no doubt; false brethren; but shall the democrat complain of usurpation; of undue influence; or oppression and tyranny from ambitious persons; and not be jealous, at the same time of democratic tyranny in himself, which is the more pernicious, as it brings a slur upon the purest principles? [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-328.jpg) \- external link  - Page 103. ] IT has been asked, why, in writing this memoir; have I taken my clown, from the Irish nation? The character of the English clown, I did not well understand; nor could I imitate the manner of speaking. That of the Scotch I have tried, as may be seen, in the character of Duncan. But I found it, in my hands, rather insipid. The character of the Irish clown, to use the language of Rousseau, "has more stuff in it." He will attempt any thing. The American has in fact, yet, no character; neither the clown, nor the gentleman. So that I could not take one from our own country; which I would much rather have done, as the scene lay here. But the midland states of America, and the western parts in general, being half Ireland, the character of the Irish clown, will not be wholly misunderstood, It is true the clown is taken from the aboriginal Irish; a character not so well known in the North of that country; nevertheless, it is still so much known, even there, and amongst the emigrants here, or their descendants, that it will not be wholly thrown away. On the Irish stage, it is a standing character; and on the theatre in Britain, it is also introduced. I [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-329.jpg) \- external link  - Page 104. ] have not been able to do it justice, being but half an Irishman, myself, and not so well acquainted with the reversions, and idiom, of the genuine Thady, as I could wish. However, the imitation at a distance from the original, will better pass than if it had been written, and read, nearer home. Foreigners will not so readily distinguish the incongruities; or, as it is the best we can produce for the present, will more indulgently consider them. I think it the duty of every man who possesses a faculty, and perhaps a facility of drawing such images, as will amuse his neighbour, to lend a hand, and do something. Have those authors done nothing for the world, whose works would seem to have had no other object but to amuse? In low health; after the fatigue of great mental exertion on solid disquisitions; in pain of mind, from disappointed passions; or broken with the sensibilities of sympathy, and affection; it is a relief to try not to think, and this is attainable, in some degree; by light reading. Under sensations of this kind, I have had recourse more than once to Don Quixotte; which doubtless contains a great deal of excellent moral sentiment. But, at the same time, has much, that can serve only to amuse. Even in health, and with a flow of spirits, from prosperous affairs, it diversifies enjoyments, and adds to that happiness of which the mind is capable. I trust therefore, that the gravest persons, will not be of opinion that I ought to be put out of the church, for any appearance of levity, which this work may seem to carry with it. I know there have been instances, amongst the puritans of clergymen, degraded for singing a Scotch Pastoral. But music is a carnal thing compared with putting thoughts upon paper. It requires an opening [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-330.jpg) \- external link  - Page 105. ] of the mouth, and a rolling of the tongue, whereas thought is wholly spiritual, and depends, not on any modification of the corporeal organs. Music, however, even by the strictest sects, is admissable in sacred harmony, which is an acknowledgment, that even sound, has its uses to soothe the mind or to fit it for contemplation. I would ask, which is the most entertaining work, Smollet's history of England; or his Humphrey Clinker? For as to the utility, so far as that depends upon truth, they are both alike. History has been well said to be the Romance of the human mind; and Romance the history of the heart  . When the son of Robert Walpole asked his father, whether he should read to him out of a book of history; he said; " he was not fond of Romance  ." This minister had been long engaged in affairs; and from what he had seen of accounts of things within his own knowledge he had little confidence in the relation of things which he had not seen. Except memoirs of person's own times biographical sketches by cotemporary writers: Voyages, and Travels, that have geographical exactness, there is little of the historical kind, in point of truth, before Roderick Random; or Gil Blas. The Eastern nations in their tales, pretend to nothing but fiction. Nor is the story with them the less amusing because it is not true. Nor is the moral of it less impressive, because the actors never had existence. This, I have thought it sufficient to say, by way of introduction in this place. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-331.jpg) \- external link  - Page 106. ] IF the memoir of the bog-trotter had not advanced the author to a professor's chair; it had, at least, procured him admission to a number of learned societies; abroad and at home: should a new edition of the work come to be published, it will take up, at least, two quarto pages, to contain the names of these member-ships, and honours. But, notwithstanding the most pressing solicitations, he could not be brought to accept of an introduction to the St. Tammany Society; owing to the impression which he still retained of being an Indian chief, from which he had a narrow escape in the early part of this work. For unfortunately, it had been explained to him, that St. Tammany was an Indian Saint; and that the Society met in a wigwam, and exchanged belts  . They offered to make him a Sachem; but all to no purpose; the idea of scalping, and tomhacking, hung still upon his mind. It was by compulsion, in France, that he took upon him the character of an Esquimaux, in the procession of Anacharsis Clootz. The Captain presented himself to the Society, explaining these things; and that, in fact, such had been the alarm of the author of the memoir, at the [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-332.jpg) \- external link  - Page 107. ] proposition of being made a member, that he had absconded a day or two before. The Society took his excuse; and made the Captain, an honorary member in his place This was no object with the Captain, as he was a candidate for no office; and could draw no advantage from a promiscuous association. Nor did he see that he could be of any use to mankind in this new capacity, as the propagation of the gospel in foreign parts, or amongst the savages, made no part of the duty. For though Tammany himself may have been a Saint, there are few of his disciples that can pretend to sanctity, superior to common christians. Or, at least, their piety consists more in contemplation, than in active charity, and practice. We hear of no missionaries from them, amongst the aborigines of the continent, as we should be led to expect from being called the St. Tammany Society. For it is to be presumed, that this Saint had been advanced into the calender from the propagation of the christian faith, as was St. Patrick; St Andrew, and others. And though, as these old societies, with that of St. George, St. David,  &c. the duty of evangelists may be excused, the countries to which they belong, being long since christianized; yet the native Americans which St. Tammany represents, are whole nations of them infidels . The sons of St. Tammany ought certainly to think a little of their brothers that are yet in blindness, and lend a hand to bring them to light. It is not understood, that even a talk has been held with a single nation of our Western Tribes; though it could have cost but a few blankets, and a keg of rum to bring them together; and in council a little wampum, and killikaneeque. But our modern churches, have not the zeal of the primitive: or that zeal is directed to a different [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-333.jpg) \- external link  - Page 108. ] object, the building up the faith at home; and that in cicivil affairs, more than spiritual, doctines, it is not the time now to go about "in sheepskins, and goat skins," to convert the heathen, to the gospel; but the citizens to vote for this or that candidate. The Cincinnati being a mere secular society  , is excusable; but the Saint Societies , would seem in this, to depart from the etimology of their denomination. I know that some remark on the word Cincinnatus; and think that it ought to be pronounced as well as spelled, St. Cinnatus; and in that case all would be on a footing. I have no objection, provided that it makes no schism; for even the alteration of a name might make a schism. And a schism in a society militant , such as this is, might occasion a war of swords; and not a war of words only. I will acknowledge that I would like to have the thing uniform, St. Cinnatus , with the rest. So that if it could be brought about without controversy, it would contribute to the unity of designation. But controversy, is, above all things to be avoided. And nothing is more apt to engender controversy, than small matters. Because, small things are more easily lost than great. Or; because it vexes a man more, to find his adversary boggle at a trifling matter of orthodoxy when he has swallowed the great articles of credence, than to have to pull him up, a cables length, to some broad notion, that separates opinion and belief. To apply it to the matter of the spelling; qui heret in litera, heret in cortice . That is, to give it in English, it may depend upon a single letter how to draw the cork . All consideration therefore ought to be sacrificed to good humour, and conviviality, and I would rather let the heathen name remain, than christian it at the expence of harmony, and concord. But to return from this digression, to the St. Tammany Society, of which I was speaking, and which had some time ago convened. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-334.jpg) \- external link  - Page 109. ] It was a new thing to the Captain, to take a seat in the wigwam, and to smoke the calumet of peace. But he was disappointed in his expectations, of seeing Indian manners, and customs introduced, and made a part of the ceremony. There was some talk of brightening the chain, and burying the hatchet; but he saw no war-dance . What is more, even the young warriors were destitute of the Indian dress. There was not a moccasin to be seen on the foot of any of them; not a breech-clout; nor had they even the natural: or rather, native brands and marks, of a true born Indian. No ear cut in ringlets; no broach in the nose; or tatooing on the breast. All was as smooth, and undisfigured, as the anglo Americans that inhabit our towns, and villages. The Grand Sachem, made a speech to the Captain, not in Indian; but in German; which answered the end as well; for he did not understand it. But it was interpreted, and related to the proposition of making him a Chief, which he declined, professing that it was more his wish to remain a common Indian, than to be made even a half-king, not having it in view to remain much in the nation; or attend the council fires a great deal. He contented himself with putting some queries, relative to the History of St. Tammany; of what nation he was? Did he belong to the North, or the South? The East, or the West? On what waters did he make his camp? How many moons ago did he live? Where did he hunt? Who converted him; or whom did he convert? Why take an Indian for the tutelary saint of the [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-335.jpg) \- external link  - Page 110. ] the hurdies o' a thousand. Ye see our executive dinna do much better in their appointments to judicial and ministerial offices, than the rabble folk themselves to the legislative. It all comes to the same thing in every government; the wind blaws, and the feathers and the fern get uppermost. At this instant he was awa ened by a bustle out of doors. The fact was; a disagreement had taken place between Teague and the hostler at the inn, about their skill respectively in rubbing down and currying horses. Teague had made use of a single grab of hay, which he held with both hands, and impressed the horse, rubbing him from side to side, and up and down with all his might. The other with a wisp in each hand, rubbed; the right hand passing to the left, while the left hand passed to the right, in a traverse or diagonal direction. The hostler valued himself on having been groom, as he pretended, to a nobleman in England, and therefore must be supposed to understand the true art of currying. Teague maintained his opinion, and way of working with a good deal of obstinacy, until at last it came to blows. The first stroke was given by Teague, who hit the hostler on the left haunch with his foot, when he was stooping down to shew Teague how to rub the fetlock. The hostler recovering, and seizing Teague by the breast, pushed him back with a retrograde motion, until he was brought up by a cheek of the stable door. Resting against this, Teague made a sally, and impelled his antagonist several yards back, who finding at length behind him the support of a standing trough, which the carriers used for a manger to feed their horses, recovered his position, and elanced Teague some distance from the place of projection. But Teague still keeping hold of the collar of his adversary, had [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-336.jpg) \- external link  - Page 111. ] He cannot withstand the whole, if they should take offence without reason; and he may be consciously scrupulous of fighting; or may be afraid to fight; which will answer the end just as well; or he may have the good sense and fortitude, to declare off; which by the bye requires more courage, than the bulk of men possess  . It requires a courage above all false opinion;  and the custom will never be put out of countenance, until some brave men set the example. There is nothing that a wise man need fear, but dishonor , founded on the charge of a want of virtue; on that which all men, of all places, and of all times, will acknowledge to be disreputable  . Under this head, will not be found the refusal of a challenge. Nothing can be great, the contempt of which is great , Is it not great to despise prejudice, and false opinion? "He that ruleth his spirit, is greater than he that taketh a city:" but, he that is above the false sentiments of others, presents to me the image of a superior power, that ascends through the vapours of the atmosphere and dissipates the fog. The world is indebted to the man that refuses a challenge; but who can owe any thing to him that accepts it; for he sanctions an unjust law?  Doubtless, the accepting of a challenge, is pardonable as a weakness; but still it is a weakness. The man is a hero, who can withstand unjust opinion. It requires more courage, than to fight duels. To sustain life, under certain circumstances, calls for more resolution than to commit suicide . Yet suicide is not reputable. Brutus in the schools condemned it; but at Philippi, adopted it. Because his courage failed him. But cudgelling follows the refusal of a challenge. Not if there is instant notice given to a peace officer. But posting follows. Notice of that may be given [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-337.jpg) \- external link  - Page 112. ] society, a public body, of any kind might be presumed to bear more than an individual, because, the offence being divided amongst a greater number; it can be but a little, that will be at the expense of any one person. If therefore, any son of St. Tammany, or St. Cinnatus, should feel himself hurt by our lucubration, let him consider that it is better to laugh than be angry; and he will save himself, if he begins to laugh first. Though, after all, some will say, there is nothing to laugh at; and in this, they will be right. For at the most, it can only be a smile . It is a characteristic of the Comedy of Terence; that he never forces your laugh; but to smile only. That I take to be the criterion of a delicate and refined wit; and which was becoming the lepos, or humour of such men, as Lelius, and Scipio, who are thought to have formed his taste, and assisted him in his dramatic compositions. Yet I must confess, if I could reach it, I would like the broad laugh; but it is difficult to effect this, and, not, at the same time, fall into buffoonery, and low humour. Laughing is certainly favourable to the lungs; and happy the man, whose imagination leads him to risible sensations, rather than, to melancholy. All work, and no play, makes Jack a dull boy. But I have no idea of laughing, any more than of playing without having perfomed the necessary task of duty, or labour. An idle laughing fool, is contemptible and odious; and laughing too much is an extreme, which the wise will avoid. Take care not to laugh, when there is nothing to laugh at. I can always know a man's sense, by his song, his story, or his laugh. I will not say his temper; or principles; but certainly his share of understanding. The truth is, this composition has more for its object than merely to amuse though that is an object. But I doubt whether we shall receive cerdit for our good intentions. For truth lies in a [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-338.jpg) \- external link  - Page 113. ] well; and unless there is some one to draw the bucket, there is no getting it up. We have been often asked for a key to this work. Every man of sense has the key in his own pocket. His own feelings; his own experience is the key. It is astonishing, with what avidity, we look for the application of satire which is general, and never had a prototype. But the fact is, that, in this work, the picture is taken from human nature, generally, and has no individual in view. It was never meant as a satire upon men; but upon things. An easy way, to slur sentiments, under the guise of allegory; which could not otherwise make their way to the ears of the curious. Can any man, suppose, upon reflection, that if ridicule was intended upon real persons, it would be conveyed in so bungling a manner that people would be at a loss to know, who was meant? That is not the way, we fix our fools caps. Let any man put it to himself, and say, would he wish to be of those that give pain by personal allusion, and abuse. Self-love, for a moment may relish the stricture; but could never endure to be thought the author. In attacking reputation, there are two things to be considered, the manner, and the object. When the object is praise-worthy, there is an openness a franknes, and manliness of manner, which commands respect. But even where the object is a public good, the manner may excite contempt. Let our editors of news-papers, look to this, those of them who wish to be considered gentlemen; such as have no character to lose, and never wish to have any, may take all liberties, and occupy their own grade. But as we were saying, public bodies, and societies of men, ought not to take offence easily; nor resent violently. "As they are strong, be merciful." A single person is not on a footing with a great number. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-339.jpg) \- external link  - Page 114. ] He cannot withstand the whole, if they should take offence without reason; and he may be consciously scrupulous of fighting; or may be afraid to fight; which will answer the end just as well; or he may have the good sense and fortitude, to declare off; which by the bye requires more courage, than the bulk of men possess  . It requires a courage above all false opinion;  and the custom will never be put out of countenance, until some brave men set the example. There is nothing that a wise man need fear, but dishonor , founded on the charge of a want of virtue; on that which all men, of all places, and of all times, will acknowledge to be disreputable  . Under this head, will not be found the refusal of a challenge. Nothing can be great, the contempt of which is great , Is it not great to despise prejudice, and false opinion? "He that ruleth his spirit, is greater than he that taketh a city:" but, he that is above the false sentiments of others, presents to me the image of a superior power, that ascends through the vapours of the atmosphere and dissipates the fog. The world is indebted to the man that refuses a challenge; but who can owe any thing to him that accepts it; for he sanctions an unjust law?  Doubtless, the accepting of a challenge, is pardonable as a weakness; but still it is a weakness. The man is a hero, who can withstand unjust opinion. It requires more courage, than to fight duels. To sustain life, under certain circumstances, calls for more resolution than to commit suicide . Yet suicide is not reputable. Brutus in the schools condemned it; but at Philippi, adopted it. Because his courage failed him. But cudgelling follows the refusal of a challenge. Not if there is instant notice given to a peace officer. But posting follows. Notice of that may be given [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-340.jpg) \- external link  - Page 115. ] also, and a court, and jury brought to criticise upon the libel. Why is it, that a public body is more apt to take offence, than an individual? Because, every one becomes of consequence in proportion, as he is careful of the honor of the whole  . It is oftentimes, a mere matter of accident, whether the thing is well, or ill taken. If one should happen to call out, that it is an insult  , another is unwilling to question it, lest he should be suspected of incivism , and lose his standing in society in general; or, in that to which he more particularly belongs. The misconception of one forces itself upon another; and misconstruction prevails. That which was the strongest proof of confidence in the integrity, and justice of the body , is viewed as distrust; and a concern for their honor, considered a reproach . The most respectful language termed insolence . Implicit submission attributed to disrespect. Self-denial overlooked, and wantonness of insult  substituted in its place. This, all the offspring of mistake; which it is the duty of the individual to remove  . But how can he speak if his head is off, before he knows, that the offence is taken?  Protesting therefore that I mean no offence to either of these societies, or the individual members, in any thing I have said, I request them to take it in good part; or, if there should seem to be ground of affront, they will give me a hearing, and an opportunity to explain. There is no anticipating absolutely, and to all extent, what a person might say for himself if he was heard. That presumption which had existed might be removed. His motives might appear laudable; or at the worst, originating in a pardonable weakness. Whether or not, the credit of the tribunal with the world, might render it expedient to observe these [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-341.jpg) \- external link  - Page 116. ] appearances. They did it in France under the revolutionary government; and even the emperor, seems to consider it as indispensible  . If therefore any thing in these chapters should unfortunately give umbrage to the sons of St. Tammany, or to the Cincinnati members, I pray a citation , and demand a hearing . I trust I shall be able to convince them that I am not deficient in respect for them individually, or as public bodies. A half-king, means double king, or king of two nations, who have him speit between them  . [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-342.jpg) \- external link  - Page 117. ] THE Captain walking by himself, could not avoid reflecting on the nature of government; a union of souls, and corporal force. It makes all the difference that we see between the savage, and civilized life. The plough, the pully, the anchor, and the potters wheel, are the offspring of government; the loom, the anvil, and the press. But how difficult to link man with man; how difficult to preserve a free government! The easiest thing in the world, says the clown, if the sage will only let it alone . It is the philosopher that ruins all. There is some foundation for this. A mere philosopher is but a fool, in matters of business. Even in speculation, he sometimes, imagines nonsense. Sir Thomas More's Utopia has become proverbial; Harrington's Oceana has become a model for no government. Locke's Project was tried in South Carolina. It was found wanting. Imagination, and experiment are distinct things. There is such a thing as practical sense  . Do we not see instances of this every day? Men who can talk freely, but do nothing. They fail in every thing they attempt. There is too much vision mixed with the fact. Want of information of what has been; the not examining the fitness and [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-343.jpg) \- external link  - Page 118. ] congruity of things, leads to this. You see a tradesman framing a machine. A chip less, or more spoils the joint. Where is the best account to be found of the Roman commonwealth? In Polibyus. In what did its excellence consist? In its balances. What invented these? The exigencies of the case. Some were adopted in the first instance; others as remedies to the mischiefs that occurred. Were the sages of any use here? A little Sallust says, "considering the history of the Roman people, that the Gauls were before them in bravery, and the Greeks in eloquence;" yet Rome, has become the mistress of the world; I have found that it has been owing to a few great men that happened to arise in it. Were these men demagogues? Not in a bad sense of the word. They did not deceive the people for their own ends. How do demagogues deceive people? How do you catch a nag? You hold a bridle, in your left hand, behind your back; and a hat in your right, as if there were something in it, and cry cope. What do demagogues want by deceiving the people? To ride them. What do they pretend they have in the hat? oats, salt; any thing they find a horse likes. How do you distinguish the demagogue from the patriot? The demagogue flatters the clown, and finds fault with the sage. The patriot, and the sage, unless you mean the vain philosopher, mean the same thing. The Jewish prophets were all of them sages. They were seers, or men that saw far into things . You will find they were no slouches at blaming the people. "My people Israel is destroyed for lack of knowledge." " I am wounded in the house of my friends." This may be said of liberty, when republicans give it a stab  . The lamentations of Jeremiah are but the weepings of a patriot over the errors of the people. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-344.jpg) \- external link  - Page 119. ] Yet the people are always right, say the demagogues. I doubt that. Tom fool , may laugh at the expression, "save the people from themselves." Nevertheless, there is something in it. It is a scripture phrase, "go not with a multitude to do evil;" which would seem to imply that the multitude will sometimes do wrong. Do the multitude invent arts? Or some individuals among them? It is sometimes a matter of accident. Sometimes a matter of genius. But it is but one out of a thousand that happens to hit upon it; or that has the invention to contrive. But government is an easy matter; and has no wheels like a watch . What is it that enables one man to see farther into things than another in matters of government? What is it that makes him a seer? Thinking, looking, examining. Does it come by inspiration? More by experience. What are the wheels in our government that are like to go first? The Judiciary, the Senate, the Governor  . Is this the order in which they will go? Precisely. Does any man mean it? Not at all. How can it then happen? In the natural progress of things. Will one house become a tyrant? It will come to be the few; and the few were always tyrants. Will it be but a few in the house, that will govern? It will come to one at last. It will take fifty years to bring it to this. I do not say that it will be a hopstep, and jump; or a running leap, all at once. But we have the press here. Suppose a leading print in the hands of a patriot. He will keep all right. Yes, provided he is a sage at the same time. That is, that his information on the nature of government, is equal to his patriotism; or that his passion does not betray him into error; the journal of L. Ami du peuple by Marat, was patriotic; but it ruined the republic. An uninformed inflammatory print, is a [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-345.jpg) \- external link  - Page 120. ] corruptress of public opinion. It is the torch that sets Troy on fire. There is no Marat, amongst us, at the head of a Journal; but there may come to be. It is a difficult thing to trim the state vessel. The altering the stowage will put out of trim. The Hancock was taken, by altering the stowage. It destroyed the trim. Yet trimmers are unfavourably spoken of. That is, I presume, halting between two opinions. "Why halt ye between two opinions?" But preservers of the balance are not trimmers in this sense of the word. But how is it that the people can do wrong, when they mean well? An uninformed spirit of reform may prevail. How can passion prevail? The axletree is heated, by the nave , and the hob is set on fire. The nave heats itself by its own motion; and fire is communicated to the whole carriage. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-346.jpg) \- external link  - Page 121. ] THIS was the day of the fair held twice a year in the village. The people had come in and erected booths. The Captain took a walk to see the fair, and on the first stall he saw boxes. What are these, said the Captain? Cases for lawyers, said the Chapman. What will the lawyers do with these, said the Captain? Put them on their back-sides, said the Chapman. That will make them look like soldiers, with cartouch boxes, said the Captain. No matter for that, said the Chapman. A lawyer can no more move without cases , than a snail without a shell. They must have authorities . They have too many sometimes, said the Captain, as I have heard the blind lawyer say; but your cases, or cartouch boxes, I presume, are meant as a burlesque. Not altogether, so, said the Chapman; but a little bordering on it. These boxes might answer the purpose, of carrying cases, to the court; but an honest man might put them to a better use: so I say no more, but sell my wares to the customer. At the next stall was Tom the Tinker, with old kettles mended, and new ones for sale. Ay, Tom, [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-347.jpg) \- external link  - Page 122. ] said the Captain, this is better than resisting laws; even the excise law. I have found out a better way than resisting laws, now, said the Tinker. What is that, said the Captain? Abolish the courts, and demolish the judges, and the laws will go of themselves. Ah! Tom, said the Captain, leave the public functionaries, to the public bodies; you have nothing to do with them But I should have something to do with them, said the Tinker, if I had a voice in a public body But you have not a voice, said the Captain. But I may have, said the Tinker. I would rather hear your voice in your shop, said the Captain; and the sound of your hammer, on a coffee pot, or a tea kettle. You can patch a brass candle-stick, better than the state, yet, I take it, Tom. Or solder spoons either, said Tom; but every thing mnst have a beginning  . At the next stall was a hard-ware man; in the next, a Potter with his jugs Anacharsis, according to Diogenes Laertius, invented the anchor, and the Potters wheel; he was a more useful man than him that invented fire-arms; though it is a question with some, whether gunpowder has not rendered war less sanguinary. A Toy man had his stall next. As the Captain was looking at his baubles, an accident happened on the other side the way At a short turn, a cart had [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-348.jpg) \- external link  - Page 123. ] overset. It was light, and loaded with empty kegs. Nevertheless the driver wanted help to lift it up. The Chapman, the Toyman, the Potter, the hardware man, and Tom the Tinker were endeavouring toassist. The Tinker and the hard-ware man, had set their shoulders, to the cart. They hove it up; but, by too violent a push threw it to the other side. The Chapman, and Toyman, thought to set the matter right, and in the adverse direction, applied their force, being on the other side the cart; and to do them justice, gave a good hoist; but over-did the matter, as much as was done before; for the cart came back and lay prostrate in the same direction, as at first. The driver, in the mean time, was dissatisfied, Gentlemen, said he, do you mean to assist, or to injure me? It may be sport to you; but it is a loss to me, to have my cart broke, and my kegs staved. It is all wrong, said the Captain. Why not let the thing stand upon the horizontal? None of your tricks upon travellers. Let the poor man's cart have fair play, and stand upon its own bottom . Aye, aye, said a misanthrope; this comes of bad doings. You must be going to the woods; and disturbing innocent forests; cutting down young trees; making staves, and hooping kegs. This is just the way they make laws; to hoop people as you would a barrel. It is right to overturn the cart, on account of the manufacture it carries. Ah; it is in this manner, said a moral drawing man  ; that people overturn the state If the vehicle goes to the one side, it is the act of a patriot to set it right. But unskilful persons, pass the line of gravity; so that as much mischief arises, from too much force as too little. Passing the line of gravitation, in erecting a body, is like wounding a principle of the Constitution  . All errors of expediency may be [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-349.jpg) \- external link  - Page 124. ] amended; but the violations of principle are vital, and terminate in death. Put that fellow in a pulpit, and he could preach, said a by-stander; do you hear what a sermon, he makes upon a cart? He could take a text; Nebuchadnezzar, or Zerubabel; and lengthen out a discourse for a fortnight. In the meantime, the Captain, was almost carried off his feet, by a crowd of people going to see the learned pig. Has he the tongues , said Angus Sutherland, a Scotchman? He has two, said a wag. The Hebrew, and the Erse, I trow, said the Scotchman. No; the squeel, and the gruntle , I ween, said the drolling person. That is his vernacular said the Scotchman; but I mean his acquired languages. I do not know that he has acquired any, said the drolling man; but he is considerably perfected in those that he had before. Weel, that is something, said Angus; but he has got a smack o'the mathematics, I suppose. A little of algebra, said the wag; the plus, and minus, he understands pretty well. The conversation, was interrupted by the vociferation of a man, in soliloquy at a distance. He appeared to be in great agitation: clinching his fists, and striking them against each other. An abominable, slander, said he; I a scholar! I a learned man! it is a falsehood. See me reading! He never saw me read. I do not know a B. from a bull's foot. But this is the way to injure a man in his election. They report of me that I am a scholar? It is a malicious fabrication. I can prove it false. It is a groundless insinuation. What a wicked world is this in which we live. I a scholar! I am a son of a whore, if I ever opened a book in my life. O! The calumny; the malice of the report. All to destroy my election. Were you not seen carrying books, said a neighbour? [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-350.jpg) \- external link  - Page 125. ] Aye, said the distressed man; two books that a student had borrowed from a clergyman. But did I look into them? Did any man see me open the books? I will be sworn upon the evangelists: I will take my Bible oath, I never looked into them. I am innocent of letters as the child unborn. I am an illiterate man, God be praised, and free from the sin of learning, or any wicked art, as I hope to be saved; but here a report is raised up, that I have dealings with books, that I can read. O! The wickedness of this world? Is there no protection from slander, and bad report? God help me! Here I am, an honest republication; a good citizen  , and yet it is reported of me, that I read books. O! The tongues of men! Who can stop reproach? I am ruined; I am undone; I shall lose my election; and the good will of all my neighbours, and the confidence of posterity. It is a dreadful thing that all the discretion of a man, cannot save him from evil-speaking, and defamation. It is a strange contrast, thought the Captain, that we admire learning in a pig; and undervalue it in a man  . The time was, when learning would save a man's neck; but now it endangers it. The neck verse, is reversed. That is, the effect of it. For the man that can read goes to the wall; not him that is ignorant. But such are the revolutions of opinion . Of all things in the world, said a speculative philosopher, I should the least expect science in a pig; though the swinish multitude are not without good moral qualities; or the semblance of these, by propensitive instinct. The herd of deer avoid, or beat off the chaced, or wounded companion: but attack a hog in a gang, and the bristles of all are up, to make battle There is an esprit de corps; or a principle of self-preservation. They do not wait until they are taken off one by one; but make a common cause in [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-351.jpg) \- external link  - Page 126. ] the first instance. When the twenty-one deputies in the National Assembly of France, were denounced, there were, no doubt, a great number that saw the injustice; but not the consequence . They were willing that the bolt should pass by themselves, and were silent. But those that followed, soon felt the case to be their own, though they did not make it at first. The hogs have more sense, or nature is more faithful than reason. A sailor on board a ship may not like his comrades; but if they are charged with mutiny wrongfully, he is interested and will see it if he is wise; for it concerns him that they be dealt with fairly. For injustice to them, leads, to injustice to himself. A third mate may dislike the first, or second  , or the Captain, himself, and have no objection to change them; but the mistake, or injustice of owners towards these, affects himself. If one goes at this turn; another may go at the next; until all fall to unjust accusation. If the independence  , and safety of command is affected all officers suffer, and the service is injured. The picking off one at a time is politic in those that assail; but fatal to those that are assailed. Polyphemus devoured but one of the soldiers of Ulysses in a day  . So that it does not follow, that hog, likes hog, more than sheep, likes sheep; or that bristle is champion for bristle; when he comes to take his part; but  that, the law of self-preservation, is better understood; or felt by this animal  . But as to teaching a pig any thing like human knowledge, though not a new thing, would seem to be of little use. Crows were taught to speak in the time of Augustus C aesar; as we find from the story of the Cobler, and his crow. The Poet Virgil talks of cattle speaking; \---Pecudesque locutae. But this was a prodigy. Learning must go somewhere, as a river that sinks in one place rises in [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-352.jpg) \- external link  - Page 127. ] another. If erudition is lost with men, it is well to find it with pigs. The extraordinaries are always pleasing. The intermediate grades of eloquence, from a Curran to a Parrot, are not worth marking. A little learning is a dangerous thing. Drink deep, or taste not the Pierian spring. If a man cannot be a Pollyglotist, he may as well be a goose. It was at a time things took this turn that Balaam's ass spoke. There was darkness all over Europe, for six or ten centuries, and little knowledge of the scientific kind to be found with man, fish, fowl or beast. A glare of light sprung up, and has prevailed awhile. Men of science have been in repute in monarchies; and in some republics: or at least science itself has had some quarter. But it is now scouted, and run down. The mild shade of the evening, the crepusculum approaches. A twilight, that the weakest eye can sustain. The bats will be out now. The owl can see as well as the cat. If there is less light, there is more equality of vision;  which may be for the best. That fellow could preach too, said a by-stander; and give him a text. What a speech he has made upon a shoat! But looking up, they saw a man actually preaching; or something like it in a tavern door, with a newspaper in his hand. It was upon the subject of oeconomies . For now all is oeconomy . Not making; but saving . This discourse was a lecture, on the subtraction of aliment, and the making water go farther by boiling it. Saving the scales of fish; and the stem beaten out of flax; curtailing wages, and doing less work; all things by the minimum: he would have all Miscroscopes; no Telescopes. Minuti ae, [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-353.jpg) \- external link  - Page 128. ] Minutiae, Minutiae; nothing great, comprehensive; or magnificent in his projects Themistocles knew how to make a great state, out of a small commonwealth. But was it by saving, or by gaining that he did it? Was the sweep of his mind contracted; or extensive? Had the Zar of Muscovy a great heart? Did he reduce mountains by particles; or employ his mind upon hen coops? These were questions, the oeconomist answered in the affirmative. But some doubted the orthodoxy of the doctrine, and left the congregation. In a public house, was heard the music of a fiddle, and a bag-pipe. It was Duncan the quondam waiter of the Captain who had made a match of the bag-pipe against the violin. Play up, said Duncan to the piper; now " the Coming o' the Camrons; " now the Reels o' Bogie  . Play up; I could dance amaist involuntarily; as, I were bit by the Taran ula. The Latin master was of the company; and encouraged the contest, by the application of classic phrases; such as, Et vitula tu dignus, et hic------ Boni quoniam cenvenimus ambo. Tale `uum carmen, divine poeta.--- But more noise; though, perhaps less music was heard out of doors coming down the street A crowd of people; boys and grown persons, were following O'Dell the revolutionist. For Ca Ira, or the Marscilles hymn, he bawl'd out the following--- Down with the sessions, and down with the laws; They put me in mind of the school-master's taws. There's nothing in nature that gives such disgust, As force and compulsion to make a man just. Hillelu; Billelu, set me down aisy . Hillelu; Billelu, &c . [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-354.jpg) \- external link  - Page 129. ] A lawyer's a liar; old Sooty his father; He talks all day long, a mere jack a-blather. His books, and his papers may all go to hell, And make speeches there, sings Lary O'Dell. Hillelu, &c . The state is a vessel, and hoop'd like a tub; And the adze of the cooper it goes dub, a dub. But hooping and coopering, is fitting for fools; Away wid all learning, and shut up the schools . Hillelu, &c . A horse eats the less, when you cut off his tail; And chickens hatch faster, the thinner the shell. A clerk in an office night do two things in one, Hatch eggs while he sits, and writes all alone. Hillelu, &c . The song may be good, as to music, said the Captain; but I do not like the sentiments: especially the concluding couplet. It seems to me, that oeconomy has become parsimony; the oppsite extreme of prodigality; or extravagance. The one is odious; the other contemptible. All tax; or no tax. There is no medium. And yet all that is excellent lies in the medium. But no tax, and oeconomy will as certainly destroy an administration, as all tax, and extravagance. The meanness of starving offices; establishments; improvements, will attach disreputation to the agents; and operate a removal from the body politic; or the debilication of the body politic itself  . But in all things there is a tendency to extremes. The popular mind does not easily arrest itself when descending upon an inclined plain of opinion. Popular ballads are an [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-355.jpg) \- external link  - Page 130. ] index of the public mind. Hence we see that an antipathy to laws, lawyers, and judges, is the ton at present and also that oeconomy is the ruling passion of the time . Yet in all these things, there may be an excess. For the people are not always right  . Unless in the sense of the English law, that "The king can do no wrong." Doubtless whatever the people do is legally right; but yet not always politically right. For do we not find from the voice of history, that those men are thought to have deserved best of their country, who have occasionally withstood the intemperance of opinion. Self seekers only "are all things to all men" Three things are necessary to constitute a great man. Judgment, fortitude, and self-denial It is a great thing to judge wisely. Perhaps this may be said to comprehend the whole. For judging wisely upon a large scale, will embrace fortitude, and self-denial. Hence, in the Scripture phrase, bad men are called fools . It is but cutting down the fruit tree, to hark in with a popular cry for the moment. All is gained for the present. But there is nothing for the next year Such a man may get into a public body, but will not long retain his seat; or, if he does, he loses all, in the esteem of the virtuous, and the wise  . But I doubt whether the people are so mad for oeconomy It originates with those who are conscious to themselves that they cannot please them by great actions; and therefore attempt it by small  . The extreme has been that of unnecessary expenditure; and it is popular to call out economy; which the people-pleaser gets into his mouth and makes it the shibboleth of just politics. But the people-pleaser is not always the friend of the people. Do we find him in war the best general who consults the ardour of his roops, wholly, and fights when they cry out for battle?  Pompey yielded to such an outcry, and lost the field of Pharsalia. A journal was [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-356.jpg) \- external link  - Page 131. ] published in France, by Marat, under the direction, or, with the assistance of Robespierre, entitled " L ami du peuple  " There could not be a more seducing title; and yet this very journal was the foe of the people  . I have no doubt, but that Marat meant well to the people; but he had not an understanding above the public, and judgment to correct the errors of occasional opinion He was of the multitude himself, and did not overtop them by having higher ground from whence to observe. He had not been a sage before he became a journalist  . Hence he denounced the Girondists the philosophers of the republic; Condorcet, and others who had laid the foundation of the revolution. He denounced them because they suggested a confederate republic, such as Montesquieu projected, and America has realized. Marat took up with the simple, the one and indivisible; the populace understood this, but not the complication, and it prevailed; but the republic went down. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-357.jpg) \- external link  - Page 132. ] I never had a doubt with the Captain, but that the bulk of the jacobins in France meant well; even Marat and Robespierre considered themselves as denouncing, and trucidating only the enemies of the republic. What a delightful trait of virtue discovers itself in the behaviour of Peregrine, the brother of Robespierre, and proves that he thought his brother innocent. " I am innocent; and my brother is as innocent as I am  ." Doubtless they were both innocent. Innocent of what? Why; of meaning ill. "The time shall come, when they that kill you, shall think they are doing God service." Peregrine, led the column with his drawn sword in his hand, that entered and retook Toulon. He threw himself into the denunciation. This ought to be a lesson to all republicans to have charity, for those that differ in opinion. Tiberus, and Caius Gracchus at Rome meant well; Agis, and Cleomines at Sparta the same; but they attempted a reform, well, in vision, and imagination, but beyond what was practicable or expedient. They fell victims to the not distinguishing the times; the advanced state of society, which did not comport with the original simplicity of institutions  . Marat the journalist and Robespierre were pushed gradually to blood; by the principle, which governed them, of taking it for granted that all who thought [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-358.jpg) \- external link  - Page 133. ] first book of Euclid, we do not lay down every postulate, and axiom; nor do we go through the demonstration of every preceding problem, on which this is built; but we refer to such of them as enter into that which is before us. The demonstrations of Euclid are brief; and that constitutes their excellence. Ad eventum festinat. Here is no detour; or winding that does not accelerate, and force the conclusion. In the mean time, the blind lawyer being at hand, delivering a lecture, had heard of the tribulation of his brother the gag'd lawyer; and for the honour of the profession, stretching out his hands to the people, had obtained his enlargement; and the removal of the peg. But it was said, this would be a warning to the advocate, to shorten his speeches for the future. The branks which had been upon his head; that is, the woodys which had tied the knob, were laid aside for another occasion. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-359.jpg) \- external link  - Page 134. ] a cabin in the western country. A strong man takes hold of the end of a log, and he lifts faster than the other. From the unskilfulness and inequality of his exertions, accidents happen. Prudent people do not like rash hands. States have been best built up, by the wise as well as the honest  . There are men that we dislike in office. All men approved Marius, says the historian Sallust, when he began to proscribe, now and then, a bad man; but they did not foresee what soon happened, that he did not stop short, but went on to proscribe the good. It is better to bear an individual mischief, than a public inconvenience  . This is a maxim of the common law. That is, it is better to endure an evil in a particular case, than to violate a general principle . There ought to be constitutional ground, and a just cause to remove the obnoxious. It will not do even in Ireland, to hang a man for stealing cloth, because he is a bad weaver  . Where parties exist in a republic, that party will predominate eventually which pursues justice. A democratic party, will find its only security in this. "If these things are done in the green tree, what shall be done in the dry" If democracy is not just, what shall we expect from aristocracy, where the pride of purse, and pride of family, raises the head; swells the port; produces the strut, and all the undervaluing which the few have for the many? Aristocracy, which claims by hereditary right, the honours and emoluments of the commonwealth. Who does not dislike the presumption of the purse proud, and the pride of connections? And it is for that reason that I wish my fellow democrats, "my brethren according to the flesh," to do right; to shew their majesty, the nobility of their nature, by their discrimination, and their sense of justice  . For I am a [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-360.jpg) \- external link  - Page 135. ] democrat, if having no cousin, and no funds; and only to rely on my personal services, can make me one  . And I believe this is a pretty good pledge for democracy in any man. Unless indeed, he should become a tool to those that have cousins and funds; and this he will not do if he has pride . He might be made a despot, but this can only be by the peoples destroying the essence of liberty, by pushing it to licentiousness. A despot is a spectre which rises chiefly from the marsh of licentiousness. It was the jacobins made Bonaparte what he now is  . The chief of the insurrection, in the western parts of Pennsylvania, in the year  1794, called himself , Tom the Tinker. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-361.jpg) \- external link  - Page 136. ] A CAVALCADE was coming by, and upon enquiry it was found to be a crowd of people with a lawyer gagged. The knob in his mouth was rather long; and the poor man seemed to be in pain, by the extension of his jaws. He could not speak; which was a great privation , it being his daily employment, and the labour of his vocation. For the people thought he spoke too much, or at least was tedious in his speeches, and took up the time of the court, and juries, unnecessarily. But this was a new way of correcting amplification in an orator. It is true that things strike more than words, and the soldier, in a Roman assembly, who held up the stump of his arm lost in battle, pleaded more effectually, for his brother, the accused, than all the powers of eloquence. But it was a wicked thing, and entirely a la mob, to stretch the jaws so immeasurably. But the people will have their way; when they get a thing into their heads, there is no stopping them; especially on a fair day, such as this was. It is true the thing was illegal, and he could have his action, but they took their chance of that. The fact is, the tediousness of lawyers, in their harangues, is beyond bearing, and is enough to drive the people to adjustment bills , and [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-362.jpg) \- external link  - Page 137. ] any thing, to get quit of them. The opener of a cause, must lead you into the whole transaction, instead of leaving it to the evidence to do it. He must give you a view of the whole scope of his case. This might be in a few words. But he wants to make a speech; a strong impression at the first. He must tell you how he means to draw up his evidence; how to fight his men  . I should not like my adversary to know this; I would not tell the court, lest he should hear it. What would we think of a general who should mount the rostrum in the presence of the enemy, and explain the order of his battle? I love the art of managing a cause for its own sake, and I like to see it scientifically won The less speaking, almost always, the better for a cause. There is such a thing, as "darkening counsel by words without knowledge." Atticism is favourable to perception in the hearer . We do not carry wheat to be ground before it is sifted of the chaff. Yet there may be an error on the other side. The declination to brevity may be too great. I am afraid to say much on this head, lest I should be understood to undervalue eloquence, and check it altogether. But certain it is, that the excess is on the side of quantity, in speaking at the bar at present. The juries feel it, and twist, and turn themselves into all shapes to avoid it. The courts feel it, and on many occasions, groan for deliverance. What necessity on a point of law to read all cases, that have relation to the subject? To give a lecture on the elementary principle, and adduce cases, from the first decision to the last It has been in vogue with the clergy, to begin with Genesis, and end with Revelations; to prove their doctrine as they go along, by an enchainment of texts; and to say the same thing over again, in many different words. But in demonstrating the forty-seventh proposition of the [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-363.jpg) \- external link  - Page 138. ] differently upon a subject were traitors; and that a majority of vote was the criterion of being right  . The mountain , the bulk of the national assembly, could not but be in their opinion, infallible. The eternal mountain  at whose foot every one was disposed to place himself; the mountain on whose top were "thunders and lightnings, and a thick cloud;" but not a natural mountain of the earth, collecting refreshing showers, and from which descended streams. It was a mountain pregnant with subterranean fire. It burst, and exists a volcano to this day. So much for the majority of a public body, being always right; and so much for a journalist meaning well, and yet destroying the republic  . It is a truth in nature and a maxim in philosophy "that from whence our greatest good springs, our greatest evils arise." A journalist of spirit is a desideratum in a revolution. But when the new island, or continent is thrown up from the bottom of the ocean; and the subterranean gas dissipated, why seek for a convulsion? But rather leave nature to renew herself with forests, and rivers, and perennial springs. But that activity which was useful in the first effort, is unwilling to be checked in the further employment; and under the idea of a progressing reform  , turns upon the establishment which it has produced, and intending good, does harm. The men are denounced that mean as well as the journalist, and perhaps understand the game better than himself though they differ in judgment on the move  . In a revolution, every man thinks he has done all. He knows only, or chiefly what he has done himself. Hence he is intolerant of the opinions of others, because he is ignorant of the services which are a proof of patriotism; and of the interest which is a pledge of fidelity. Fresh hands especially, are apt overdo the matter, as I have seen at the building of [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-364.jpg) \- external link  - Page 139. ] IT was a legal proceeding, in this village, that when any one was suspected of insanity, a commission of lunacy issued, and an enquiry was held to ascertain the fact. An inquisition was holden at this time on the body of a man, and it was the right of the defendant, when the evidence on the part of the commonwealth was closed, to be heard in his defence. On this occasion the accused person made use of his privilege. THE MADMAN'S DEFENCE. Fellow-Citizens; It is an aukward situation in which you see me placed, to be obliged to maintain that I am in my right mind , and not out of my senses. For even if I speak sense, you may attribute it to a lucid interval . It is not a difficult matter, to fix any imputation upon a man. It is only to follow it well up "Line upon line; precept upon precept; here a little and there a little" There is nothing but a man's own life, and a course of conduct, that can rebut the calumny. It is therefore in vain, to answer in gazettes, or to go out into the streets and call out falsehood . The more [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-365.jpg) \- external link  - Page 140. ] pains you take to defend yourself, the more it is fixed upon you. For the bulk of mankind are on the side of the calumniator, and would rather have a thing true, than false. I believe there would be no better way, than for a man to join in, and slander himself, until the weight of obloquy, became so great, that the public would revolt, and from believing all, believe nothing. I have known this tried with success. But how can one rebut the imputation of madness? How disprove insanity? The highest excellence of understanding, and madness, like the two ends of a right line, turned to a circle, are said to come together. Nullum magnum ingenium sine mensura dementiae. Great wits to madness sure are near allied; And this partitions do the bounds divide. Hence you will infer that I may appear rational, and quick of perception, and even just in judgment for a time, and yet be of a deranged intellect. What can I tell you, but that it is the malice of my enemies, that have devised this reproach, in order to hinder my advancement in state affairs? It is true there are some things in my habit, and manner that may have given colour to the charge; singularities. But a man of study, and abstract thought, will have singula ities  Henry Fielding's Parson Adams; and Doctor Orkborn in Mrs. D' Arbray's Camilla, are examples of this. A man of books will be abstract, or absent in conversation, sometimes in business. A man of books, said the Foreman of the Jury! a scholar! Ah! You are a scholar, are you. Ah, ha; that is enough; we want no more. If you are not a madman, you must be a knave , and that comes to the same thing. Say, gentlemen, shall we find him guilty? What say you, is he mad? [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-366.jpg) \- external link  - Page 141. ] 1\. Juryman; he seems to be a little cracked . 2\. He does not appear to be right in his head . 3\. I cannot think him in his right mind . 4\. He is beside himself . 5\. Crazy. 6\. Out of his reason. 7\. Deranged. 8\. Insane. 9\. Mad. 10\. Stark mad. 11\. As mad as a March hare. 12\. Fit for Bedlam. Verdict--- Lunacy . The court to whom the inquisition was returned, thought it a hard case, as there was no other evidence than his own confession of being addicted to books  , and gave leave to move an arrest of judgment; and ordered him before themselves for examination. You are a man of books--- A little so. What books have you read? History, divinity. What is the characteristic of history? Fiction. Of Novels? Truth. Of metaphysics? Imagination. Of natural philosophy? Doubt. What is the best lesson in moral philosophy? To expect no gratitude . What is the best qualification of a politician? Honesty. The next best? Knowledge. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-367.jpg) \- external link  - Page 142. ] The next best? Fortitude. Who serves the people best? Not always him that pleases them most . It seems to the Court, said the Chief Justice, that the man is not altogether mad. He appears rational in some of his answers. We shall advise upon it . [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-368.jpg) \- external link  - Page 143. ] As for the blind lawyer, humanity interposed on his behalf. There is a generosity in the public mind that leads them to pass by the unfortunate. The sovereign people, like other sovereigns, do not make war upon bats . His lectures were short, and did not cost much. The loss of money, leaves a bite behind it worse than the sting of the wasp. It is this that excites a prejudice against lawyers; and yet people are, themselves, to blame. It is their own self-love, and unwillingness to think themselves in the wrong, that leads to law. Covetousness, deceives. O, si angulus ille, mihi foret--- I must have that nuke of woods, that rins out there. It will mak a calf pasture. I admit that bar oratory is carried to excess, and there is too much of it occasionally; it is valued by the quantity, more than the quality. But there is a great deal of excellent oratory to be found at the bar. There are stamina, though retrenchments might be made. \---Cum luculentus flueret, Erat quod tollere posses. The great defect is, the making many points; the that had but one way to escape, stood as good a chance, as the fox that had a thousand. Seize the turning point of the cause; if it can be done, and canvass that. The stroke of the eye, or coup d' eil, which characterizes the great general, is the being able to see, at once, the commanding point of the field: to abandon out posts, and concentrate his forces. Why need a man be taking time to shew, in how many ways, he can kill a squirrel? If he can take him down with a rifle ball, at once, it is enough. Oratory has no where a finer province, than at the bar. In a deliberative assembly, there is no such [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-369.jpg) \- external link  - Page 144. ] Political studies ought to be the great object with the generous youth of a republic; not for the sake of place or profit; but for the sake of judging right, and preserving the constitution inviolate. Plutarch's lives is an admirable book for this purpose  . I should like to see an edition of 10,000 volumes bought up in every state. Plutarch was a lover of virtue, and his reflections are favourable to all that is great and good amongst men. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-370.jpg) \- external link  - Page 145. ] THE madman being out upon bail, walked about seemingly disconsolate; and fell in with a philanthropic person, who endeavoured to console him. You may think yourself fortunate, said he, that the charge had not been that you were dead . You might have been tumbled into a coffin, and buried before you were aware. When a public clamour is once raised, there is no resisting it. People will have the thing to be so, lest there should be no news. For the stagnation of intelligence is equal to the want of breath. I will venture to say that in three days, were I to undertake it, I could have it believed that the soul had gone out of your body, and that you were a walking mummy. It is only to insist upon it, and spread it, and a part will be credited; at first, and finally the whole. Thank fortune that you are upon your feet upon the earth. You are not the first that have been buried alive. On opening a coffin, the corpse has been found turn'd upon its face. In a tomb it has been found out of the coffin, and laying where it had wandered, thinking to get out. Good heavens! said the madman, this is enough to turn one's brain indeed. I begin to feel my head swimming. Is it possible that without the least [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-371.jpg) \- external link  - Page 146. ] foundation, such a proposition should come to be believed? Believed; ay; and people would be found to swear to it. You have no conception from how small beginnings great things arise. Ingrediturque solo, & caput inter nubila condit. You have seen a wood-pecker . It is astonishing how large a hole it makes with so small a beak. It is owing to successive impressions  . Since common fame has begun with you, it is well that it has taken that turn; and made you only mad . If that is the case, said the man of books , I ought to be reconciled. It might have been worse. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-372.jpg) \- external link  - Page 147. ] IT may seem strange that in the present current of prejudice against learning, and learned men, the schoolmaster had not been taken up, that spoke Latin . The fact was, the people did not know that it was Latin. Some took it for one language, and some for another. Thus, when he accos'ed persons in the street, with his puzzling phrases to translate, either on account of the peculiarity of the idiom, or the elipsis of the sentence, answers were given correspondent to the mistake. Thus: Nil admirari--- I do not understand Spanish. Simplex munditiis--- I never learned Welsh. Ambiguoque vultu--- It is Greek to me. Lacrimae rerum--- I do not understand Dutch. Mea Valentiam, si quis--- I have never been among the Indians. \---Esse Sua Parati--- Potatoes are very good. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-373.jpg) \- external link  - Page 148. ] THERE has certainly been a great deal of vain learning in the world; and good natural sense has been undervalued. "Too much learning may make a man mad." It may give him a pride and vanity that unfits for the transaction of serious affairs. I would rather have a sober sedate man of common sense in public councils, than a visionary sciolist just from the academies. But solid science is ornamental, as well as useful in a government. Literary acquirements may be undervalued. A man may not be a scholar himself; but he may have a son that may. "The child may rue that is unborn." A check given to the love of letters. The offspring of a plain farmer may be a philosopher; a lawyer a judge  . Let not the simplest man therefore set light by literary studies . The bulk of our youths are sufficiently disposed to indolence of themselves. It requires all the incitement of honours and emoluments to trim the midnight lamp. The rivalship of the states ought to be in their public foundations; in producing men of letters  . Popular distrust of them ought not to be promoted. The coxcomb; the macaroni springs up in the cities; The illiterate in the country village. Legal knowledge, and political learning, are the stamina of the constitution. The preservation of the constitution is the stability of the state . [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-374.jpg) \- external link  - Page 149. ] scope. Questions of finance have nothing to do with the heart. No man can be an orator at the bar, that has not a burning love of justice. For it is this gives the soul of oratory. An advocate thinking merely of the fee can be no orator. The soul must be expanded by the love of virtue. In a deliberative assembly, it is difficult to be honest. Party will not suffer it . At the bar a man may be honest. For, in a cause he is not supposed to speak his own sentiments, but to present his side of the argument; and with truth in his statements. The attempting to hold what is not tenable , is a mark of weakness . Why then a prejudice against lawyers? I exclude attornies that are mere money gatherers; or professional men, that screw the needy, and grind the faces of the poor. Such there will always be. But nature presents nothing without an allay of evil . As to the blind fiddler if it should be asked, why he was not accounted mad, it was because he was not denounced . There is a great deal in calling out mad dog  . Besides, the insignificance of the scraper, protected him in the republic. He was so busy scraping, that he never meddted with politics , and this was a great help And as he played every tune to every one that asked, having no predilection for Langolee, above Etric Banks, he gave no offence. \---Nunquam contra torrentem, brachia, Direxit, sic octaginta annos vidit in aula. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-375.jpg) \- external link  - Page 150. ] A CATTLE driver had come from the western settlements  , to exchange at the fair, stock, for salt, iron, and women . In barter for the last article, a cow was given for a girl. The settler went out, in the first instance, with a rifle, a hatchet, and a knapsack. Having fixed on a spot at a spring head, the next thing was to fall saplins and construct a hut. A small piece of ground was then cleared of the under-wood, and this formed into a brush fence to inclose it. He returned then to the interior of the country, and the next summer, going out with a hoe, and a stock of provisions, on a pack-horse, he began his cultivation. Having tamed a buffaloe, or got a cow from Padan Aram, he had in due time, milk in abundance. This put it into his head to get a milk-maid; in other words a wife . The traders in this article, usually chose those of the less opulent , whose dress answered all the ends of fashion without the affectation. The elbows were bare  , because the sleeves did not reach; and the folding doors of the bosom were undrawn, because they had been always open. There was no occasion for flesh coloured pantaloons; for the pantaloons were the natural flesh itself, discovered through the rents of the muslin by the waving of the wind, like a light cloud upon a bed of air, in an April day. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-376.jpg) \- external link  - Page 151. ] When these virgins, "nothing loath," had been conducted to the bowers mantled with the natural vine, an offspring arose in a few years, such as that from whence the poets have drawn their best fictions. You will have no occasion to read Ovid's Metamorphosis, to have an image of Daphne, or Proserpine; Diana and her nymphs; the Dryads, Hamadryads, or other personages. Just cross over into these new forests and there you have them in reality: maids bathing their snowy limbs in transparent streams; climbing the mountain top, collecting flowers, or gathering the berries of the wood Nature is here in her bloom; no decay or decrepitude. All fragrancy, health, and vivacity. The stripling of these woods, is distinguished from the city beau; but it will not become me to say who has the advantage: whether the attitude of the presented rifle; or that of the segar in the teeth, is the most manly? Which looks best, the hunting shirt open at the neck, or the roll of muslin that covers it, and swells upon the chin? These are things to be canvassed by the curious. I am of opinion, however, that it is better to be clear sighted than purblind, and to be able to see a deer in a thicket, than to have need of a glass, before the nose to direct the steps where there is nothing to stumble over. It can be no slur upon the descendant of a western settler, that his mother was obtained in barter, with her hair descending to her girdle; or waving in ringlets on her shoulders; and the moisture of her eye brightened with a tear at the emigration; when he considers, that, in all times, and in all places, matrimony, to use the pun of Bishop Latimer, has been, in a great degree, a matter of money; and the consideration of the contract not always what the lawyers call a good consideration , that is affection; but a [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-377.jpg) \- external link  - Page 152. ] valuable one, wealth . Even if the circumstance should be considered as less honourable than a marriage settlement with forms  , and perfect equality, in the transaction; it will be forgotten in a century or two, and it may come to be doubted whether there was ever such a thing as barter at all  . A noise of a different kind was now heard in another quarter. It was occasioned by a brick-bat which had fallen from the heavens, or the top of a chimney; or been thrown by some one, which is just as likely, and hit the stall of an honest Frenchman, who sold hair-powder. He construed it an insult, and insisted upon knowing, what no one could inform him of; or if they could, was not disposed to do it; that is, whence it came? Diable! diable! said he, in a rage. Si j' etois, d' en la France. If I vere in my own contree--- Le miserable police. Dish contree has une ver bad police. A l' en enfer,---Foutre, Foutre, Foutre! Parce que je suis un jacobin. I be de jacobin. Dish ish de enrage. Vill kill all de honest republican. Ah!  aristocrats; c' est que vous voulez me tuer---C' est une terrible conspiration. It ish van terrible conspiracy. Civility to a foreigner induced the multitude to interpose, and endeavour to pacify. But strangers are jealous, and it was an hour before he could be persuaded by some that spoke the language, to believe that the thing might have been a matter of accident. He had threatened to make a representation to the government, and demand the interposition of the executive. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-378.jpg) \- external link  - Page 153. ] There is reason to think that he had dropped it; as we have seen no diplomatic correspondence on the subject. A seller of patent medicines gave out that he had bought them from a chymist who had invented a new vegetable  . Discovered, you mean, said a naturalist . No; Invented , said the patent doctor. He made it himself. I have some of the seeds in my pocket. Out of what did he make it? Hydrogen; oxygen; carbonic acid, and muriate of soda. It is beyond my comprehension: what does the seed look like, said the naturalist? Coriander seed; or mustard, said the doctor. Here is a sample of it, giving him a grain or two. And it is out of this you make your drops, said the naturalist? Certainly, said the doctor. And a new seed will produce new drops, said the naturalist; and perform new cures in the world. Undoubtedly, said the doctor: what use could there be in inventing it, if it did not? I wish he would invent a new planet , said the naturalist. That he could do readily enough, said the doctor; but there are more than are good already. They shed malign influences . Aye, quo' the Scotchman; there is such a thing as " evil stars ." [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-379.jpg) \- external link  - Page 154. ] A COMPANY of village players were acting a pantomime. Harlequin represented a politician with the people on his back. Incurvated and groaning, he seemed to feel the pressure exceedingly. I like burlesque very well, said a spectator. A man must imagine himself Atlas, forsooth, with the heavens on his shoulders!  The people would walk on their feet if he would let them alone. What matters it, if by attempting to sustain them, he gets his rump broke? That is all the thanks a patriot ever got, said a wise man. Are not the people strong enough of themselves? said the spectator. Strength of mind is improvable, said the wise man. Hence strength of mind differs more than strength of body. The aggregate of mind is one thing and a distinguished mind another. It is not so absurd, to suppose that one mind, in a particular case, may excel another. The social compact is a noble study. He who has devoted himself greatly to it, may be supposed to have made some progress. Why should he not have credit for his good intentions? Why make him the object of a public exhibition, because [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-380.jpg) \- external link  - Page 155. ] he thinks himself the support of the community? Public spirit ought to be supported, and hints well meant, well taken . It is but an innocent hypocondriasis for a man to apprehend that he is doing good, by his lucubrations. That he is a pillar of the commonwealth. See how he grins, and balances, said the spectator, speaking of the Harlequin, because the people, in his opinion, are too much to the one side  . It is an easy thing to turn even virtue into ridicule, said the wise man. But selfishness was never an amiable quality. And can there be a nobler effort of benevolence than to seek the public good? If one individual misses it; another hits; and the principle is salutary. It is not him that sails with the wind of popular opinion that always consults the interest of the populace. At the same time, I am for keeping up the spirit of the people. It is the atmosphere of liberty  . And though this atmosphere is the region of lightning and engenders storms, yet in it we breathe, and have our being  . But I speak of the angel that guides the hurricane; the good man of more temperate counsels, and who, from age, experience, or extent of thought, sees the consequence of things, and applies the prudence of restraint to the common mind in the violence of its emotions. Why shall we censure such a man should he indulge the ambition of restraining the people; or rather of supporting them by counselling moderation. He is sometimes the best friend that reproves . A flatterer never was a friend. The caricature of a man having the people on his back, is an aristocratic fetch to discourage a love for the people, and a disposition to promote their real interest. This Harlequin is set on by the enemies of the people, and with a view to disparage republican exertions. The spectator was silent. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-381.jpg) \- external link  - Page 156. ] While the Harlequin was acting The Oppressed Politician  , as the pantomime was called, a pedlar had thrown himself into nearly a similar position; and though it may seem strange, an accidental conjunction of attitude. He had got his stall on his back; and gave out that he had taken an oath, not to set it down, until the people at the fair, had bought off all his goods. He was on his hands, and feet, and bellowing like the bull of Phalaris, affecting to be overcome, with the load of his pack. The people, out of humanity; credulous to his distress, came from every quarter to hear his complaint, and ease him of his goods. A partner was handing out the merchandize, and disposing to the customer, as fast as he could come at the articles. The back-bent man, in the mean time, in his inclined posture, was gathering up the dollars, thrown upon the ground, and putting them into his hat; not omitting, the groans necessary to attract a continuance of commiseration. Christian people, said he, ease me of my wares, or I shall have to break my back, or to break my oath . You had better break your oath than your back, said a man passing by; I have no money to throw away upon a rogue. A rogue! Said the burthened man. If I were a rogue I could break my oath; but it is conscience keeps me here. I cannot break my oath; and my back must be broke. Help good people help; buy my wares and ease me of my load. You son of a whore, said a rude man, cannot you stand up, and your pack will fall off? Ay but it is my oath, said the Pedlar, that keeps it on, until all my goods be bought. It ish a tam sheat, said an honest German; he ish a liar and a rogue. His back ish not broke more ash mine. His pack ish light ash a feather; wid shilks, [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-382.jpg) \- external link  - Page 157. ] and such tings, dat weigh nothing. He is a tam sheat and a rogue. I am muckle o' your way o' thinking, said Donald Bain, the weaver; it is a' a stratagem, to get his hand in folks pockets, and wile awa' the penny. The deel an aith has he ta'en. It is a' a forgery. It ish a devlish contrivance, said the German. It is all de love of de monish, said a Jew. His conscience is monish; I go anoder way to de exchange dish morning. Nevertheless credulity prevailed; and some continued to purchase. If at the hundreth edition of this work, a century or two hence, it should be published with cuts, like Don Quixotte, and other books of an entertaining cast; the figure of the Pedlar and his pack may afford a good drawing; and the Harlequin, at the same time, with the people on his back. The moral of the distressed politician is obvious to every one. It is natural for us to suppose that the world cannot do without us. O what will they do when we are gone, is the language of almost every man's heart in some way or other. I will venture to say there are chimney sweepers, who think that all will go to pot, when they drop off. Yet the world goes on its gudgeons, and all things that are therein revolve just as before! What will we do for a general, said one to me, when Fayette deserted to Sedan. What? when Dumourier went off said another? He may be yet in the ranks said I, who will termi [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-383.jpg) \- external link  - Page 158. ] nate the revolution . It came nearly to pass; for the was at that time but in the low grade of what we call a subaltern. I have reflected with myself whence it is that men of slow minds, and moderate capacities, and with less zeal and perhaps less principle, execute offices, and sustain functions with less exception, than others of more vigour and exertion; and I find it owing to a single secret; laissez nous faire; "let us be doing:" that is, let subordinates, do a great deal themselves. "He is right;" it is well; and if it is wrong, self-love saves the error: men had rather be suffered to be wrong, than to be set right against their wills. What errors of stupidity have I seen in life, in the small compass of my experience, and the sphere of my information; and these errors the object of indulgence, because there was nothing said or done to wound the pride of the employer. This is a lesson to human pride and vanity It is a lesson of prudence to the impetuous. The sun lets every planet take its course; and so did General Washington. That was the happy faculty that made him popular. His fort was, in some degree, the laissez nous faire; "The not doing too much." Yet the lovers of an art, may be excused in being hurt when they see the artist err. The lovers of the public may deserve praise who wish to set the world right and do a little towards it. It is the error of vigorous minds, to say the least of it; and oftentimes, the excess of virtue. Sometimes, it is an instinctive impulse of spirit that cannot be resisted  Alcibiades superseded in the command of the Athenian army, but remaining in the neighbourhood could not avoid pointing out to the generals who succeeded him and who were his enemies, the errors they were about to commit, and which [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-384.jpg) \- external link  - Page 159. ] advice, neglecting, they were overthrown with their forces, by the  under the conduct of Lysander, and disgraced. Moreau though superseded by the directory, and serving only as a volunteer, stepped forward to an unauthorized command, and saved the army on the defeat, and death of Joubert. The critic will say, what use can there be in such representations? We do not write altogether for grave, or even grown men; our book is not for a day only. We mean it for the coming generation, as well as the present; and intending solid observations, we interlard to make the boys read  . CONTAINING EXPLANATIONS. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-385.jpg) \- external link  - Page 160. ] IN my observations on the licence of the press in the early pages of this book, it may be seen that I have had in view personal , and not political stricture. The difference of these I cannot so well express as in the words of the greatest orator in the knowledge of history, Curran of Ireland . I quote him to give myself an opportunity of saying how much I admire him. It is on Finerty's trial for a libel, that the following correct sentiments are beautifully expressed. "Having stated to you gentlemen, the great and exclusive extent of your jurisdiction, I shall beg leave to suggest to you a distinction that will strike you at first sight; and that is the distinction between public animadversions upon the character of private individuals, and those which are written upon measures of government, and the persons who conduct them; the former may be called personal, and the latter political publications. No two things can be more different in their nature, nor, in the point of view in which they are to be looked on by a jury. The criminality of a merely personal libel, consists in this, that it tends to a breach of the peace; it tends to all the vindictive [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-386.jpg) \- external link  - Page 161. ] paroxisms of exasperated vanity; or to the deeper, and more deadly vengeance of irritated pride.---The truth is, few men see at once that they cannot be hurt so much as they think by the mere battery of a newspaper. They do not reflect, that every character has a natural station, from which it cannot be effectually degraded, and beyond which it cannot be raised by the bawlings of a news-hawker. If it is wantonly aspersed, it is but for a season, and that a short one WHEN IT EMERGES LIKE THE MOON FROM BEHIND A PASSING CLOUD TO ITS ORIGINAL BRIGHTNESS. It is right however, that the law and that you, should hold the strictest hand over this kind of public animadversion that forces humility and innocence from their retreat into the glare of public view --- That wounds and sacrifices that destroys the cordiality and peace of domestic life; and, that, without eradicating a single vice or a single folly, plants a thousand thorns in the human heart." It will not give universal satisfaction to have introduced the name of Porcupine, or Calender. For though no man can respect these characters; yet, consciousness of having once favoured them from other motives, will touch the self-love of some, as it will be said the one is dead; and the other run away, and it was not worth while, or perhaps liberal, to make use of their names even in a dramatic way; or as a character in a fable. As to Porcupine, it was said at the time, that though occasionally coarse in his language, and gross in his reflections, yet such a spirit and stile [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-387.jpg) \- external link  - Page 162. ] of writing, was necessary to counteract the excess of democratic principles; that in fact, it did good. I doubt upon that head; or rather to the best of my judgment, it did harm to the cause which it was thought to serve. Indignation is insensibly transfered from the advocate to the cause. It has been said, in the British Parliament, that "He deserved a statue of gold for the services rendered here." This is a great mistake. He did injury to the character of British manners and liberality. It produced something like a personal resentment against the whole nation whence such a writer came. An intemperate partizan in public or in private life, can never serve any cause. But it was not with a view to pourtray this spectre of scurrility that the name is introduced; but because it suited to the counterpart, Polecat. I had thought of Panther; but Porcupine, could be drawn from real life, and was at hand. I will not say, that before Porcupine came and since, there has not been a portion of scurrility in some gazettes, unworthy of the press . There has been too much; but I believe the example and the fate of this monster, and his successor Calender, has greatly contributed to reform the abuse. It is a check upon an editor, to be threatened, not with a prosecution; but to be called, a Porcupine; or a Calender . It will be natural for a reader to apply in his own mind, the history of the village and its agitations, to the state where we live; and it will be asked, what ground is there for the idea, that here we talk of [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-388.jpg) \- external link  - Page 163. ] pulling down churches; or burning colleges. There is no ground so far as respects churches; but it is introduced by way of illustration. What if any one should say, let us have no books, and no doctrines, but the ten commandments, the Lord's prayer, and the apostles creed? Give us the gospel in a narrow compass, and have no more preaching about it. This would be no more than is said of the law; why cannot we have it in a pocket book, and let every man be his own lawyer? Our acts of assembly fill several folio volumes; and yet these are not the one thousandth part of our law. Why not, at least, put the acts of assembly in a nut shell? Ask our legislators. What else law have we but the acts of the legislative body? The law of nations forms a part of the municipal law  of this state. This law is of great extent, and to be collected from many books. The common law, before the revolution, made a part of our law; and by an act of our legislature of the 28th January, 1777, it is recognized and established to be a part of our law, and " such of the statute laws of England as have heretofore been in force  ." This law must be collected from commentaries, and decisions. It is of an immense extent. Because the relations of men, and the contracts of parties, are of an infinite variety. But how is Turkey governed? Do the mufti require such a multiplicity of rules? No, nor the cadi in Persia; because "having no law, they are a law unto themselves." There is no jury there. It must be a profession, a business of study to understand our law: we cannot therefore burn the books of law, or court-houses, any more than we can dispense with sermons and commentaries on the Bible; or pull down religious edifices. I will not say, that people talk of burning colleges; but they do not talk much of building them up. The [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-389.jpg) \- external link  - Page 164. ] constitution provides, Art. 7. "That the legislature shall, as soon as conveniently may be, provide by law for the establishment of schools throughout the state, in such manner that the poor may be taught gratis." Sec. 11. "The arts and sciences shall be promoted in one or more seminaries of learning." We do not hear of much exertion on this head; either in the legislative body, or out of doors. But what is more exceptionable; or at least unfortunate, in the opinion of literary men, and perhaps in the opinion of some that have the misfortune not to be learned, is that learning does not seem to be in repute universally. The surest means in some places, as is said, to make your way to a public function, is to declaim against learning. It would be a libel on the body politic, if a state could be the subject of a libel, to say, or to insinuate that this is general. But it is hard in some places  . I do not know that it is carried so far that a candidate for an office will affect not to be able to write, but make his mark; but it is not far from it; for he will take care to have it known, that he is no scholar; that he has had no dealings with the devil in this way; that he has kept himself all his life, thank God, free from the black art of letters; that he has nothing but the plain light of nature to go by, and therefore cannot be a rogue; that as for learned men that have sold themselves to the devil, they may go to their purchaser; he will have nothing to do with old nick or his agents. This is not just the language used; but it is the spirit of it. It may be a caricature, as we distort features to mark deformity more deformed. But the picture is not without some original of this drawing. To speak figuratively, as we say of fevers, it may be in low grounds, and about marshes that we have the indisposition; that is, in the secluded parts of the country  . But so it is that it does exist. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-390.jpg) \- external link  - Page 165. ] It is true, the savages of our frontier country, and elsewhere, dispense with the use of letters; and at a treaty, Canajohalas and other chiefs make their marks. They are able counsellors, and bloody warriors, notwithstanding. The Little Turtle defeated General St. Clair, who is a man of genius, and literary education; and yet the Little Turtle can neither read nor write, any more than a wild turkey; or a water tarapin. But let it be considered, that the deliberations of the council-house, at the Miami towns, embrace but simple objects; and a man may throw a tomhawk, that holds a pen, but very aukwardly. So that there is nothing to be inferred from this, candidly speaking. I grant that Charlemagne, made his mark, by dipping his hand in ink, and placing it upon the parchment. It was his hand, no doubt; but it must have taken up a large portion of the vellum; and it would have saved expence, if he could have signed himself, in a smaller character. But what may pass, in an illiterate age, with an emperor, will not be so well received in a more enlightened period, and in the case of a common person. It is not the want of learning that I consider as a defect; but the contempt of it. A man of strong mind may do without it;  but he ought not to undervalue the assistance of it, in those who have but moderate parts to depend upon. It is a bad lesson to young people; who had better take a lesson from their books. At any rate, it is good to have the thing mixed; here a scholar and there an illiterate person; that the honesty of the one may correct the craft of the other. How comes it that a lawyer in this state seems to be considered as a limb of satan? There is a great prejudice against them. It would seem to me that it is carried to an extreme. An advertisement appeared some years ago in a Philadelphia newspaper of a [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-391.jpg) \- external link  - Page 166. ] ship just arrived with indented servants; tradesmen of all descriptions; carpenters, joiners, and sawyers . The error of the press had made it lawyers . It gave a general alarm; for the people thought, we had enough of them in this country already. But if we have lawyers at all; it is certainly an advantage to have them well educated. Were it for nothing else but the credit of the thing, I should like to see an enlightened, and liberal bar in a country. It is thought that learning makes them make long speeches. If that should be made appear; I bar learning; for I like brevity: with Shakespeare, I think it "the soul of wit." I attribute the making long speeches , to the taking long notes . When every thing is taken down, every thing must be answered, though it is not worth the answering. This draws replies long into the night; and we labour under the disadvantage of not having woolsacks to sleep upon as they have in England, while the council are fatiguing themselves; or at least the juries. The prejudice against lawyers stands upon the ground with the prejudice against learning. The majority are not lawyers, or learned men  . A justice of the peace is a deadly foe to a lawyer; for what the one loses, the other gets. The chancery jurisdiction of a justice is hewn out of the jurisdiction of the courts of law, and abridges the province of the lawyer. It is well if it does not edge out the trial by jury. How? This mode of trial is retained by the courts of law. But who are at the bottom of this hostility to the courts of law. I will not say the holy army of justices; though some may break a spear at it. I believe there are of them, that think their jurisdiction is sufficiently encreased; but there are others who would not object to a little more  . [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-392.jpg) \- external link  - Page 167. ] In China there are no courts of law or lawyers; all justices of the peace. They call them Mandarins . In capital cases, there is an appeal to the emperor. There is no jury trial there . A limb of the law, is a good name for a lawyer; for we say a limb of Satan; and a lawyer in a free country  is the next thing to it: a thorn in the flesh to buffet the beople. There is freedom enough in the constitution; why need we be afraid of aristocracy in practice? Every man is brought up to the bull-ring in a court of law, be he rich or poor; but the scheriff, in Arabia, who is a justice of the peace; not like our sheriff here, though it is spelt the same nearly, can summons no jury ; at least he takes care not to do it. But the governments of those countries, are arbitrary, not free. It is an astonishing thing to me, that a free government, and the exclusion of lawyers, cannot well be reconciled  . How can the overthrow of a judiciary tribunal, affect liberty? No otherwise than as it militates against a branch of the government. Take away a branch from a tree, and the shade is reduced. What is a branch that is born down by the rest? But suppose the judiciary branch goes; the legislative and executive remain. There are two sprigs to the legislative branch. Which is strongest? That of the house of representatives  . Is there no danger of this out-growing the other two? There is half a spring in the executive. But the great sprig of the house of representatives is "the rod of Aaron that will swallow up the other rods." There is a talk now of abolishing the senate. That will be talked of, unless it becomes an enregistering office . It is hoped that will never be. In this I allude not to any disposition that has yet shewn itself in the house of representatives; but to what I have heard broached out of doors. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-393.jpg) \- external link  - Page 168. ] Despotism is not a self-born thing. It has its origin in first causes . These not perceptible, like the gas that produces the yellow fever. Why call out against the fever? It is the gas that is the cause. Whence sprung the emperor that now affects the French?  From the mountain of the national assembly. It is the madness of the people that makes emperors. They are not always aware when they are planting serpents teeth . Reflecting men saw the emperor, in the insurrections of Paris; in the revolutionary tribunals; in the dominancy of the clubs; in the deportations to Cayenne. Whether it springs from the seed, or grows from the plant; is oviparous, or viviparous, despotism is not of a day ; it is of gradual increase. Will not the people give him credit that can point out to men, where a germ of it exists . In what is hinted at, in several pages of the preceding chapter, of hostility to laws and a disposition to overthrow establishments, and judges, I have in view, not the proceedings of a public body, but the prejudices of the people. It is talk out of doors that I respect. And this is the fountain which is to be corrected. Representatives must yield to the prejudices of their constituents even contrary to their own judgment. It is therefore into this pool that I cast my salt. It is to correct these waters that I write this book  . I have been in the legislature myself, and I know how a member must yield to clamours at home. For it comes within the spirit of the princple, to obey instructions  . [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-394.jpg) \- external link  - Page 169. ] In the song which I have put into the mouth of O'Dell, I have nothing else in view but to give a picture of the excess of the spirit of reform. It is taken from the life; for though not in verse, yet I have heard similar sentiments expressed by the uninformed . The talk of abolishing the courts, and the judges, is a language which I put into the mouth of Tom the Tinker; yet is more general than is imagined. I am afraid it may affect ultimately the democratic interest; to which I feel myself attached; for I aver myself to be a democrat. No Perkin Warbeck, or Lambert Simnel; but a genuine Plantagenet. Hence my concern for their honour and existence, which can alone be supported by their wisdom, and their justice. Judges are impeached, and violent persons will have them broke before they are tried. But accusation and condemnation are not the same thing. It is not on every bill that is found by a grand jury that there is not a defence. There is nothing to be collected from any hints of mine that I arraign the justice or policy of the impeachment; much less, that I wish to see it quashed, or withdrawn. I have it only in view to arraign preconceived opinions, and the forestalling the public judgment  . Sublime is that tribunal that is to judge judges . The highest judicature of the body politic. It presents an awful, but majestic spectacle. Our senators, in this capacity are the representatives of heaven. I see them seated on a mount "fast by the throne of God;" the stream of justice issuing at their right [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-395.jpg) \- external link  - Page 170. ] hand; full and equal in its current; crystal in its fountains, and giving vegetation to the groves and gardens on its borders: The stream of injustice at their left, bursting like a torrent of enflamed naptha, scorching and consuming all before it. It lies with this sublime court to give its lessons of impartial justice to the subordinate judiciaries. I rejoice in this power of the constitution. I shall submit to its decisions. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-396.jpg) \- external link  - Page 171. ] IT occurs to me, that I shall have all the lawyers on my back; because I have said to them, as was said to the Pharisees, "Use not vain repetitions as the heathens do: for they think they shall be heard for their much speaking." By the bye the heathen with us, that is, the savages of North America, are not long speakers. They call it a talk, it is true; but it is raised above a common conversation. And they are not tedious speakers; short, clear and pithy, are the characteristics of their eloquence. The heathen \---are the Gentile nations here meant, that bordered on Judea? or does it refer to the redundance of the Greek and Roman eloquence? The loquacious Greek was proverbial. When a language becomes copious, the speakers become verbose. But the lawyers will say, "how can we help it? The client will have talk for his money. He purchases his plantation by the acre; he sells his wheat by the bushel; or if a shopkeeper in the city, he measures tape by the yard. Omnia deus dedit, says the Latin scholar, Numero, mensura, et pond ere. He will have quantity, let what will go with the quality. For of that he is not a judge. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-397.jpg) \- external link  - Page 172. ] I admit it is difficult to get a man to understand that the cause is oftentimes won, with judgment and silence, like the game of chess. All depends upon the move. A client will say, you ought to refund me something; or take less than I promised. You had no trouble. Or he will go away, and say, lawyer M`Gonnicle took twenty dollars from me, and did not say a word. He was six hours on his feet, says a man coming from the court. This sounds well and it looks as if the man was a great lawyer. So that self-preservation is at the bottom of long speaking. Or is it in accommodation to false opinion. I admit something in all this. An advocate will occasionally find himself under the necessity of saying more than is necessary, in order to save appearances, and to satisfy his client who is not like the court and jury, weary of the harangue. But this is not the great cause of prolixity. It has a deeper root; it is a false stile of eloquence that has been introduced, and is become fashionable. I have asked chief justice Shippen, if he could recollect and trace, the origin and progress of it. Is it imported, or of domestic origin? He thinks it was introduced by John Dickinson, who was an agreeable, but a lengthy speaker. At nisi prius; or at bar in England, there was no such thing. But whether there is or not; is of no account. The thing ought not to be. Because it will lead to the loss of the jury trial . A lawyer must say every thing that his ingenuity can suggest on the subject. The strongest reasons are not sufficient; he must bring up the weaker. After throwing bombs, he must cast jackstones. There is more sense in the common mind than is imagined; and close thought in strong words will be understood, and a few will suffice. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-398.jpg) \- external link  - Page 173. ] The bar of this state is said to excel in legal knowledge; but certainly is behind none in liberality of practice; and delicacy in argument. In practice, no catches, or as the common people call it, snap judgments; lying in wait at the docket; making surreptitious entries, and giving trouble to get slips set right. This the meanest lawyer can do. A rat can gnaw the bowstring of Philoctetes. The drawback in the opinion of foreigners, and the feelings of the people here, is the length of speeches. I will not say that hence arises wholly the prejudice against lawyers. A prejudice against the liberal professions, exists in all countries; or they are made the subjects of invective from the occasional abuse of their privileges. "Woe unto you lawyers," is a scripture expression, and applies to the priests among the Jews who were the interpreters of the law of Moses. The physicians of all countries are said to kill people. And as to advocates they get no quarter in any country. Wits will exclaim even without ill will. Don Quevedo, a Spanish writer, in his vision of hell, tells us, that he observed a couple of men lying on their backs asleep in a corner, with the cobwebs grown across their mouths. He was told these were porters, and had been employed in carrying in lawyers, but there had been no occasion for their services, for a century past, these cattle had come so fast of themselves, that the carriers had laid themselves up, in the interval of business, to take a nap there. As to the length of speaking, how can it be helped in advocates? Not by any act of the legislature, constitutionally, at least in criminal cases; for it is provided by the constitution that in criminal cases, the party shall be heard by himself and his counsel. But this provision was not meant to exclude the right in civil cases, which existed at the common law; but [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-399.jpg) \- external link  - Page 174. ] because in capital cases, in the courts of criminal jurisdiction in England, counsel was not allowed to the accused, except on law points, arising on the trial. In civil cases the legislature may change the law or modify it; but I am not able to say, what regulation by an act of the legislature, might be expedient; or what practicable by the courts themselves. The safest and most easy remedy would be in the bar themselves; cultivating a stile of eloquence of greater brevity, and endeavouring to be more laconic in their speeches. They are not aware that this length of speaking has become unsufferable. That resentment against the bar on that account, has been accumulating, and is now ready to overwhelm their existence. It is a great cause of that obloquy against the proceedings of the courts of justice, which is heard in this state. Delay is the effect; and delay is an obstruction of justice. But delay is the cause of loss to the lawyer. It is a vulgar idea, but founded in mistake, that lawyers delay causes for the sake of fees. It is their interest to have speedy trials, as much as with merchants to have quick returns. It is the interest of the advocates that I endeavour to promote, in suggesting a reform in the length of pleadings. I am endeavouring, in the scouted language of some reasoners, "to save the lawyers from themselves." It is on this principle that I attempt to school them a little on the point of oratory at the bar. Some one will say, that I but affect to treat them thus cavalierly. That it is like the case of an Indian in a skirmish, of which I have heard, on the west of the Ohio, who on his party being defeated, pursued one of his own people, with his tomhawk lifted up, ready to strike, and was mistaken for a volunteer. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-400.jpg) \- external link  - Page 175. ] In the heat of the affair seeing him alert, and pursuing, they thought the one before him was in good hands, and they let them both escape. To apply the story. It may be thought that I affect to school the profession, to save it from arbitration laws, in the spirit of what has been called the adjustment bill . I am not one of those with whom it has been clear, that the adjustment bill passed into a law, would do any injury to lawyers. It might winnow off some of the chaff, but better corn would come to the mill. I have no idea that any thing can hurt the profession, but the overthrow of liberty. Council to advise, and an advocate to speak, will be always wanted where the laws govern and not men . Rules of property and contract in civil cases, and the principles of law in matters of life, liberty, and reputation, will always call for the assistance of the head, and the powers of speech, in a republic. My concern in the case of innovations, doubtless meant for improvements, has been that the experiment would not shew wisdom in the framers; but, on the contrary, discredit the administration by which they had been introduced; or, if tolerated, and approved, would lead to aristocracy, and despotism in the end. This by gradations insensible, as opiates unnerve the constitution. It would take a volume to trace gradatim, how, and why this would be brought about; and after all it may be a spectre of the imagination. Let the wise determine. Were I a practising lawyer, as probably I may soon be, I should apprehend little from it on the score of profit, and loss to the profession. My idea is, that eighteen months would put an end to it, and it would, by that time, have sowed a pretty fruitful field of controversy, that would last as many years. As to the constitution , it [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-401.jpg) \- external link  - Page 176. ] seems to be in vain to talk to the people about it, when it is in the way of what they wish, and must have  . But hinting as has been done with regard to the exuberance of oratory at the bar, it is to be taken subject to the exception of cases which cannot be considered in a few words; either where the facts are complicated, and the evidence extensive; or where a point of law embraces an extensive scope of argument. The elucidation in some cases, must be drawn from the law of nature; the law of nations; the municipal law. Statutes, commentaries, and decisions must be examined at full length. It is not half a day, or a day, that will suffice always, to do justice to a question. The court themselves will stand in need of the careful preparation, and the miuute investigation of the counsel. The bringing forward lucidly, and arguing a matter well, is a great help to a court. It is doing for them, what they would have to do for themselves, without their assistance.---The labour of the counsel is the ease of the court. Many a midnight thought is expended by the laborious lawyer, of which the court feels the benefit, in the light which he throws upon the subject of the litigation. It is the \---Rudis indigestaque moles, of the unprepared that wastes the most time. It is the highest effort of a strong mind to condense. Having taken a comprehensive view of the whole horizon of the subject, the man of talents collects the principles that govern and illustrate the case  . To state and press these, is the effort of the great orator. To reduce to generals, and bring forward the result. But in order to speak short upon any subject--- think long . Much reflection is the secret of all that is excellent in oratory. No man that speaks just enough, [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-402.jpg) \- external link  - Page 177. ] and no more, ever wearies those that hear him. And that is enough which exhausts the subject, before the patience of the auditory. There is such a thing as alarming the patience . A speaker branches out his subject. It is all proper that this should be done in his own mind. It is necessary that he should have a system of argument, and a certain order of arrangement. But I do not approve of an explanation of this. I remember the alarm which I have felt listening to a speaker in the pulpit, when he has spread out the table of his doctrine into heads and sections. When he had done with the first, that is well, thought I. But then, there is the second head; will he be as long upon that? Now if he had said, This point of doctrine arises from the text, I would have heard it out without fore-casting in my mind that the ulterior divisions were to come yet. It is not in the language of nature to have such compartments. It is well enough in a book of didactic dissertation. For there is one can lay down the volume, and amuse himself otherwise when he is weary. The Indian in his talk has an order in his mind, and pursues it by the wampum belt, as the Catholic says his prayer by his beads. It is not the secret of persuasion, which does not steal upon the heart; and whatever the effect in matters of the judgment, may be the annunciation of method; it is unfavourable to all that interests the heart, and governs the imagination. You will see no such thing in Demosthenes or CurranCicero has something of it, but I always thought it a blemish. Ars est celare artem. There is no such thing in the works of nature. Artificial gardens sometimes present that view, but these are not in the best taste. The hills and mountains, vales, and extensive plains are dispersed with a beautiful variety. The stars of [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-403.jpg) \- external link  - Page 178. ] the heavens are not at marked distances. There is a concealed regularity, order and proportion in all that affects. The mind remains cold where there is nothing that surprises and comes unexpectedly upon it. END OF THE FIRST VOLUME. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-404.jpg) \- external link  - Blank Page. ] [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-405.jpg) \- external link  - Blank Page. ] [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf021v2&image=021-406.jpg) \- external link  - Blank Page. ] [
