 of the American forests, albeit she is not quite robust enough for a wood- nymph. She is still and will for ever be found there, in spite of the author's report of her death, and as long as gentle creatures, who cannot help being ladies, long to realize such dreams with their lovers. We like her laughing and crying over Shakspeare in her favourite valley,---the "early fox" who "appeared in momentary view,"--- "The stock-dove plaining through its gloom profound," the aloes with "their everlasting arms," and last not least, the nuptial hour "ineffable," While, here and there, a solitary star Flush'd in the darkening firmanent of June. Lines like these we repeat in our summer loiterings, as we would, remember an air of Sacchini or Paesiello. We like too what every body likes too, the high- hearted Indian savage. The stoic of the woods---the man without a tear--- not omitting the picture of his bringing the little white boy with him, which the critics objected to, \---Like Morning brought by Night. As to the passage which precedes the wild descant into which he bursts out, when the prostrate Waldegrave after the death of his bride is observed convulsively shivering with anguish under the cloak that has been thrown over him, our eyes dazzle whenever we read it, and we are glad to pick a quarrel with the author for ever producing any thing inferior. He certainly has the faculties of a real poet; and it is not the fault of the poets of his country that he has not become a greater. Mr. Campbell's favourite authors appear to be Virgil and Racine; which may serve to shew both the natural and artificial bent of his genius. He has imagination and tenderness, but he has also a great notion of criticism; so he leans to those poets, ancient and modern, who have at once a genius from nature, and the most regular passports for the reputation of it from art. He forgets that what the critics most approve of in the long run, as distinguished from the more intuitive preferences of the uncritical lovers of poetry, obtains the approbation because it flatters their egotism with the nearest likeness to their own faculty. Mr. Campbell's own criticism would be perhaps worse that it is in this respect, if it were really any thing else but ingenious and elegant writing. But there is a constant struggle in him between the poetical and the critical, which he doubtless takes for a friendly one; and in his prose he is always slipping from an exercise foreign to his nature into mere grace and fancy. After reading the Essay prefixed to his Selection of English Poetry , we recollected nothing but three things, which are characteristic enough;---first, that he seemed disagreeably mystified at the great praises bestowed on our old dramatists by certain living writers:---second, that he allows Shakspeare to put us wherever he pleases in a first act, but protests against a repeition of the illegality in a second; and third, that he has written a considerable number of beautiful similes.  1 
