 scholar. It is the essence of the impression made upon him by that habit of thinking and reading, which is his second nature. Mr. Coleridge began with metaphysics when at school; and what the boy begins with, the man will end with, come what will between. He does not turn metaphysical upon the strength of his poetry, like Spenser and Tasso; but poet upon the strength of his metaphysics. Thus in the greater part of his minor poems he only touches upon the popular creeds, or wilful creations of their own, which would occupy other poets, and then falls musing upon the nature of things, and analysing his feelings. In his voyage to Germany, he sees a solitary wildfowl upon "the objectless desert of waters," and says how interesting it was. It was most probably from a train of reflection on the value of this link between land and the ship, that he produced his beautiful wild poem of the Ancient Mariner , which he precedes with a critico-philosophical extract from Burnet's Archaeologia . We do not object to this as belonging to his genius. We only instance it, as shewing the nature of it. In the same spirit, he interrupts his Christabel with an explanation of the wish sometimes felt to give pain to the innocent; and instead of being content to have written finely under the influence of laudanum, recommends Kubla-Khan to his readers, not as a poem, but as "a psychological curiosity." All this however is extremely interesting of its kind, and peculiar. It is another striking instance of what we have often remarked,---the tendency of all great knowledge and deep delight in it, of whatever kind, to extend itself into poetry, which lies like a heaven in the centre of the intellectual world for those to go to and be refreshed with, more or less, who are not bound to the physical world like slaves to the soil. Every lover of books, scholar or not, who knows what it is to have his quarto open against a loaf at his tea, to carry his duodecimo about in his pocket, to read along country roads or even streets, and to scrawl his favourite authors with notes, (as "S. T. C." is liberally sanctioned to do those of others by a writer in the London Magazine, ) ought to be in possession of Mr. Coleridge's poems, if it is only for Christabel, Kubla Khan , and the Ancient Mariner . The first comprises all that is ancient and courteous in old rhythm, and will also make any studious gentleman, who is not sufficiently imaginative, turn himself round divers times in his chair, as he ought to do, to see if there is not "something in the room." Kubla Khan is a voice and a vision, and everlasting tune in our mouths, a dream fit for Cambuscan and all his poets, a dance of pictures such as Giotto or Cimabue, revived and re- inspired, would have made for a Storie of Old Tartarie, a piece of the invisible world made visible by a sun at midnight and sliding before our eyes. Beware, beware, His flashing eyes, his floating hair! Weave a circle round him thrice, And close your lips with holy dread, For he on honey dew hath fed, And drank of the milk of Paradise. Justly is it thought that to be able to present such images as these to the mind, is to realise the world they speak of.--- We could repeat such verses as the following down a green glade, a whole summer's morning:--- A damsel with a dulcimer In a vision once I saw, A lovely Abyssinian maid; And on her dulcimer she played, Singing of Mount Aborah. As to the Ancient Mariner , we have just this minute read it again, and all that we have been saying about the origin of the author's poetry, appears to be nonsense. Perhaps it is, and we are not sorry that it should be. All that we are certain of is, that the Ancient Mariner is very fine poetry, and that we are not the "one of three" to whom the sea-faring old greybeard is fated to tell his story, for we are aware of the existence of other worlds beside the one about us, and we would not have shot the solitary bird of good omen, nor one out of a dozen of them. It is an Ancient Mariner, And he stoppeth one of three: "By thy long grey beard and thy glittering eye, Now wherefore stopp'st thou me? The Bridegroom's doors are open'd wide, And I am next of kin; The guests are met, the feast is set; Mayst hear the merry din." He holds him with his skinny hand, "There was a ship," quoth he, "Hold off! unhand me, grey-beard loon!" Eftsoons his hand dropt he. He holds him with his glittering eye--- The wedding guest stood still, And listens like a three year's child: The Mariner hath his will. The Ancient Mariner was one of a crew, who were driven by a storm to the south pole. An albatross appeared, who became familiar with the sailors, and a good wind sprang up. The Mariner not having the fear of a violation of kindness and gentleness before his eyes, killed the albatross, for which the others said he would be pursued with a misfortune; but the good breeze still continues, and carries them as far back as the line, for which they laugh at his offence, and say it was a good thing. But now "the ship has been suddenly becalmed." (We proceed to quote the marginal summary which the author has added in imitation of old books.) "The ship hath been suddenly becalmed, and the albatross begins to be avenged. A spirit had followed them; one of the invisible inhabitants of this planet, neither departed souls nor angels; concerning whom the learned Jew, Josephus, and the Platonic Constantinopolitan, Michael Psellus, may be consulted. They are very numerous, and there is no climate or element without one or more. The shipmates, in their sore distress, would fain throw the whole guilt on the ancient mariner, in sign whereof they hang the dead sea-bird about his neck. The Ancient Mariner beholdeth a sign in the element afar off. At its nearer approach it seemeth him to be a ship; and at a dear ransom he freeth his speech from the bonds of thirst. A flash of joy. And horror follows. For can it be a ship that comes onward without wind or tide? It seemeth him but the skeleton of a ship. And its ribs are seen as bars on the face of the setting sun. The spectre-woman and her death-mate, and no other on board the skeleton ship. Like vessel, like crew. Death , and Life-in- Death , have diced for the ship's crew, and she (the latter) winneth the Ancient Mariner. At the rising of the moon, one after another, his shipmates drop down dead; but Life-In-Death begins her work on the Ancient Mariner. The wedding- guest feareth that a spirit is talking to him; but the Ancient Mariner assureth him of his bodily life, and proceedeth to relate his horrible penance. He despiseth the creatures of the calm, and envieth that they should live, and so many lie dead. But the curse lieth for him in the eye of the dead men. In his loneliness and fixedness he yearneth toward the journeying moon, and the stars that still sojourn, yet still move onward; and every where the blue sky belongs to them, and is their appointed rest, and their native country, and their own natural homes, which they enter unannounced, as lords that are certainly expected, and yet there is a silent joy at their arrival. By the light of the moon he beholdeth God's creatures of the great calm. Their beauty and their happiness. He blesseth them in his heart. The spell begins to break. By grace of the holy Mother, the Mariner is refreshed with rain. He heareth sounds and seeth strange sights and commotions in the sky and the element. The bodies of the ship's crew are inspirited, and the ship moves on--- "I fear thee, ancient Mariner!" Be calm, thou Wedding-Guest! 'Twas not those souls that fled in pain, Which to their corses came again, But a troop of spirits blest.
