 "The critic then proceeds, not very consistently, to blame Milton, on account of his roughening his style by his uncommonly frequent use of elisions. 'The great peculiarity of Milton's versification (says he) compared with that of later poets, is the elision of one vowel before another, or the suppression of the last syllable of a word ending with a vowel, when a vowel begins the following word. As, 'Knowledge--- Oppresses else with surfeit, and soon turns Wisdom to folly, as nourishment to wind.' "'Milton (adds Dr. Johnson) therefore seems to have mistaken the nature of our language, of which the chief defect is ruggedness and asperity, and has left our harsh cadences still harsher.' The same objection was made by the critics to Tasso, and with full as little sensibility to true poetical harmony." So far Dr. Black. His concluding observation is very true. But Dr. Black himself, whom this finer perception of the beautiful might have enabled to discern it, has missed the real beauty of these nomenclatures in Milton. It is not that the names are merely beautiful or sounding in themselves, but that they are so grand and full of variety in their collocation. And for this the poet is certainly not indebted to the author of the Sette Giornate, nor, I believe, to any author ancient or modern. It is a discovery of his own elaborate and harmonious spirit, ever prepared to better what he finds, and make his "assurance doubly sure." Dryden had secrets of versification which he professed himself unwilling to divulge. He was afraid they would be turned to bad account by the unskilful. Surely he need not have been alarmed. A poor hand may play the finest piece of music after another, and yet still remain and be recognized as a poor hand. To hide his secret effectually, Dryden should not have written his verses. I am much mistaken if it has not been discovered in our own times; and yet nobody can write the heroic measure as he did. The great secrets of a noble and harmonious versification appear to consist in varying and contrasting the vowels, distributing the emphasis, diversifying and nicely measuring the pauses, and bringing together as many emphatic syllables as possible without heaviness. The last requisite corresponds with nerve and muscle; the next with spirit and grace of action: the second with fervour of intention; the first with harmony of utterance. Dryden excelled in them all, as far as the shackle of rhyme allowed him. Indeed he gathers his golden chains about him, like a vassal superior to his destiny. But Milton is as much greater, as an invincible spirit roaming at large. There can be no doubt that Milton made use of Tasso in various instances, or that while composing his first book he had in his mind the striking passage pointed out by Dr. Black. But in no instance is Milton indebted to him for the variety and loftiness of his modulation; and in these consists the charm of his proper names. The Italian language, which is so adapted for music in all other respects, is haunted with monotonous vowels. These, one would think, it would be the first business of a great versifier to endeavour to avoid; yet Tasso has not done it in the present instance; he has even commenced his Jerusalem with a set of o's, which startled Voltaire; nor throughout either that poem, or the one which Dr. Black has quoted, is there any evidence, I fear, which would go to prove that this eminent poet had any very conscious idea of his versification at all. He seems to have taken his beautiful language on trust, and left it to make out its own case. Observe the repetition of the same sound on the third and fourth lines: \---di Silvani, Di Pani, e d'Egipani, e d'altri erranti. and again the o's in the two next: Ch' empier le solitarie inculte selve D'antiche maraviglie. and then the o's: \---e quell' accolto Esercito di Bacco in oriente, Ond' egli vinse, e trionfo degl' Indi Tornando glorioso ai Greci lidi Siccom' e favoloso antico grido, &c. to say nothing of c arta and bugi arda in the last line, and of that villanous quanto unquanco in the last but one. Whenever Milton repeats a vowel, we recognize, in him , a variety in the very sameness, owing to the singular diversity with which he treats us in general. To mark the diversity in the passage quoted by Dr. Black, would be to mark almost every syllable. Not a line but what contains a sprinkle of different sounds, and the whole passage is replete with grandeur of intonation: \---"For never , since created man , Met such embodied force , as named with these Could merit more than that small infantry Warr'd on by cranes ; though all the giant brood Of Phlegra with the heroic race were joined That fought at Thebes and Ilium , on each side Mix'd with auxiliar gods ." What strenuous language! and then he goes on, heightening at every step, till he ends with that flower of a word, which seems to droop with all the beauty of the East upon it:--- "---and what resounds In fable or romance , of Uther's son Begirt with British and Armoric knights ; And all who since, baptiz'd or infidel, Jousted in Aspramont , or Montalb an, Dam asco , or Marocco , or Trebisond , Or whom Biserta sent from Afric shore, When Charlemain with all his peerage fell By Fontarabia ." Now take another passage from the Sette Giornate, book the second. Corron dall' oriente Idaspe ed Indo E degli altri maggior trascorre il Gange Ed il Caspio e l'Arasse, e Cirro e Battro, &c. and again: \---E la Saetta accesa Di cinque stelle, e l'Aquila superba; E 'l guizzante Delfin, e 'l gran Pegaso, Che gia porto Bellerofonte a volo: E la figlia di Cefeo, e 'l Delta appresso, E quella immago, che figura e segna L'Isola, che tre monti innalza in mare; E del nudo Monton l'oscura testa Del suo splendore 'nfiamma; e 'n quella parte Alle vie degli erranti e piu vicina. Dall' altre verso 'l Polo opposto all' orse Press' al torto viaggio e il fiero Mostro, &c. Ohe jam satis!---After these read such lines as the following: Nor was his name unheard , or unadored , In ancient Greece ; and in Ausonian land Men call'd him Mulciber ; and how he fell From heaven they fabled, thrown by angry Jove Sheer o'er the chrystal battlements . From morn To noon he fell ;---from noon to dewy eve ,--- A summer's day ; and with the setting sun Dropt from the zenith like a falling star , On Lemnos th'  Ægean isle : thus they relate Erring. Or these:--- As when the Tartar from his Russian foe By Astracan , over the snowy plains Retires ; or Bactrian Sophi , from the horns Of Turkish crescent, leaves all waste beyond The realm of Aladule , in his retreat To Tauris or Casbeen. See also the famous passage on Vallombrosa in book the first; the long one in book the eleventh beginning with \---"The walls Of Cambalu, seat of Cathaian Can;" the account in the first book of the gods and their places of abode Beyond The flowery dale of Sibma, clad with vines, And Eleale to the Asphaltick pool; in short, all the passages where names are brought in, not omitting the feast in Paradise Regained, the description of which seems a part of the luxury. I am not aware of a finer piece of modulation in the whole circle of English poetry, than the account of Satan's journey of discovery in book the ninth. The pauses are wonderfully and beautifully varied, the modulations of the syllables masterly; and at the close the ear remains perfectly satisfied. In with the river sunk,  and with it rose Satan,  involv'd in rising mist;  then sought Where to lie hid:  sea he had search'd,  and land, From Eden over Pontus,  and the pool Maeotis,  up beyond the river Ob; Downward as far antarctick;  and in length, West from Orontes to the ocean barr'd At Darien;  thence to the land where flows Ganges, and Indus.  Thus the orb he roam'd With narrow search;  and with inspection deep Consider'd every ereature,  which of all Most opportune might serve his wiles;  and found The serpent,  subtlest beast of all the field.
