 [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342fcov.jpg) \- external link  - Front Cover. ] [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342spin.jpg) \- external link  - Spine. ] [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342edgf.jpg) \- external link  - Front Edge. ] [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342bcov.jpg) \- external link  - Back Cover. ] [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342edgb.jpg) \- external link  - Bottom Edge. ] [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=EAF-001.jpg) \- external link  - Reader. ] [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-001.jpg) \- external link  - Half-title. ] [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-002.jpg) \- external link  - Blank Leaf. ] CHAPTER I. "Ah! luckless babe, born under cruel star And in dead parent's baleful ashes bred, Full little weenest thou what sorrows are Left thee for portion of thy livelihed; Poor orphan, in the wide world scattered, As budding branch rent from the native tree, And throwen forth, till it be withered." Fairy Queen . [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-003.jpg) \- external link  - Page 025. ] The brilliant reign of Charlemagne is, amid the dark ages, like the splendours of day preceded and followed by a starless night. History does not here disappoint, nor delude us. The men of letters with whom he delighted to surround himself, "the brightest jewels of his coronet," have left us minute descriptions and particulars, not only of the wars, edicts, and pilgrimages which rendered their sovereign the hero of warriors, the legislator of lawgivers, and the saint of the church, but they have introduced us within his palace, and seated us at his hearth. From Eginhard, his historian and secretary, and the lover (or, as he claims, the husband) of the emperor's beautiful daughter Emma, we learn the domestic habits, tastes, and affections of that great man with whose name the "decree of posterity has indelibly blended the title of magnus ." We are surprised to find that the chief of the western empire, who traversed his vast dominions, extending from the Ebro to the Elbe, with a celerity that has only been equalled [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-004.jpg) \- external link  - Page 026. ] by the prodigy of our own times, condescended to direct the planting of his gardens and the feeding of his poultry; and that such is the enumerated variety of his fruits and vegetables, that an amateur-gardener of our own horticultural age could scarcely rival the catalogue. Charlemagne has been reproached with having been, in the coarse plebeian phrase, a "hen-pecked husband." It may be so, for strength is ever condescending and gentle to weakness. It has been said by one of nature's noblemen, the stature of whose mind and heart corresponded with the six feet four inches of his corporeal frame, that "all good husbands are henpecked,--- the women, poor creatures! ought to have their way." Thus the lion regards the helpless little animal that is thrown upon his mercy. The softness of the great monarch's disposition was as marked in his parental, as in his conjugal relations. It is well known that he refused his beautiful daughters to the most powerful suitors in Christendom, and for the simple reason that governs a rustic, "sooth to say, he could not bear to live without them." But the emperor was destined to illustrate the old fable which teaches us that even Jupiter cannot enjoy the pleasures of mortals without first deposing his thunderbolts. Domestic happiness is not the appanage of royalty. It is by nature's decree free and spontaneous. It smiles on the home of the subject, but with all his "appliances, and means to boot, is denied to a king." The emperor's daughters loved their father, but they did not withhold their affections from their natural and ordained channels, and the court was scandalized by clandestine marriages, and secret intrigues, of which the emperor (not willing to punish them) prudently affected to be ignorant. Aix-la-Chapelle was Charles's favourite residence. He embellished this city with the riches of his [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-005.jpg) \- external link  - Page 027. ] southern and more fortunate provinces, "being ambitious," says his historian, "that the capital he founded on the confines of Germany should resemble magnificent Rome." The monarch himself marked out new streets, caused wide avenues to be opened, and sumptuous palaces to be built. Churches, then the favoured objects of architectural honour, were erected; costly bridges were constructed, and all the art of the times exhausted on the noble chapel, which, after being dedicated to the Virgin, had the honour of incorporating its name with that of the city, thereby changing Aix into Aix-la-Chapelle . Neither the decrees of a monarch, nor the wishes of a hero, can countervail the laws of nature. Aix-la-Chapelle soon dwindled into insignificance,---and what is our city of Washington while towns are shooting into life and consequence on every part of our continent! Charles's palace presented a singular mixture and contrast of barbarism and refinement. It was enriched with sculptured marbles and precious vases transported from Ravenna, and embellished with statues and paintings that were reckoned chef-d'oeuvres of the arts, while it was destitute of the common articles of convenience that are now deemed essential to the domicile of the humblest mechanic. There was a like ill-assorted and startling variety in the guards and attendants of the palace. They were composed of men from all the different provinces of the vast empire--- Romans, Gauls, Saxons, Franks, Huns, Avars, and numberless others, each speaking the language, wearing the costume, and bearing the arms peculiar to his own province. The emperor himself, elevated by his genius, caught a ray from the lights of distant ages, while he was in part immersed in the darkness of his own. The accomplished Alcuin was his poet-laureate, and the learned Eginhard his secretary and friend; but [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-006.jpg) \- external link  - Page 028. ] though, as they boast, he had learned both Greek and Latin from oral teaching, he never acquired the art of writing. A rare art and expensive luxury it was, when blank parchment was quite as rare and almost as dear as paper written over with good poetry is now. Should our fair readers be inclined to substantiate the following narrative by their own investigations, we would refer them to any accredited history of the age of Charlemagne, and particularly recommend the recent and still unfinished "History of the French," by the most philosophic, purest, and truest of historians, M. Simonde di Sismondi. We must ferewarn them, however, that they may explore far and wide without finding some of the particulars we shall relate, and which we confess to have been derived from sources less authentic, and quite inaccessible to others. It was late in the eighth century, and in the afternoon of a mellow October day, that Charles was seen entering the palace gates, attended by a gay retinue of court lords and ladies on their return from a hunting excursion. His social and domestic tastes were a singular feature in that barbarous age. Even now, in the golden age of the sex, the presence of ladies on occasions when Charles deemed them indispensable would be esteemed rather an impertinent intrusion. The emperor was preceded by Frank soldiers, his chosen men-at-arms. He was without any emblem or insignia of royalty, save that which nature had stamped upon his lofty frame and noble countenance. In dress and language he adhered tenaciously to the usages of his forefathers, and now, as usual, he was dressed in the simple costume of the Frank soldiers, with the addition of an otter-skin over his breast and shoulders, a Venetian cloak, a gold sword-belt, and [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-007.jpg) \- external link  - Page 029. ] his good weapon "joyeuse." On his left rode his eldest and illegitimate son, Pepin, called Le Bossu, from a slight deformity of the spine, occasioned by an accident of his infancy which had spoiled one of nature's masterpieces. He was the son of Himiltrude, the most beloved and most lamented of all Charles's favourites. From her he had inherited the rich dark eye and jetty locks of the south, which, though he bore a striking resemblance to his father, gave to his face more of the beau-ideal,---more of the bright and changing lights of imagination and passion. In Pepin's youth Charles had employed the skill of Christian and infidel leech, and had commanded the prayers and penances of holy men, to remedy his misfortunes; but when it was found there was no exemption to royalty from the lot of humanity,---that that beautiful head must be borne by a bent and stinted trunk, every measure was taken to alleviate the misery. Pepin was instructed in athletic and graceful exercises. His health was fortified and his vigour increased by field-sports, and every ingenious art was employed by which his person might be managed and sheltered. In his boyhood he submitted to this discipline, and was eager to profit by it, but as he advanced to manhood he disdained the arts that seemed to him unavailing; he affected indifference to an incurable misfortune, and carefully closing the natural outlets of an irritated and dejected mind, and the inlets to compassion and sympathy, he shut up his grief in his own heart, till it became a spirit that ruled him, and could be ruled only by one celestial influence---still there was nothing in his demeanour that betrayed his feelings to a common observer. In spite of the imperfection of his person he was foremost in all manly exercises, and repeatedly, while the future heir of the empire, Louis le Debonnaire, was indulging in the soft pleasures of his palace in Aquitaine, Pepin, at the head of his father's forces, or by his side, drove [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-008.jpg) \- external link  - Page 030. ] back the barbarians from one frontier, and repelled the Saracens from another, and then returned to Aix-la-Chapelle to reap his father's favour. But, alas! a false hand had begun to mingle tares with that well-earned harvest. At the emperor's right-hand rode his queen, the crafty, cruel, and still beautiful Fastrade. Her buskined ankles, the bent bow and quiver at her back, and the brilliant crescent that sparkled on her hunting-cap, showed that she had chosen to represent the goddess Diana; and though her person was somewhat too mature and matronly for the forest divinity, yet her rare gracefulness and classic beauty helped out her royal right to violate the letter of mythology. The emperor's beautiful daughters and the other ladies of the court composed her train of nymphs, and were attended by lords and lovers, bearing cross-bows, and fantastically decorated with antlers, skins, and other emblems of the chase. Among them, before, or behind, as his horse willed, for he seemed not to interfere with the animal's discretion, rode Alcuin, the unconscious butt and laughing-stock of the gay lords, as an awkward savant of the present day might be of a knot of court soldiers or city dandies. But while he cowered over his horse's mane with such an aspect of awkward timidity, his thoughts perchance were absorbed on some of those treatises on theology, philosophy, or rhetoric, which caused him to be venerated even in those barbarous times as the finest genius of the age, and which have transmitted his name to us, while century after century has heaped oblivion on the proud names of contemporary warriors. Who was she who rode so gracefully at the queen's right-hand, in a green hunting-dress exquisitely fitted to her nymph-like form, with her face modestly shaded, but not concealed, by a black hunting-cap turned up at the side and fastened with a golden arrow instead of the [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-009.jpg) \- external link  - Page 031. ] wreath of white poppies (the insignia of Diana's nymphs) worn by the other ladies? Was it her rich brown tresses where the golden sun-beams seemed to linger---her eye of the deepest violet hue---the rose opening on a cheek of infantine delicacy, or those lips that seemed carved and died as if sculpture and painting had tried their rival arts upon them--- was it matchless colouring and form that riveted the eye to the orphan Blanche of Aquitaine, or did her spirit beam through its mortal veil, and make her approach that ideal beauty that the arts have laboured to impart to their representations of immortals? The figure, character, and mysterious fortunes of Blanche, all conspired to stimulate the imagination. She was the last relict of the Merovingian race, and nature had stamped on her unrivalled tresses her descent from the "princes chevelus ." She was the last too of the house of the renowned Hunold of Aquitaine, who with all his family, save this delicate scion, had been pursued to cruel death by the unrelenting hatred of the queen. Blanche was preserved from the general fate by the ingenious affection of her nurse, Ermen. But when the fact of her existence, which Ermen had sedulously concealed, was betrayed to the queen, she, instead of causing the infant to be put to death, as was expected, commanded that she should be brought to the palace, nurtured there, and treated with the most marked favour. This singular departure from the terrible consistency of the queen's conduct was long a matter of speculation to the courtiers. Some believed that her malignity was controlled by magic, others that the orphan's tutelar saint had worked the greatest of all miracles in her behalf---had converted diabolical hate into generous love, had filled her with kindness, who was, "From the crown to the toe, top-full Of direst cruelty." [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-010.jpg) \- external link  - Page 032. ] But a keen observer might have discerned in all these profuse manifestations of favour the constrained air of unwilling kindness. One spring of the heart, one tone of the voice, excited or modulated by the movement or melting of love would have been worth them all. There were some other peculiarities about Blanche that were mysteries to common observers. As she grew to womanhood, though solicited by the allurements of a brilliant court, and though her beauty was so striking as "ne'er seen but to be wondered at;"--- though the homage of all eyes, and the vows of captured hearts awaited her, she was rarely drawn from the nunlike seclusion of her own apartment, but by the command of her royal mistress. Our readers must forgive the prolixity of our ceremony of introduction, remembering, in our behalf, that court presentations cannot be brief, and return to the gay company, who were now approaching the palace, up an avenue, enclosed on one side by a marble wall. The queen had addressed Blanche in a low voice. Blanche did not reply, but at the instant, Pepin's inquiring glance met her eyes suffused with tears. "Curse on that demon's tongue," thought he, "it never moves but to send off a poisoned shaft." "My lord," said the queen, addressing the emperor in a voice which she affected to depress, but whose clear shrill tone she well knew reached Pepin's ear, and cut to his very soul, "my lord, I was just admiring your shadow on this marble wall, somewhat lengthened by the descending sun, but it still retains its symmetry. But Blanche, didst thou not say it was pity to set off the noble proportions of our lord emperor by the contrast of Le Bossu's shadow." "Nay, that I did not, Madam---; but truly I marvel that my royal master's shadow has not a virtue like to the holy apostle's---or at least if it cannot [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-011.jpg) \- external link  - Page 033. ] cure those on whom it falls, I marvel, as I said, that it does not protect them." "Spoken boldly! my pretty Blanche," exclaimed Charles, whose generous spirit was roused by the sarcasm on his unfortunate son. "I think it is ever the weakest animal that is most courageous in defence." "And what craven animal is that, my lord, who is willing to be defended by the weakest?" asked the queen in a voice tremulous with the passion she betrayed in her affected irony. The emperor saw the angry spot on his wife's brow, and as usual he sheltered himself in silence, which he had often occasion to find a friendly shield from similar conjugal attacks. Blanche, however (the only person who never felt, nor feigned fear of the queen), replied to her interrogatory, "I think, madam, I have heard that the eagle will remain passive while the little sparrow-hawk drives an ignoble enemy from his eyrie." "Ha, my lord!" exclaimed the queen, "heard you that?---The golden arrow won to-day by Sir Pepin's superior shaft, has plumed my Lady Blanche's wing for a bold flight indeed." This was an artful reference of the queen to the arrow that was attached to Blanche's hunting-cap, and which was won for her at the expense of some mortification to the emperor. A golden arrow had been offered in guerdon for the best shaft that should be shot during the sports of the day. Charles and the prince had arrived at the same instant within bowshot of a stag at bay. The emperor, as of grace he ought, had the first trial. His arrow touched, and glanced off. Pepin's followed, and was buried in the victim. The emperor was vain of his excellence in sylvan sports, and could not brook to be surpassed, even by his son, and this little successful rivalry, managed by the crafty queen, was an important step to the fatal issue between the father and son. So much more are even the great (alas for human [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-012.jpg) \- external link  - Page 034. ] greatness!) governed by their "idol vanities," than by those reasonable motives which the grave historian sets forth with such imposing dignity. Blanche saw the emperor's eye turn angrily towards Pepin---she felt that she had ventured too far, but while she was mustering words to excuse or conciliate, they turned an angle of the wall, and were in front of the grand entrance to the palace. "In the name of the holy martyrs, what have we here?" exclaimed Charles. In front of the steps that led to the vestibule, on the mosaic pavement, stood an ambassador from Haroun al Raschid. In his right hand he held the standard of Jerusalem, and in his left, the keys of the holy sepulchre, the caliph's magnanimous gifts to the western monarch. Near the ambassador stood a black slave, beside a huge elephant whom he held, or rather seemed to hold, by a gold chain which was wound round the animal's neck, and carelessly thrown over the attendant's arm. The chain, as if to show the elephant's docility, was so delicately wrought that a child of a year old might have broken it asunder. The slave was dressed in white and scarlet silk intermingled, and his naked and jet-black arms were encircled with bracelets of gold set with precious stones. Dispersed around were the ambassador's attendants in their picturesque oriental costume. As Charles advanced, the envoy proclaimed his errand, waving on high the holy ensign, and bending forward till his lips almost touched the pavement. His inferiors imitated and thrice repeated his salaam, and the well-taught animal evolved his trunk, and knelt, as if with instinctive homage, before the great monarch. The horses in the emperor's train were startled by the novel exhibition, and the retinue was thrown into disorder, of which Charles was unconscious, while eager to express his reverence for the sacred emblems of the restored rights of Christendom, he pressed forward and dismounted,---knelt [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-013.jpg) \- external link  - Page 035. ] before the holy standard, crossed himself, kissed the ponderous keys and placed them in his belt. He then turned towards the queen, who had not yet dismounted. "Still in thy seat, Fastrade!" he exclaimed; "By my faith, I thought thy heart and foot would have leaped at sight of these holy symbols." "My heart, my lord, has done them reverence, but you see---I must wait till my lady Blanche is served." The emperor turned towards the prince, who was standing beside Blanche holding the bridle of her palfry. Charles drew his sword, and raised the hilt to strike him. A mortal paleness overspread the face of the prince, his lips were livid, but he did not speak, nor even involuntarily flinch from the menaced blow, which was arrested by Blanche, who, springing from her palfrey, stood between the father and son. "Nay, my lord emperor," she cried, "touch him not---blame him not---it was my fault that he did not his duty to my royal mistress---my palfrey started at the sight of that monstrous beast, I shrieked, silly girl that I was, and Sir Pepin sprang to my aid. But indeed, my lord, I would rather have died than he should have provoked thy displeasure. Oh say you pardon him," she continued with more earnest entreaty, "he cannot bear your anger." Her manner expressed what she too well knew---he will not . The king was touched by her generous intercession, and good-naturedly putting aside the curls that half-veiled her mantling crimson, with the weapon he had destined for a harsher service, and kissing her, he replied, "For thy sake, my pretty Blanche, and for this kiss on thy blushing cheek, Sir Pepin is forgiven." "And now, young man, atone for thy offence---kneel down before the queen, and let her honour thee by making a footstool of thy hand, while she permits me to lift her from the saddle." The prince did not move. Fastrade bit her lips, and [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-014.jpg) \- external link  - Page 036. ] then suddenly turning her horse's head towards the recreant son, and affecting to believe he was dutifully complying with his father's bidding: "Nay it were superflous for Sir Pepin to kneel," she said, "your hand my lord." Charles extended his arms. She laid her hands upon them, and Pepin at the same instant stooping to avoid her, she placed her foot on his shoulder, and for a half moment, but long enough to touch the spring of hate and revenge, her foot rested on that projection which procured for the unfortunate prince the descriptive appellation of Le Bossu . Pepin sprang from the insulting touch, but the indignity had been inflicted. The queen had been permitted to insult and degrade him in the presence of the nobles--- of his sisters---of the lady of his love. His father's hand had been raised to strike him for a petty offence offered to the queen. A fire was kindled in his bosom destined to be fed and cherished by those who were seeking an occasion, and a fit instrument to avenge their own wrongs. The whole party now proceeded to the grand saloon of the palace. It was never safe to offend the queen; and those who had been betrayed into an involuntary expression of indignation, if it were only by one of those exclamations in which the swelling soul finds vent, were most obsequious in their demonstrations of respect. The prince seemed lost in gloomy abstraction; and even the soft inquiring glance of Blanche's eye met no return from his. "Alas!" she thought, "I have offended him---I have passed the bounds of maidenly reserve, and exposed to public scrutiny the feelings that were for him alone. I have fallen to the level of these court ladies who tell their loves to the passing winds." Ah, poor Blanche! she fell into a woman's common error in believing that her lover must be occupied with the sentiment that always occupied her. Love is to a man like the sunshine of a stormy day, [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-015.jpg) \- external link  - Page 037. ] bright, short, and fitful; beautiful and pervading while it lasts, but succeeded by more potent and more enduring passions. The prince was possessed by burning thoughts of wrong and vengeance, and even Blanche's influence did not penetrate the thick clouds that were gathering about him. Happily they both passed unobserved, for as the party entered the grand saloon, a beautiful novelty, the production of the superior arts of the East, attracted every eye. In the centre of the apartment stood a table that was long afterward preserved as an illustration of the arts, and of the barbaric taste of the age. It was formed of three burnished and embossed silver shields. On this table was placed another gift of the munificent Haroun, a water-clock made of gold and precious stones. The work-shops of Geneva and Paris now produce every day more complicated and perfect mechanism, but then the most polished court in Europe stood as if entranced gazing on this wonderful timepiece, and lingering hour after hour to watch the advent of the little automata who were made to appear on the dial-plate, and tell the hour by ringing a bell. "By St. Denis!" exclaimed the emperor, while he gazed at the clock with the delight of a child with a new toy, "this surpasseth the wonders described in Eastern tales. Tell me, Eginhard, have you ever found in all your thousand volumes that treat of Rome, and Greece, and elder Egypt, any thing so curious, so inexplicable as this." "Never, my lord emperor," replied the court-bred historian. "And you Alcuin, declare to me, hath any thing been wrought by science, imagined in poetry, or dreamed of by philosophy, that matches this marvellous little creature, who stealeth away our time even while we watch its passage." "Nay, my lord emperor, but that seeing is believing, [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-016.jpg) \- external link  - Page 038. ] I never would have credited that the skill of man could have produced a piece of mechanism in which beauty and utility are so combined, and carried to such perfection that each seems to have been the only aim of the artist." "Ah!" exclaimed Charles, delighted to be assured that ignorance made no part of his admiration, "you are right, my wise and learned friends, neither art nor nature ever produced any thing so perfect." "There, my liege," replied Alcuin, who was accused of the susceptibility to female beauty that seems a part of the poet's nature, "there, my liege, I crave your leave to dissent. This production of Eastern art is indeed wonderful; but how poor, how dull, how insignificant, compared to one of nature's masterpieces!" As he finished speaking, he fixed his eyes on Blanche, who stood leaning pensively against a statue of Ceres,---the comment could not be misunderstood---every eye had followed the direction of Alcuin's, and a murmur of assent ran round the circle. Blanche started from her revery, looked up, and a deep blush suffused her cheek. "Each look, each motion waked a newborn grace." The assent became applause, and the caliph's envoy, as if to ratify the truth of the poet's sentiment, advanced, and nearly prostrated himself at Blanche's feet, saying, as he did so, "By our holy prophet, the mighty caliph will deem too much honour done to the most cunning work in gold and precious stone, that it be compared to this masterpiece of Heaven's creation." It was afterward remembered by many who were present, that at this moment the impatience which the queen's countenance betrayed at Blanche's having become the object of exclusive attention, gave place to a glow of pleasure. It seemed as if a sudden light had flashed upon her. She looked at the Eastern [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-017.jpg) \- external link  - Page 039. ] stranger, then at Blanche, and then seemed lost in her own thoughts. The emperor again reverted to the clock, and ordered the pages to place it in the queen's apartment. "I pray it may not be sent thither," cried the queen, devoutly crossing herself. "I think naught less than the spell of the magi, or the craft of their great master, the evil one himself, could make these images so marvellously to appear and disappear. Or perhaps they are not images, but the little people, the fairies we hear of in our northern provinces! If my lord would do me grace, let him order it to Blanche's apartment." "It hath been thought," replied the emperor, but in a tone so doubtful that though the words were afterward weighed in the courtier's nice balance, it could not be decided how much he ventured to imply, "it hath been thought that Blanche had power over evil spirits; but there are none here to try her art, and this matchless gift from our most noble ally would too much honour any subject in our empire. By my faith it shall not be removed from the place where it now stands--- these shields of renowned warriors are a worthy pedestal for it. And now, my lords, we must separate to devise some fit return to our brother Haroun, and it shall be our care that he does not surpass us in generosity; albeit we cannot match him in skill." Late in the evening, Fastrade, who was superstitiously exact in her devotions, retired to her private oratory, a small apartment lighted by a single silver lamp hanging beside a crucifix. Nothing could better illustrate the impotence of external religion than this proud woman, reeking with crime, and teeming with cruel purposes, worshipping the image of perfect benevolence and meekness. Father Bernard, her spiritual guide, was awaiting her. The emperor tolerated no pampered luxurious priests at his court, and Father Bernard appeared strictly [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-018.jpg) \- external link  - Page 040. ] conformed to his edict, which declared it to be "suitable that the soldiers of the church should be inwardly devout, externally learned, chaste in life, and erudite in speech." Father Bernard wore a mask, and had always worn one, in obedience to a vow made by his parents, who had dedicated him in his infancy to a religious profession. With this exception his dress was the uniform of his order; and according to its strictest rule, there was no approach to embellishment nor superfluity; and his attenuated person, sickly complexion, and faded eye indicated that his life was as austere as his profession. His demeanour was that of a man accustomed to independent and direct proceeding---more knightly, than priestly. Still he had tasked himself to the study of the human mind till he had mastered his subject, and could adroitly thread the subtle passages of that mysterious labyrinth---subdue its strength, and manage its weakness. He had been confessor to the queen for fifteen years; the depositary of the secrets of a conscience never for a single day void of offence towards both God and man. Always self-abasing and sycophantic to her priest, Fastrade was more than usually so this evening, and Father Bernard soon suspected that she had sins of more than ordinary magnitude to confess. But whatever solicitude her manner betrayed, it was not indicated by her words when drawing near to the priest, and fixing her dark brilliant eyes on him, she said, "I have summoned you, father, to consult you on a point touching the honour and advancement of our most holy faith." She paused, stammered, and seemed quite at a loss how to proceed. "Speak on, daughter," said the priest, "the heart is ever bold in a good cause, or, as saith the Scripture, `the righteous are bold as a lion.' " Fastrade cast down her eyes and looked much like a detected criminal, but she proceeded---"You have [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-019.jpg) \- external link  - Page 041. ] heard of the splendid gifts my husband has received from Haroun al Raschid?" "Yes." "You speak coldly. But though Father Bernard, `not being of the world, worldly,' may despise the costly masterpiece produced by the arts---perchance the magic of the East,---he cannot be indifferent to the unrequitable generosity that has remitted to us the holy standard of Jerusalem, and the sacred keys of the tomb of God?" "Vain and bootless symbols, madam---the sullied standard of a vanquished power, and the keys of an inaccessible and violated sanctuary! And so far from unrequitable, that they are designed by the wily caliph to purchase the services of the emperor against the Saracens of Spain. These Mahometans resemble us Christians in preferring even infidels to those of their own faith, who differ from them concerning an incomprehensible dogma, or useless rite. But proceed, daughter, your zeal is just in that our monarch should not be surpassed in chivalric courtesy by the caliph." "Ay, father, but what have we to return?" "Bauble for bauble---why not the clasp of diamonds that sparkle in native lustre on our master's imperial mantle?---the richest gems of Christendom." "Of Christendom they may be," replied Fastrade, suppressing a smile at the priest's ignorance, "but the caliph's envoy, now in our palace, wears far richer stones than these." "Then, why not the silver disk that hangs in the banqueting-hall, which, though graven with all the learning of our astronomers and geographers, is useless here; for, sooth to speak, our warriors can sooner traverse and ravage a province than read its name." "My lord did speak of this, but Alcuin says that albeit inscribed with all the knowledge of our empire in these sciences, it would but expose our ignorance to [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-020.jpg) \- external link  - Page 042. ] Haroun's learned men, taught by their magicians, doubtless, father, else how should infidels in aught excel Christians?" "I commend thy pious inference, daughter, but in this matter of the presents I cannot assist thee farther with my counsel. The treasures of the palace have never arrested my thoughts, nor even attracted my eye. These matters do not pertain to my office, and I cannot see how, as you hinted, they can in any way affect the holy cause of our religion." "I have not yet fully explained myself. I was willing you should first see our perplexities, in order that you might the better comprehend the relief and pleasure the emperor derives from the device his royal mind has adopted." Once more the queen faltered, and then proceeded with an air of resolution, as if she had nerved herself for a dreaded task: "It is now, I think, holy father, fifteen years since the reputation of your sanctity induced me to select you for the place you have ever since held---I was prostrate with a malady that seemed to be drying up the fountain of life." "I remember, daughter---your mind had passed from the exaltation of victory to sore conflicts of fear and remorse."--- "Truly, father, but was not the fault---" "Fault!---call it crime, daughter---things are not changed by names." "Was not, then, the crime necessary---was not Hunold in open rebellion against the emperor?" "Was it necessary, madam, that you should cause the royal faith solemnly pledged to Hunold and his confederates to be violated? Must I remind you that after they had lain down their arms, and received the emperor's pardon on condition that they would pass from shrine to shrine, doing heavy penance at each, you caused them to be seized, their eyes plucked out, their tongues torn away by their roots, and every species of torture [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-021.jpg) \- external link  - Page 043. ] inflicted till they were done to death---was this necessary? " "Spare me, holy father---remember how afterward I repented me; and that when I discovered that one child of Hunold survived, I revealed the secret to you, and promised to be governed by your counsel?" "Ay, daughter, and after a night's vigil and ceaseless prayers, I gave you the response of the Deity, that the innocent helpless orphan should be brought to the palace---that she should be your shrine of expiation \--- and that for every good deed done to her you should be assoilzied of one crime, in the black list committed against her father's house; and that for every wrong of word, or act, a score should be marked against you, that neither prayers, alms, nor masses could efface. This was the inspiration I received, and truly delivered; did I not?" "Yes---yes. But why repeat it? Have I not been obedient to the celestial voice? has not Blanche been the chief object of my care and bounty? Have I not seen, as she rode by my side, the eye even of the churl forget its loyalty and fix on her? and yet have I not put down my queenly rights and womanly vanity, and ever given her the place of honour? Have I not borne that she should gainsay me when none other dared? Have I not granted to her intercession, what I refused to all others? Have I not decked her with gems and costly apparel? and though her nature resembles the humble flower by whose name the fair beauty is designated by the caliph's envoy"--- "Haroun's envoy! Has he seen Blanche!" "Ay, and marked her as the lily of our court. Holy father, if ever criminal did faithfully the appointed penance, I have fulfilled mine. It is for thee, the worthy servant of God, now to strike the balance in which my deeds to the house of Hunold are weighed." "Madam, the balance cannot be adjusted till death [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-022.jpg) \- external link  - Page 044. ] closes the account. Blanche is still in your power-still to receive good or evil at your hands." "Good---naught but good, father, as you shall hear." "Then proceed plainly to the point; for remember, daughter, all self-delusion and hypocrisy vanish before God, as the mist melts away in the eye of the sun." "Father, I have no fear of communicating to thee, but that thou art always somewhat over-jealous for Blanche." "Thou knowest, daughter," replied the priest, in a voice that penetrated the queen, "that as it respects the orphan Blanche, I am as a shield appointed by God to defend thy soul from crime, and as a leech to heal it of the wounds that have but one cure---but one, remember. My jealousy is for thee. Preceed, daughter." "Then, father, hear me, and I call God to witness that what we purpose for this girl is, as I am first declared, for the advancement of our most holy religion; and if we fail in the blessed end we seek, our motive I deem should sanctify our purpose." "Proceed, madam." "The great Haroun has ever shown a preference for blonde beauties, delighting to place them beside the dark-eyed girls of the East, and thus to heighten the beauty of each by contrast. The favourites of his haram are the blue-eyed Saxon and the fair Circassian. The caliph's queen has just died, and Haroun has appointed an extraordinary term of mourning to manifest his sincere and uncontrolled grief. Till that has expired none may hope to succeed to the place of the deceased." "I see---I see. It is for this place that Blanche is destined." "I crave thy patience, father. The character of the superb Haroun al Raschid cannot be unknown to thee: generous, enlightened, magnanimous, his only misfortune is to have been born a follower of the false [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-023.jpg) \- external link  - Page 045. ] Mohammed---his only sin, that he tolerates all religions--- that he extends an equal favour to the fire-worshipper of Persia, and the servants of the Cross." "In that doth he truly resemble the Divinity," murmured the priest. The unpriestly remark was either not heard or not understood by the queen, and she continued, "Thou knowest, father, the matchless beauty of Blanche, much as she shrinks from the public gaze (and truly she hath a Turkish love of veils and seclusion), is the theme of every tongue, and hath been sung by minstrels, and far celebrated by the paladins of our court." "Yes,---and I know that her spirit is fit for its excelling temple, and that wisdom, humility, love, and all the sweet messengers of God dwell there. I know she lives in your licentious court unscathed as were the faithful in the Babylonian's furnace---fragrant and unsullied as the peerless flower to which you have compared her, albeit, like that, rooted in a rank soil." "True, true, most true, father; and doth not this rare union of outward beauty and inward grace point her out as a fit instrument to convert the caliph to our most holy faith? and it may be to exalt the cross above the crescent in all his wide dominion?" "And for this doubtful end the child of Hunold is to be expelled from Christendom---to be degraded to the level of the minions of the haram? Madam, the vengeance you poured on Hunold and his nobles was mercy to this. It is better that the eyes should be torn out and the tongue out-rooted than that the whole body should be cast into hell." "Sir Priest---Sir Priest---you exceed your office, you pass the bounds of my forbearance. You have already made me pay dearly for the vengeance I visited on Hunold and his vile band of conspirators. You have closed up the natural outlet of my hate, and there is a festering and gangrene pool within my heart that can [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-024.jpg) \- external link  - Page 046. ] no longer be endured. I might have strangled the chicken in its nest, but you have made me foster the bird to peck at me!" "Be calm, madam: remember I am but the humble interpreter of the Almighty's will. Thy salvation, or perdition, eternal and irremediable, depended and still depends on thy nurture of this innocent bird." "Be it so, be it so. I have done well, and now purpose well,---I call all saints to witness for me! Blanche shall be sent to the caliph with a royal retinue of knights. The emperor wills it,---the safety of the empire demands it:---for know, Sir Priest, that this foolish girl, who has refused the hands of the proudest nobles in the land, loves---nay, dotes on Le Bossu!" "Ha!" exclaimed the priest. It is sometimes difficult to comprehend the bearing of an exclamation. The queen interpreted Father Bernard's in accordance with the suggestions of her own evil mind. "It is monstrous," she said, "that perfection should desire to be mated with deformity; but so, on my faith, it is. I have before suspected she returned his passion,--- to-day she betrayed herself in the eye of the whole court. Le Bossu has lain under his father's displeasure for the last month, and to-day he has received indignities that his contumelious spirit will not brook. In brief, there are disaffected, rash, and impetuous youths, such as Baudouin, Arnolphe, and Berenger, the sons of Hunold's confederates, who are ripe for revolt, who are ready to peril their lives to place Le Bossu and the daughter of their renowned leader on the throne. Our warriors worship this misshapen dog; their silly brains are dazzled with his victories, and they deem his deformity but the sign of preternatural power. Now, holy father, once more I appeal to thee. Is it not prudent to thwart this dangerous union?---is it not pious to prevent hostility between the son and father?---to save for holy church the gold that would be spent in most [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-025.jpg) \- external link  - Page 047. ] unholy warfare?---to give this young devotee opportunity and subject for her zeal?" "Madam," replied Father Bernard, in a tone of bitter contempt, "if thou art reasoning to convince me, thou art wasting thy breath; if to silence the voice of thy conscience, believe me, thy labour is equally vain. Answer me one inquiry---truly as if thou wert at the confessional: Has the emperor decided to send Blanche to the caliph?" "He has." "Then, Fastrade, my ministry with thee is impotent--- thy soul is sealed with double damnation; for, as holy church saith, he who repenteth himself of his repentance, and turneth back from the good he purposed, sinketh into remediless ruin, and none can help him." "Nay," exclaimed Fastrade, "I will not believe this,--- the church has penances and masses to outweigh the heaviest crimes, and the royal coffers shall be emptied but I will obtain absolution." "Miserable woman! delude not thyself with this lying doctrine of a perverted religion and false priesthood. I tell thee the soul can only be purified by its own act; the prayers and penances of the universe could avail thee naught. ` Work out thine own salvation ' is the unalterable law written in the word of God, and wrought into the nature that he hath given thee, which makes thee incapable of any other heaven than that within the rocesses of thine own soul." "Within the recesses of my soul!" exclaimed the queen: " there is indeed hell!" "Ay, woman," replied the priest, changing from a slow and somewhat ecclesiastical manner to a tone of deeply excited and personal feeling,---"Ay, woman, a hell of insatiable cruelty---of revenge for unrequited passion---revenge that died not with its victim, but must still be wreaked on the innocent orphan." [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-026.jpg) \- external link  - Page 048. ] "What meanest thou, Sir Priest---have the dead appeared to thee?" "Nay, lady, the dead tell no tales, as thou didst well believe when thou gavest orders to thy emissaries to extinguish the last spark of life in Hunold. He never told your secret: his was not a spirit to betray, even to the ear of his merciful and abused sovereign, the folly of the woman who vainly tried to seduce him from his loyalty to the idolized mother of Blanche. Ha, madam! thou stoopest to the ground, and art struck with terror, even as was the guilty king when the prophet appeared to him. Shall I tell thee more?" "Nay---hold---it is enough---leave me---" "To commune with thine own heart!" And with these parting words, uttered in a tone of irony and exultation that ill suited their tender character, Father Bernard withdrew. Fastrade, when left to herself, and recovered in some degree from the shock and confusion of mind occasioned by the discovery that the secret which she believed to have been buried in Hunold's grave was known to her confessor, vainly endeavoured to account for this mystery. Father Bernard, she knew, had been dedicated to a religious life in his earliest youth, and had never left the recesses of the cloister till, by her command, he was called to the court. He had declared to her that Hunold never told the tale of her dishonour, she had a moral certainty that none but Hunold knew it, and she came to a conclusion, natural to a superstitious mind, that her confessor was endued with supernatural power. It soothed her pride to believe this; for by managing her religious terrors, and by the more legitimate authority of a superior mind, he had governed her, and made her feel in his presence something like the awe that is inspired by an element over which we have no control The restraint he imposed had become [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-027.jpg) \- external link  - Page 049. ] intolerable to her. She would not have scrupled at any moment, by the foulest means, to have rid herself of Blanche, but for the belief infused by Father Bernard, that her own destiny was indissolubly inwrought with the beautiful orphan's. When the scheme of sending her to the caliph flashed upon her, it seemed to promise a compromise with her conscience. Blanche might be exalted from her lowly dependence to the most magnificent station in the East. This she whispered to her conscience. Her passions said that she should deliver herself for ever from the presence of Blanche, who annoyed her almost equally as a youthful and surpassing beauty, and as the living memorial of Hunold. She should break Le Bossu's heart, too, whom she hated for his lofty disdain of her, and dreaded as the future rival of her sons. She had flattered herself that she could artfully commend this plot to her confessor; but some secret misgiving induced her, before making the communication, to deprive herself of the power of retracting by putting the cards into the emperor's hands to deal, having well shuffled them herself. Pepin, after the insult he had received from the queen, had felt himself to be a disgraced man, and avoiding every eye, he had remained solitary in his own apartment. Till now, love had been the masterpassion of his soul; its melting influence and gentle thoughts had pervaded his existence, and seemed to constitute his life. Now he passed the night in brooding on his own degradation; and though, when the image of Blanche glanced athwart the deepening gloom of his mind, she seemed to him a messenger of heaven, it was a heaven for ever lost to him. His gallant spirit had caught the first ray of dawning chivalry, and he spurned the thought of allying himself to the lady of his love while he was dishonoured by an unavenged insult. And how was it ever to be avenged? His enemy was a woman---the wife of his father, fenced [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-028.jpg) \- external link  - Page 050. ] about by his father's power, and guarded by his overweening affection. "I might," he thought (misery opens the door to temptation, and evil thoughts eagerly rush in), "I might raise a standard of rebellion: I have many friends, and should soon have many followers: I know there are unquiet spirits abroad that fear not even the great emperor's power. My father has wronged me of late: he has misinterpreted my motives and misconstrued my actions, and---oh, shame, even to think of it!---he has raised his hand to strike me. But get thee behind me, Satan---it is all that fiendish woman. Till within this last month my father has been godlike in his unalienable love and unwearying kindness to me. Oh, I must endure it till Heaven shall grant me deliverance by death!" From these and bitterer thoughts, a thousand times revolved, he was roused late on the following day by a note from Father Bernard, requesting the prince's immediate presence in his dormitory. At first he threw it aside with careless indifference; but then his consideration returned to it, and he felt a little curious to know what the queen's confessor, a priest whom he had regarded as absorbed in the strictest services and gloomiest abstractions of his religion, could have to say to him. When the mind is engrossed with any subject of overpowering interest, it seems as if every occurrence may have some relation to this subject. Impelled by this feeling, the prince obeyed Father Bernard's summons. Father Bernard's name had long been embalmed in the odour of sanctity. Before leaving the monastery he had acquired the title of saint, a title seldom accorded but by the decree of posterity, and after the tomb has barred out alike the gratitude and the envy of man. At court he had maintained the seclusion of his monastic life. He was never suspected as the author of the queen's mysterious kindness to Blanche; and as she continued audacious in her crimes, it was believed that [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-029.jpg) \- external link  - Page 051. ] her confessor's indulgence was commensurate to her demands. The mischievous and exploded dogma of political economy, "that private crimes are public benefits," then exactly adjusted the scales by which the church was made to profit by the sins of the offender; and it was believed that the confessor heavily assessed the emperor's coffers to redeem his queen's lapses. The prince found Father Bernard impatiently awaiting him; and after bolting his door, and securing himself from every mode of intrusion, he proceeded, without preface or apology for betraying the secrets of the confessional, to impart the communication he had received from the queen. The prince heard him in silence, but his deathlike paleness, his fixed eye, and his quivering lip betrayed the indignation and anguish that overpowered him. The priest paused for a moment and then said, "If I mistake not, my lord, in believing that you have a feeling more tender than pity for this helpless maiden, you will make an effort for her rescue!" "An effort! Sir Priest I would give my life to save her from a thousandth part of the evil that threatens her---but what can I do? I have lost my father's favour--- the meanest churl in the empire has more weight in his councils than I---I am a disgraced and fallen man." "Nay, my lord prince, disgraced you cannot be but by your own act, and if you are fallen, why rise and return tenfold the blow that cast you down." "Holy father, do you remember against whom you counsel resistance---true the queen is the instigator of this mischief, but is she not protected by an unassailable barrier?" "Ah well!" replied Father Bernard, in a tone of mingled pique and disappointment, "I was deluded---I believed you loved Blanche." "Loved her! and so I do, with a devotion that the imagination of a cloistered priest never conceived. But [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-030.jpg) \- external link  - Page 052. ] think more justly of the Lady Blanche than to believe she would accept a lover stained with crime." "Crime, my lord! Circumstances alter our relations, and modify our actions. He who takes the life of another in defence of his own is not accounted a murderer. And is he criminal who resists the malice and tyranny that crushes him?---who rescues the innocent and helpless from the most accursed fate?" "Ah!" exclaimed the prince, "my sword almost leaps from the scabbard at the thought of it---but the way!---the way! My father, till these few days past, has always been kind and generous!" "Kind and generous!" retorted the priest with a scoffing smile, "while you fulfilled and never opposed his wishes---while your hand, never weak nor unwilling, fought his battles---while you were content to return from the hard-fought field and live in his eye without honour or reward---to be a waiter-on of the court---to be called Le Bossu \---to ride beside our lady Fastrade on gala days, and patiently take her insults,---and doubtless he will again be kind and generous if you will tamely be trodden under foot of the queen, and quietly sit with your hands folded, and see the helpless lady depart for the caliph's haram." "No more, Sir Priest---tell me what may be done--- I will think on't." "Nay, you must not think---the bold resolve and bolder act must go together---the present fortune must be taken at its flood. All is prepared to your hand--- the emperor has issued orders for reorganizing the forces just disbanded. Many of his leaders are disaffected. They have been outraged by the audacious queen, and are burning for revenge. The Saxon provinces are in open revolt. They have burnt their churches, driven off their Christian priests---sacrificed the bishops to their divinities, and returned with passionate devotion to the worship of their gods. The [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-031.jpg) \- external link  - Page 053. ] Saracens, led by the infidel hero Abdelmelec, have passed the Ebro and the Pyrenees---have daringly advanced to Narbonne and burned its fauxbourgs. The spoils of the emperor's richest provinces decorate the mosque of Cordova, and his Christian subjects are the captives and slaves of the infidels. There was a time when the emperor would have beaten down these rebels and enemies at opposite extremes of his empire, but his vigour is now touched by advancing age, and relaxed by long prosperity." Father Bernard spoke with the rapidity and decision of a man accustomed to govern the decisions of others. The priest seemed as utterly gone and forgotten as if the character had been the light masquerade of an hour. "If," he said in conclusion, "if, my lord Pepin, you remain passive, your ruin is certain---it is resolved on---what remonstrance can turn the queen from a purposed mischief? She knows too well the story of your noble grandfather to risk subjecting her sons to your rivalship? She knows that Charles Martel, left by his father immured in a prison, without the legal inheritance of one rood of land, superseded his legitimate brothers, and extended his dominions far beyond his father's limits. "You are the son of the great Charles---this is all our warriors demand---you have his eagle-eye, his front, his voice---this to them will be the signal of victory and glory. What care they if your brothers can boast a legitimate birth! This is a matter for priests, not warriors. It is enough for them that you can traverse a province, while our young master, Louis le Debonnaire, is counting his beads. What say ye, my lord? This night the sons of Hunold's confederates---would to God he had a son to revenge him---but they were all strangled by the queen's order---all his brave boys!" For the first time the priest faltered, his voice was choked with emotion---"Pardon me, Sir Pepin," he said, "will you meet these young men at the altar in [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-032.jpg) \- external link  - Page 054. ] the great chapel, and there receive their oaths of fealty?" It was for Blanche's sake alone that Pepin had at first listened, but as the priest had proceeded he had touched the spring of ambition, and of that love of power that is the master passion of most men's minds. It was the possible master of Charles' great empire, whose eye and cheek were now lighted with a brightness from the kindling fires of his soul. Still he hesitated to speak the word that must sever him from the parent stock. "We waste time, my lord," urged the priest. "Are you for this noble enterprise, or must I seek another leader who will dare to rescue Blanche---and deserve her?" "And who are you," exclaimed Pepin, all the passions in his frame aroused, "who are you that dare to speak to me of giving Blanche to another?" The priest replied with perfect calmness, for he had been schooled in the fires of a living martyrdom. "Come near to me, young man, and you shall hear a name that these walls must not echo." Father Bernard pronounced the name. "Righteous Heaven!" exclaimed the prince---"Is this so---can it be so?" "Do you doubt it?" asked the priest, with the assured smile of one who can command belief. "Nay, I cannot; it furnishes the key to a mystery, insolvable till now---I am yours---I submit myself to your guidance with one single condition---our friends shall swear to hold my father's life inviolate." "Your father's---granted---but not Fastrade's. May I live to see the dogs eat that Jezebel! You meet us in the chapel, my lord?" "Yes." "You now know, my lord, why you received so imperative an order from the emperor this morning, to hold no communication with the Lady Blanche, public or private. He feared to have the decree against her [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-033.jpg) \- external link  - Page 055. ] reach your ear. He knew your noble nature too well to believe you would submit passively to it. But go now to her saloon; the night is so dark you may escape observation. Ah, how often have I watched your steps thither, when you thought the eye of Heaven could scarcely penetrate your secresy. But be cautious. On your life do not betray my secret. Remember that in fifteen years no tone of the voice, nor cast of the eye has answered to the gushings of my heart, though there have been moments when I have felt as if every drop of blood was drained from it. Farewell, my lord. Inspire the poor girl with courage. Assure her that her safety is first to be cared for---to-night we will consider the means. I will remain at the altar till the last lingering devotee has left the chapel, and then, by Heaven's good aid, we'll weave a fatal mesh for our enemies!" "Amo te solo, te solo amai, Tu fosti il primo, tu pur sarai L'ultimo oggetto che adorero." Metastatio . Fastrade had, to quote the language of Father Bernard, made the Lady Blanche her "shrine of expiation;" and like many others who render a forced homage, she had loaded the altar with gifts, while she neglected the spirit of the giver. A saloon and contiguous bedchamber were assigned to the beautiful orphan, arranged according to her own taste, and luxuriously furnished by the queen. At one extremity of the saloon was a deep recess, lighted by a window that extended from the ceiling to the floor, and filled with rare plants [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-034.jpg) \- external link  - Page 056. ] arranged on semicircular steps. Before these was a silver fountain which was supplied by an aqueduct, and could be made to play at pleasure into a marble basin, over which a statue of one of Flora's nymphs was bending, apparently in the act of filling a watering-pot. Suspended from the ceiling by silver chains, and half hidden by the flowers, were cages, whose little prisoners sent forth such a wild harmonious chorus, that it seemed as if their gentle warder must, by the artful position in which she had placed them, have beguiled them into the belief that they were in their own sweet woods. Opposite this sylvan scene, and reflecting it almost as distinctly as the more perfect reflectors of our own time, was a polished silver mirror, hung on each side with embossed sconces of the same precious metal. Instead of the ottomans and sofas of a modern drawing-room, piles, or couches of cushion were placed at convenient distances, covered with silk "from farthest Ind," richly embroidered with flowers and imitations, and fantastic caricatures of animals. Beneath the silver mirror was a marble slab, supported by sea-nymphs, and covered with the choicest shells; and in the centre of the apartment was a small ivory table inlaid with silver, with an oriental lamp in the centre constantly burning, and diffusing sweet odours; beside it an hour-glass, in which the sands of time were literally golden; and dispersed around, a few manuscript books beautifully illuminated. Our readers must imagine the apartment we have described occupied by a single tenant, Ermen, the faithful nurse and serving-woman of the Lady Blanche, a hardy, frank, good-humoured looking person of the certain age of forty. "Nothing more uncertain than the certain age;" but not with those of low degree. Time had notched its revolutions on Ermen's honest face, and with less agreeable records of its progress, had impressed there acute sense and kind dispositions. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-035.jpg) \- external link  - Page 057. ] "I marvel that my lady does not return," thus she soliloquized---"it takes but short space to say yes--- but heaven help us! still shorter to say no. He will not say that word to her---bless his great heart---he never yet spoke it to aught of womankind---after all, if worst come to worst, it would not be so bad if my poor lady would make the best of it---but it's only little folk, and not great ones, that have the skill to make the best of a bad bargain. If all that our minstrels report is true, this renowned caliph is of a right noble temper--- but then he is a paynim \---and our royal queen is a Christian! Truly, there is much virtue in a name!" Here Ermen's cogitations were broken by the opening of the door, and her mistress entered, her person enveloped in a veil, which having cast aside, she threw herself on a couch, pressed her hands to her temples, throbbing with repressed emotion, which now burst forth without control. "It was in vain then, my lady?" said Ermen. "Oh, utterly in vain, Ermen!" "You were not admitted to the private audience room?" "Yes." "But the queen was there?" "No." "You were faint and faltering then, and did not press your suit?" "Nay, I poured out my very soul---I entreated---I knelt---but it is of no use, Ermen. The emperor is resolved---his word is pledged. The cries of the victim for succour, who is already delivered to the executioner, are bootless." "St. Genevieve aid us! It passeth my comprehension that the emperor should deny you, my lady---you whom no one can deny---not even the queen; so that it is currently said in court that you wear a talisman [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-036.jpg) \- external link  - Page 058. ] that can unfiend the fiends. But the devil, that has ruled her in all things else, has now got the upper hand in this too. Our good lord emperor deny you, indeed! Nay, it is the queen. There is no mischief abroad but she brews it. Why were the fifty cottages burnt at Mens, but because a poor churl refused to the queen the hawks she had trained for my Lady Bertha! And the artisans of our city must all be thrown into dungeons, forsooth, because one of their number had offended my lady queen. I marvel at our great sovereign! Though I am a woman that says it, no good or honour ever came to a man, high or low, by being ruled by a woman. Has not he suffered the noblest in the land to have their eyes plucked out at the queen's order, and now my Lord Pepin has offended her, and that is to be wrested from him that is far dearer than eyes or soul either. Think you the prince is acquainted with this journey of ours, my lady?" "I believe not, Ermen---it is yet a secret." "I believe not, too, or we should have heard from him before this. He has a bold heart and a quick hand. Beshrew me! if he submits without striking a blow." Blanche rose for the first time from her disconsolate position; "You do not mean, Ermen," she exclaimed, "that he would attempt resistance---he cannot be so foolish---so frantic!" "I do not know what you count foolishness, my lady, but my Lord Pepin is not of a spirit to sit down and weigh his strength before he resists attack." "But, Ermen, his father's power is as irresistible as the tides of the ocean." "It may be; but do you think my Lord Pepin would let the waves of the ocean overwhelm him without buffeting them. He never quietly submitted to any injustice. He is lion-hearted, and, as they say of that royal beast, kind and fostering to every thing weak and powerless. Ah, he is noble and gentle, and save in that small [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-037.jpg) \- external link  - Page 059. ] matter of the rising on his back, perfect, soul and body; and there, I verily believe, he was smitten of a demon, who could not bear the world should have the pattern of a perfect man." Ermen's praises were fallen on an ear attuned to them, and though the keys were struck by an unskilful hand, Blanche had gradually subsided into the silence of a greedy listener. Ermen, like a careful nurse, who has tried the admission of a little light upon an afflicted vision, and found it to solace rather than irritate, ventured a little more. "Cheer up, my blessed young lady," she said; "it seems pretty dark now, but I, that have lived to more than twice your age, have seen many a cloudy morning turn into a bright day,--- Ah, I remember that time your father's beautiful house was burned, and all his pleasant places laid waste. I thought life would be one wail and sad lament, but we have had many a bright hour since. Now, my lady, I must leave you, and I pray you to take my counsel,---hope for the best---nay, expect it---that will keep down the black vapours." Poor Blanche, when left alone, found it (as others have) far easier to approve advice than to be governed by it. She rose from her seat and went to the window--- the night was shutting in dark and threatening. As she turned her eyes towards the heavens she saw one planet shining through the parted clouds with undimmed lustre. To a thoughtful mind it is natural to perceive a relation between the outward and the inward world. "The clouds have hidden all but this one beaming light from me," she said. "Beautiful image of the love of God, that penetrates the thick darkness around me, and will sustain me in my utmost need." She might have been mistaken, at this moment, for a saint holding communion with Heaven, or rather for a spirit of heaven, that had just touched upon the sorrows, but never known the sins of humanity. Her rich tresses, [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-038.jpg) \- external link  - Page 060. ] wreathed in curls, and infolded by many a braid, were fastened by a cross of pearls, so as to define perfectly the Grecian outline of her brow and head. Her white muslin dress, fastened by a girdle of the same pure gems, harmonized with a celestial character, and gave to her figure, relieved as it was against the deep crimson window-hanging, a spiritual aspect. Her thoughts were soon brought back from their heavenward flight, and weighed down by the cares of earth. "But for the dismal memory of his loneliness, she said, I might endure it---who shall console him when I am gone? who shall sooth his irritated spirit? who shall watch against the demons that torment him?---it was my mission?---" "It is not finished, Blanche," said a voice that responded to her low but audible tones, and turning round she saw, by the light of the little lamp, that the prince had entered without rousing her from her abstraction. "Oh, my lord, it is," she replied, in a voice almost choked with emotion---"and you have yet to learn the cruel decree---and to endure it." "Nay, my love, not yet to learn it, nor would I endure it, if all the fiends of hell, instead of one, had decreed it. What! suffer you to be driven out of Christendom, and delivered up to be the minion of the infidel caliph. Did you deem that my soul had been trampled out of me, Blanche?" "My lord, you know I never had one evil or demeaning thought of you; but who has dared to inform you of what I have been so sternly commanded to keep a secret?" "It signifies not who---be tranquil on that head, and Blanche, my love, keep down your womanish spirit, and listen to what I have to tell you---that she-wolf has well stirred the stream, but she will yet find herself foiled of her victim." "Ah me! my lord, do not raise hopes that must be [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-039.jpg) \- external link  - Page 061. ] crushed. The darkness will only be more terrible after the flash of light has passed---but hark--some one knocks---it is not safe for you to be seen here." The knocking was repeated, and proved to proceed from the faithful Ermen, who being in nothing excluded from her mistress' confidence, was immediately admitted. She whispered to her lady, "I have a private message to you from the emperor." "Speak it aloud, Ermen, my lord Pepin knows all." "Blessings on the free tongue that told him. I fear not now to tell you the emperor's behest. My heart did sorely misgive me, for I know it the nature of the timid deer to fly to the covert. But my lord will counsel bolder measures." "I know, my good Ermen, you would fain have a stouter spirit than your poor mistress, to rely on," said Blanche, with a faint smile. "But tell us quickly, what message do you bring from the emperor?" "As I left you, my lady, I was met by a page from the emperor, who commanded my presence. As we went along the gallery I fished from him, that since you left the audience-chamber no person had been admitted--- the queen herself had been put off, and the emperor had been heard walking up and down, as I, or any of the commons would, with a worried mind; so I thought to myself this angured well for my dear lady, for when the emperor gets in a ferment, and is left to himself, he works off pure, like good liquor." "Proceed to the message, honest Ermen," said the prince. "He bade me tell you, my lady,---Heaven grant I may not forget the words---he tried to write them, but everybody knows that, for all his getting up o' nights to practise, and Master Alcuin's teaching, he is yet not the clerk to do it." [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-040.jpg) \- external link  - Page 062. ] "The message, Ermen," repeated the prince, impatiently--- "the message." "My lord, I crave your patience: I must tell a story my own way,---if I drop a stitch the whole ravels out. Where was I? ah! at the writing. Well, he scrawled and scribbled, and spoiled parchment enough for one of my lady's heartfull criss-crossed letters to you, my lord. I had a great mind to snatch it from the floor and smuggle it into my pocket against a time of need. Now I have got to the right place, and I'll make even work of the rest of it. The emperor bade me tell you there is still one---oh skies above! I have forgotten the word---alterative---no, that is not it. I'll leave it out. If the great people would leave out half their words, we simple folk could understand them far better." Patience was like to have her perfect work; but Blanche, who well understood her woman's infirmities, cast a deprecating look at the prince, and she was permitted to proceed without interruption. "The upshot of it is, my lady, that the emperor says he will take back his royal word to the ambassador, provided you will profess yourself a nun"--- "Now the blessing of our holy mother Mary be upon him!" exclaimed Blanche. "Nay---nay, Blanche"--- "My lord, and you, my lady, hear me out. There is something far harder for you to do than to drop the but half-lifted veil between you and the world: you are to persuade my Lord Pepin to retire to the monastery of Pruim, of which the emperor will make him Abbe. You are allowed to-morrow to make your decision whether you will be the bride of Heaven---or of the caliph." "My decision is already made. My lord---my dear lord---hear me. Away from you, it is all exile---desolation, but not all degradation. In leaving the world I leave only you---for you are the world to me. We but [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-041.jpg) \- external link  - Page 063. ] end this brief life a little sooner: at the best it would have been a few more hopes---blighted, it may be; a few more years---a past and useless dream when they are ended---Nay, if you will not hear me out," she concluded, covering her face with her hands, "think from what I escape!" "Blanche, this is idle; your vows are plighted to me, and I swear by all the saints in heaven, that Omnipotence alone shall wrest you from me! Leave us, Ermen." "I'll come again for your answer, my lady, shall I not?" inquired Ermen, while she indicated by a slight compression of her under lip her secret and very satisfactory conjecture as to which of the lovers was like to obtain the victory in the pending controversy. Her mistress bowed assent, and she withdrew. "Think you, my beloved," said the prince, passionately pressing Blanche's hand to his lips, "that I will supinely yield this, after it has been promised to me again and again, in smiles and in tears? Never!" "Oh, I well know, never voluntarily; but our fate"--- "Pardon me, dearest, for cutting off the words from your sweet lips,---but I read far differently the book of our fate. I see inscribed there banded friends, trusty followers, a crushed enemy, victory and empire, and my peerless Blanche sharing with me the throne of the West." There was a fearful ecstasy in her lover's eye, that shot terror through Blanche's gentle soul. "My dear lord!" she said, in a voice of such deprecating tenderness that the prince saw he had alarmed her. "Pardon me, dearest Blanche," he replied; "I should more cautiously have disclosed to your timid spirit the bright future that is opening upon us; you are confounded by the sudden light." "I do not comprehend you, my lord." "My gentle girl, you could not comprehend the [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-042.jpg) \- external link  - Page 064. ] means, were I to detail them, by which your freedom and safety are to be secured till you permit your lover to put the bridal ring on your finger, and Heaven and a good cause shall enable him to place a crown on your head." "A crown, my lord! Has insult and wrong vanquished your virtue?---do you purpose rebellion against your sovereign---your father? " "My ties to my sovereign, Blanche, have become weak as my obligations have diminished. My father severed for ever the bond that united us when he saw me suffer the touch of that fiend's foot, and was silent." "Ah, my lord, human imperfection should be borne with and forgiven. Your father is blinded and perverted from his noble nature by the queen." "But he is perverted, Blanche, and he, or you and I and others, must suffer the consequences. On whom should they fall,---the guilty or the innocent?" "Leave that to Heaven's judgment. But be assured, that nothing God reckons evil can fall on him who is shielded by innocence. Do not part with that defence, my lord." "Oh innocence! it is only for the sucking babe and you, sweet saint, who live at the gate of heaven. As to right and wrong, how can we, who are groping in the dark and tangled passages of life, say what is right and what is wrong? We can only discriminate colours accurately, Blanche, in full light." "My lord, we are only perplexed when we look without, where men impose false colours to confound our enslaved senses. Within is God's own light--- always clear and bright unless we sacrilegiously dim it with our evil passions." "This is useless, my love. He who is driven to the brink of a precipice, must not be over-nice in discussing the only mode of escape. What would you have me do?---quietly submit to see you the proffered bride of [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-043.jpg) \- external link  - Page 065. ] the caliph? I am not yet the poor slave to suffer that!" "But remember, we have an alternative---the peace and sanctity of the cloister. Oh, my lord, it is both sin and folly to reject it." "Blanche! Blanche!" replied the prince in a tone that betrayed the irritated pride of the lover. "It seems right easy for you to transfer your heart to the cloister. But thus it ever is with your sex: your affections are so soft and fusible, that they can be recast at any moment; religion offers the mould, and the change is at once perfected: the lover of this hour is the devotee of the next." "My lord, you do us much injustice. The disappointments, the reverses, the struggles, the anguish of a woman's love must be pent up in her own heart---no human eye may see it---no human ear may hear it. Man proclaims his, and it escapes in its publication,--- and he follows some new idol: it may be wealth, or fame, or power, or glory. But she who truly loves, never loves but once; and it is because her affection is pure, disinterested, and self-devoting, that it may be--- not transferred, my lord, but succeeded by a sentiment holy, illimitable, and eternal." "My dear Blanche, on my bended knees I pray your forgiveness for my slander. But do you think, while you are convincing me of the value of my treasure, you are preparing me to acquiesce in being rifled of it? What do they offer us? My peerless Blanche, the most beauteous flower that ever opened to the eye of the sun, may be permitted to wither in the cloister's tomb---perchance to wear out vigils in prayers and penances for my Lady Fastrade! And I, who have led hosts to victory, and will again---so help me, God--- I am to be promoted to the abbacy of Pruim! Or, if I would play the saint, I may, perhaps, like my meek uncle Carloman, tend the sheep of the monks of Mont [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-044.jpg) \- external link  - Page 066. ] Cassin, dress the food for their pampered palates, hide my royal birth, and be scourged by every valet in the monastery. Nay, by the mass! I will rather follow in the footsteps of Charles Martel, and snatch the crown destined for my legitimate brother's brows, though, after I have won, deserved, and enjoyed it, the kind priests shall say of me, as they say of him, that my soul is doomed to eternal torments, not only as the recompense of my own sins, but that I may burn for the good of others, who step to heaven over my head! But my dear Blanche," added the prince, changing his voice to a mild and affectionate tone as he caught the sad and half-reproachful expression of her face, "I should not cloud these last moments---this is our last parting---our last separation: to-morrow you shall be apprized of the means by which your safety is to be secured till He who has willed that our hearts should grow together in adversity, shall reunite us in prosperity. Then, dearest, you shall see him swaying multitudes who has hitherto been the slave of another's will. Oh, Blanche, will it not be sweet to share together wealth, power, and honour?" "Ah, my lord! your love was enough for me; other wealth, power, or honour I never coveted, nor do I now. Alas! that little stream that flowed so freshly and so quietly, giving forth no sound to others, but making such music in our ears, and nurturing flowers always blooming and always sweet---that little stream will soon be forgotten---my lord hath launched on the ocean of ambition. Man may wile away his unripe youth on that pure stream; but once embarked on that tempesttossed ocean, he never returns. Alcuin has read me of such things in the old poets: now I believe it, for I feel it." Blanche laid her head on her lover's bosom, overpowered by feelings that silence and tears only could adequately express; and he, for a few moments at least, felt that a love like hers, that disdained all [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-045.jpg) \- external link  - Page 067. ] accessories, was sufficient for him, and he told her so. "My dearest Blanche," he said, "if there were a spot in the wide world whither we could fly and remain unmolested, not a thought or desire of mine would stray beyond it. But there is no such haven for us: nothing remains for me but resistance, or submission to have my sole light extinguished. Then what would life be to me?---the bitter draught it was before you made me love it. I felt myself degraded below the standard of a man: you have raised me above my fellows---you have made Le Bossu the envy of the handsomest and noblest paladins of our court." Never, in all the tenderness of their confidence, had the prince before alluded to his deformity. Blanche perceived that his frame thrilled at the word. "You wrong me, Blanche," he continued, "to doubt my exclusive devotion to you. I have enlisted in this very enterprise you so deprecate for your sake." "For mine, my lord? Oh, then abandon it, for no good can come of it. If, as the heathen priests of Odin hold, the temple is desecrated in which a lance has been permitted to enter, is not the filial bosom polluted in which one disobedient thought has risen? In sooth, it is far better to yield to evil than to inflict it---to embrace the cross than to be crushed by it." "These are a woman's timid thoughts: dismiss them, Blanche. Our affairs are complicated with others---I have embarked, and cannot turn back if I would. But the victory achieved, and my Blanche shall be to me what the image of the goddess Bertha is to the Saxon--- no evil passion shall confront you---hate and revenge shall vanish before you---and spears and shields fall to the ground!" It is not in the nature of a tender, devoted woman to oppose long the bold decision of a resolved man. Her power must be reserved for his hours of happiness or suffering. Blanche ceased to resist her lover's [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-046.jpg) \- external link  - Page 068. ] determination, even by her meek persuasion, and their conversation soon subsided into those interchanges of expressions of deep and eternal love, beautiful to them, but untranslatable into the vulgar tongue. While they were imprudently protracting their interview, Ermen was killing the time in walking up and down a gallery that communicated with various apartments of the palace. There she met her gossips, managed the easy key to their confidence, heard all their mistress's secrets (and, in the licensed court of Charlemagne there was as abundant materials for scandal, as in the French courts of a later date), but never indulged them with a hint of her lady's affairs. As it is difficult to decide which is most agreeable to a real scandal-monger, hearing, or telling tales---there is no reason to suppose Ermen's companions were dissatisfied, though one after another dropped off and left her, wishing that lovers would bethink them that there were more than two people in the universe. Suddenly her attention was arrested by hearing her mistress' name pronounced by a voice that issued from a guard-room, at the extremity of the gallery. No one, Ermen thought, had a right to speak aught of her mistress, that she had not a right to hear; and she instantly placed herself in a convenient position for her car to do its duty. "I doubt the queen mistakes," said one of the parties, "in supposing the prince to be in the Lady Blanche's saloon, but for all that we must maintain our watch." "Ah, Valdrad and Hardouin!" thought Ermen, "wellchosen men for spies." "You have a snug warm birth here, Valdrad," continued the first speaker. "I am chilled through in the court. There is a snow-storm without---a pretty time of year to begin winter, truly. Come, change posts with me for a little while." [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-047.jpg) \- external link  - Page 069. ] "With all my heart, though on my faith, Hardouin, I like not this trust of our gracious lady. I had rather make love than mar it. I had rather the prince would escape than be caught in a net of my spreading." "Curse on that cowardly fashion of yours, Valdrad, as if you could lighten a sin by lamenting it, when you have not the virtue to eschew it. Now I take quite another way to hush my conscience. There must be a certain amount of sin enacted on this mortal stage, and he is the boldest fellow who cheerfully bears his part of the burden. For example, somebody must do this villanous duty for the queen. The prince cannot escape her. She has stirred up the emperor's heart, which is of itself as clear as this cup of Rhenish, against him; and without our means, and even if she does not now detect the prince in this violation of the emperor's commands, she will contrive some mode to provoke him to resistance---his ruin follows of course." "I am not sure of that. There is nothing that, if left to himself, the emperor will not remit to Le Bossu. But come, Hardouin, lend me your watch-coat, and I'll to the outer post." Accordingly he sallied forth, but immediately returned, saying, "It's as dark as Erebus. How am I to depose to the emperor that I have seen the prince issue from the Lady Blanche's saloon, when I cannot see my hand before my face? Stay, a lucky thought strikes me. This damp snow---as clever a material to take the measure of a man's foot as can well be contrived---covers the court two inches deep. Not an impress will be made upon it till morning, unless it be by the prince. He shall betray himself. The emperor is the lark of the palace. The queen has nothing to do but to point to the footsteps from her window,--- a hint to her is enough." "Bravo, Valdrad! They say the devil deserts his followers at their utmost need, but our lady queen finds him as true as steel. Here is a fall of snow to befriend [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-048.jpg) \- external link  - Page 070. ] her, and a witty-pated fellow to teach her how to profit by it." Ermen had heard enough. She left the friends to quaff their Rhenish, and hastened to her lady's apartment, where she immediately communicated the amount of her information. The prince perceived his danger, and saw no way of escaping it. An arrest, at this stage of his affairs, would be fatal. Blanche, habituated to depend on the fidelity and experience of her serving-woman, appealed to her. "Dear, good Ermen." she said, "can you devise no way to save my lord from this peril?" "Indeed, my lady, I cannot. Would that he had that winged horse our minstrels sing of, that touches never a hoof to the ground, but posts through the welkin like an eagle---stay, let me think."---Ermen paused, tasked her wits, and a bright gleam shot through her little gray eye, as she exclaimed, "Yes, there is a way." She opened a door that led into a vestibule, and an outer door. "It is still as dark as Egypt," she said, and then, after a moment's awkward hesitation, she added, "you must pardon me, my lord. The manliest and noblest must condescend to their necessity. The royal lion was helped out of the net by the mouse. Say your parting words, my lord, and come hither; but you, my lady, stay there." The parting of the lovers seemed to Ermen needlessly protracted---to them, fraught as the future was with uncertainty and danger, it was most brief, and such as seems to "press the life from out young hearts." Blanche, in spite of Ermen's counsel, which had a woman's wit in it, would have followed her lover to the threshold; but Ermen hastily closed the inner door, and left her mistress to guess at the modus operandi by which her lover's safety was to be effected. Effected it was, and the prince kept his appointment in the chapel, and was animated by the zeal and [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-049.jpg) \- external link  - Page 071. ] harmony of his confederates. Father Bernard, who still maintained his incognito, was the soul of the conspiracy. All deferred to his superior knowledge, and agreed to be governed by his bold, yet prudent counsels. The plan of the conspirators was, not to attempt to overthrow the power of the emperor---this did not enter into the hope, perhaps not the wish, of the boldest among them; but to elevate a standard under which the wronged and disaffected might rally. To establish, under the prince, their favourite leader, a rival and independent government, and to secure to him wholly, or in part, the succession of the empire. "Though an ill mind appear in simulation, And for the most, such quality offends, 'Tis plain that this, in many a situation, Is found to further beneficial ends." Rose's Orlando Furioso . Fortune, always delighting to ensnare human credulity and play with human hopes, seemed to lavish her smiles on the conspirators. The queen had received the report of her emissaries, and was eager to enjoy her malignant triumph at the detection of the prince in a violation of his father's commands. She went earlier than usual to the emperor's dressing-room, which overlooked the inner court of the palace. He was dressing while, according to his daily custom, he was listening to the reading of one of the learned men of his court. Charles was avaricious of time, and of time only, and appears, from the brevity of his toilette, to have thought with a witty anti-Brummel of our own day, that the [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-050.jpg) \- external link  - Page 072. ] poorest employment a man can have, is that of looking at his own face. Fastrade found a pretext to dismiss the reader. "Rely upon it, my lord," she said, as soon as they were alone, "you have acted with your usual wisdom in striking at the root of this love-affair of your son with my ungrateful Blanche. The Scripture saith, wind, rain, and snow are God's messengers, and I think this snow is sent thus untimely to inform you Le Bossu has violated your command---his love has overruled his duty: look there, my lord!" The emperor made no reply; his keen eye was fixed on the traces of the footsteps to which Fastrade had directed it. She deemed her point secured. "It is most certain," she continued, "that Pepin has abused your confidence: but do not be harsh with him. An arrest for a few weeks, till Blanche is far beyond his reach, will prevent any further rashness on his part." The emperor still made no reply, but sounded a bell: a servant appeared. "Send Eric hither," he said. Eric was the court shoemaker, and, like all the other masters of the domestic arts then in use, he lived within the palace walls. He was instantly in waiting. "Eric," said his royal master, "go measure me the prints of yon footsteps on the snow. Return and tell me, as I think you can, whose shoe has made them." "If it can be told, my lord emperor, it is I that can tell it, for I have fitted every foot at your majesty's court for the last ten years." "I rely upon you. Fear not to report truly,---fear nothing but to deceive me." "It is right, where justice demands punishment," said the queen, "to proceed, as you ever do, my lord, with scrupulous caution; otherwise we might surely in this case trust to our eyes: no one can mistake the track of Le Bossu's almond-shaped foot." "Almond-shaped! I know not what you mean by almond-shaped, my lady; but if in aught to disparage [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-051.jpg) \- external link  - Page 073. ] the shape of Pepin's foot, by the mass you greatly err. His foot is as fairly formed, and as well set on, as any lord's, or lady's either, in the court. It is like his mother's, and that was never matched in beauty by any foot of flesh and blood." Fastrade reddened with vexation (her own little foot was her pet idol), but she knew too well the art of managing, to chide when she was chidden; and reserving her resentment for some more auspicious moment, she remained rather awkwardly silent. Eric soon reappeared, with a last in his hand, which looked like an unshaped block of wood, as broad as it was long. "The track, an please your majesty," said Eric, "is Ermen's, the Lady Blanche's Gallic serving-woman. I have measured it with her last: you see, my lady, there is no other woman's like it---so broad, and flat on the instep---short-vamped and square-heeled." "Enough, Eric," said the emperor, evidently agreeably surprised. "I am satisfied---here is gold for your trouble---say nothing of the errand I sent you on. And, good Eric, I commend you for being at your stall at this early hour: I like no drones in my hive. My Lady Fastrade," continued the emperor, when the menial had left the apartment, "you have been somewhat over-alert with your suspicions." "If so, my dear lord, it was an over-zeal in your service: I ask no obedience from Le Bossu---he violates no duty to me." "Nor to me either. On my soul, I believe I have wronged him---and in matters far more serious than this love-passage. By Heaven! I had rather be a duped and credulous fool, than a tyrant father. Leave me, Fastrade---I have business with my secretaries." "I will leave you, my lord, but not in anger with me. You must first forgive me for loving you too well, and serving you too anxiously. Simpleton that I was! I deemed it my duty to tell all that was in my heart to [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-052.jpg) \- external link  - Page 074. ] my royal lord and master, but, in future, so far from troubling you with my sad suspicions of Le Bossu, whatever outrage and obloquy he may heap upon me, I will remember that the lot of woman is on me---that I must live---suffer---and be silent!" "Oh woman, woman!" thought Charles, "what a power of words you take to express your vow of silence;" but he vouchsafed no reply to her meek resolution, uttered as if she were the most oppressed and enduring of women. His feelings had taken a new and strong direction, and he suffered her to depart without one apologetic word or look. His generous spirit was stung with a sense of injustice to his son, and he determined to repair it on the instant, by giving him a signal proof of his confidence. One week earlier this step would have saved Charles from everlasting regrets, and the prince from crime and sorrow; but neither monarch nor subject can control the consequences of evil actions. "As ye sow, so shall ye reap," is the just and immutable law. The reader must readily have conjectured the mode by which Ermen evaded the peril that menaced the prince. He was allowed no choice of the means, and scarcely time to feel how much more ludicrous than heroic was his position. The night that followed he had passed without sleep, and in anxious deliberations, and when he was summoned to his father's presence, his pale and haggard aspect alarmed the emperor. "Are you sick, my son?" he inquired, in a kinder voice than had fallen on the prince's ear for many weeks. "No, sire, not sick, but---" "But what? my dear Pepin." "Heart-sick, my liege. Is it strange that I should droop, and grow pale, in the cold shadow of my father's displeasure?" Pepin's noble heart was unschooled in artifice, and [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-053.jpg) \- external link  - Page 075. ] he felt its true blood rush to his face, at the first evasion he had ever used with his father. The emperor saw only in his flushed cheek the expression of filial feeling, wounded by his injustice. "My dear Pepin," he said, "there has been something wrong between us. We have both been to blame--- have we not?" "I believe so, my lord." "Nay, Pepin, do not so be-lord and be-liege me: have you not always called me father? It is the title God has made, my son, worth all others of man's creation. I would not be a common king, and live far up in the frozen regions, above the sweet and melting breath of nature. Call me father, my dear son; and henceforth let us maintain the natural offices of our relation. You shall be my support and hope, and I will be your protector and benefactor." The impulse of Pepin's heart was, to throw himself at his father's feet---to swear to him eternal gratitude and fidelity---but the solemn oaths he had plighted in the chapel still vibrated in his ear, and withheld him; and when the emperor concluded, by saying, "Is not this our compact, Pepin?" and offering him his hand, the prince gave him his, but it was as cold and nerveless, in his father's warm grasp, as if it were death-stricken. "So mute and cold, my son!" The emperor gazed at him for a moment, piercingly. "Ah, Pepin," he continued, "I see how it is with you. Duty, honour, glory, all weigh light against love. But believe me, my boy, this will pass away---it is the plaything of our youth---the mist of the morning, certainly to be dispersed by the fervid sun of manhood. As to this pretty Blanche, she is a rare gem, I grant you, and fit for a monarch's cabinet; but I have given her away, and I cannot retract my royal word." "But why was that word given, sire?" "Why, in part, young man, to place her far beyond [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-054.jpg) \- external link  - Page 076. ] your reach---think you it were well to reward treason and rebellion by giving the daughter of the rebel Hunold to my favourite son? Let that pass---let us not look back, but forward---you have glorious work before you--- no time for a lover's sighs---the Saxon provinces are in revolt---the barbarian forces have already passed our eastern frontier. I am bound, as you know, to the succour of the Pope against his insurgent Romans,--- and as a proof of my restored confidence, I shall give to you the supreme command of the forces already levied and now levying for this eastern war. And further, my son, name to me your friends, those that you would have appointed to stations of trust and honour under you, and their claims shall be considered." Pepin was overpowered. He saw placed in his hands, by the blind confidence of his father, the certain means, as he believed, of achieving his designs. A vision of love, independence, and power floated before his eyes; but he recoiled from himself at the thought of abusing a trust so nobly and generously proffered. He made an effort to express, in general terms, his gratitude, but he abhorred hypocrisy, and the words died away on his lips. A nervous tremulousness seized his whole frame. He was exhausted by long-continued excitement, fasting, and vigils, and torn by the conflict of opposing passions. The emperor believed his agitation to result from a spirit grieved by injustice, and overpowered by unexpected kindness. "Now God forgive me!" he exclaimed, as he rang for assistance, "for ever distrusting him." The prince attempted to rise; he again essayed to speak, but the power of motion and utterance failed him, and when the attendants appeared he was conveyed, unconscious, to his own apartment. The scenes that followed may be imagined. His faltering and changing purposes---the whisperings of unappeasable resentment to the queen---Father [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-055.jpg) \- external link  - Page 077. ] Bernard's stern, unyielding onward pressure---the indignant remonstrances of his confederates, and above all, and finally prevailing, the soft pleadings of a love that melted every subordinate affection in its fires. In a few days he was at the head of his father's forces, marching towards the eastern frontier of the empire. In a few days more he had unfurled an independent standard, and declared that he would never lay down his arms till he had secured a participation in the government, and an equal succession with his brothers. Success everywhere attended him. The emperor was on his progress towards Rome. There was no loyal force to oppose the prince, and he marched victoriously from city to city. Where was the gentle Blanche while these events were shaping her destiny? The prince had been compelled by his military duties to leave Aix-la-Chapelle without delay. He had previously concerted a plan with Father Bernard for Blanche's clandestine removal to a place of security, where she might await the moment when their happy destinies should be achieved, and for ever united. In the mean time Father Bernard remained in the palace to watch, with his untiring eye, over the safety of the orphan. For this end he curbed his haughty spirit, and still stooped to play the priest to the queen; and kept down, as well as he might, his impatient desire to unsheath his sword in a fair field. Through Ermen's agency he effected a communication with Blanche, and every measure was appointed to secure their secret and safe release from thraldom. The appointed hour was at hand, when their hopes were suddenly dashed by an order from the queen, who ruled the palace in the emperor's absence, to remove the Lady Blanche to an upper apartment, where she was to be strictly guarded, till she could be sent off with her retinue, without danger of being intercepted by the prince. The queen, still influenced by the [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-056.jpg) \- external link  - Page 078. ] superstitious notions respecting Blanche that had been so deeply stricken into her soul by the priest, treated her with no discourtesy that she deemed unnecessary. She assigned to her use the emperor's private sleeping-room, which communicated on one side with a gallery, guarded day and night, and on the other with her own bedroom; the passages to which, in the emperor's absence, were always jealously guarded. The third day of Blanche's removal had passed, and was succeeded by a quiet starlit evening. The busy and the happy were either reposing or revelling, and no sound was heard in the streets of Aix-la-Chapelle, save the half-stifled groan of the houseless vagrant---the slow step of the panitent returning from midnight prayers, or the whistle of the soldier who did the watchman's duty. Blanche was sitting at her casement-window, absorbed in sad and tender thought, while Ermen was pacing up and down the room, performing superfluous services, keeping time with her tongue to her movements; complaining, expostulating, and entreating, half to herself, and half to her lady: thus letting off the accumulating steam that, being restrained from its proper channels, must find a safety-valve or explode. "Our bodies might be as free as our thoughts," she said, "if my lady had taken my advice." "What advice?" asked Blanche, rather to humour Ermen's tongue than for information of what had been already repeatedly rung in her ear. "What advice! sure, my lady, you know---but it's easy going over it again, and maybe you'll think differently--- pardon me, my dear young mistress, but they say wit had better come late than never. It is but to give the ten gold pieces to our warder---his honesty, a plague on him! is not worth half the sum, but he swears by St. Denis he'll not take less---then the Saxon churl at the other end of the gallery is easily [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-057.jpg) \- external link  - Page 079. ] disarmed by a cup of drugged Rhenish---after that our only hindrance till we get to the private passage to the chapel are the two Gallic sentinels below the first flight of stairs. And one glance of your eye---one word from your tongue, my lady, will move all the bars and bolts at their command, for the loyal blood of Aquitaine is in their veins, though my Lady Fastrade knows it not. Once in the chapel, we might trust to holy mother Mary to help her own servants out of her own temple--- that is, if we help ourselves; beyond that, I'll trust to my own wits alone,---for once in the free air, they'll rise like steam from a boiling pot when the cover is taken off." "Consider once more, my good Ermen, by what means we should escape: first, by corrupting the fidelity of our keeper---" "Pardon me, my dear lady, the faith that is to be bought for ten pieces of gold is not worth speaking of." "Be it so then. But in sorrow, I must confess there is no human virtue but has its price, since my good Ermen is willing, for the doubtful chance of liberty at last, to expose to cruel punishment two of her kind-hearted countrymen. Oh it is the bitterest drop in my sorrows, that I involve my best friends in crime, as well as misery. You, Ermen,---this kind mysterious priest, who is playing a treacherous part for me, and my dear lord, whom the doom of treason certainly awaits." Blanche's voice expressed her utter hopelessness, and Ermen forgot all her plans and pique, in the desire to console her. "Now, my blessed lady," she said, "do not talk so despairingly; I had a dismal dream of the dead last night, and that's a sure sign you'll hear good news of the living. Do not lay your head so droopingly on your harp, as if you were never again to wake it to a joyous measure---nay, do not rise from it till you have once more played that Gallic song, that my fathers sung ere they had passed under the yoke of [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-058.jpg) \- external link  - Page 080. ] barbarian, or Roman either. Ah, well I remember how your little hand and foot kept time to it, while you were yet a baby in my arms. There it is!" continued Ermen, as Blanche, to gratify her, boldly struck the chords. The wild heroic air called up the dead and the distant, in the faithful creature's memory. "It is too much!" she said, with streaming eyes, when her mistress had finished. "I see those vine-covered hills--- and the white cottage---and the pear-tree---my father--- my mother. I hear the viol, and the flute, and the shouting chorus of us young ones, as we stopped to join them---but hark---is that the echo of my memory, or are you answered from below?" Both listened intently, and heard these words repeated, in the lowest audible tone: "Fear is for the willing slave, Triumph waits the true and brave." Blanche grasped Ermen's arm, while Ermen exclaimed, `It is the prince's voice!" "Hush, Ermen, for the love of Heaven, hush!" "Ay, my lady, but look, look!" At this moment a procession of priests and attendants, bearing the host to a dying man, were seen to issue from a monastery on the opposite side of the street. By the torches they carried, two persons were distinctly descried passing from beneath the palace wall, and deliberately crossing to the opposite side. They were muffled in the long hooded russet cloaks worn by the pilgrims of Jerusalem, whose order was designated by a broad white cross wrought on the back of the cloak. As the host passed them, the pilgrims dropped on their knees; and then rising, exchanged a salutation with the priests. The procession passed on rapidly, and the pilgrims appeared to be slowly following in their train, till they turned a corner, and disappeared. Blanche was certain, that one of these seeming pilgrims was the prince; but [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-059.jpg) \- external link  - Page 081. ] while she wondered what wild hope could have led him to such a rash exposure, and held her breath, and strained her ear for what she fancied was the sound of rapidly returning footsteps, she heard voices in the gallery at her door. The bolts were turned, and Father Bernard entered. "Now, holy father," said the warder, as he admitted him, "for the love of mercy shrive the lady quickly; for as I hope St. Peter will turn the key of heaven for me, I scarcely dare to break the strict order of the queen, even at the word of her confessor." "No more words, good fellow. Here is gold for thee. If thou hast unabsolved sins do some act of mercy with it. Now get thee out---lock the door, and thou shalt have notice when I have done my office with the lady." The man obeyed. Father Bernard turned towards Blanche, who approached him with an expression of the most earnest inquiry. He would have replied to it, but his heart was swelling, and his pulses throbbing; the tide of long-repressed feeling overwhelmed him like a flood, and he was on the point of stretching out his arms to her, when the thought that he might ruin all renerved him, and he said, in a voice so tremulous as scarcely to be intelligible, "I have come to attempt your rescue---there is not a moment to be lost---silence, caution, and celerity alone can save us. Do you follow, Ermen. Obey any signal I may make, but speak never a word. We must first pass through the bed-chamber of the queen. She is at her prayers in the adjoining oratory. Her jealous ear will catch the least sound. Off with your shoes, Ermen---they creak like a rusty hinge. But, woman, what are you doing?--- there is no time for other preparation." "Beshrew me," thought Ermen, "if my life were worth saving if I left this," and she hastily finished [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-060.jpg) \- external link  - Page 082. ] tying on a petticoat, into which she had providently quilted her mistress' gold and jewels. Blanche wrapped herself in her veil, while the priest was cautiously unlocking the door, with a key which he had drawn from his bosom. As he opened the door he recoiled at an unexpected obstacle. Here it will be necessary to pause for a moment, to present some particulars that materially affected the safety of our fugitives. On their left was a window, in a deep recess, before which hung a curtain that had been dropped for the night. On the opposite side of the apartment was an open door that led into a small bathing-room, lighted by a suspended silver lamp, and dimmed by the soft fumes of a perfumed bath, prepared for the queen. The object that had startled the priest was the queen's tire-woman, who sat in the middle of the room, awaiting her mistress' protracted devotions; her drowsiness had overcome her, and she had fallen asleep. As she was a plump young creature, seemingly fullfed, her sleep was profound, and like to continue so, as was indicated by the nasal sounds she emitted, and which fortunately drowned any inevitable noise our passengers might make. But there was a vigilant little spirit that could not be cluded, in the shape of a German poodle, lying on the maid's lap, with his head peering over her shoulder. His prying eye was strained towards the door, but he made no sign of molestation at the accustomed sight of Father Bernard. Blanche too, who had often caressed him, was permitted to enter without a greeting; but no sooner had poor Ermen passed in, and the priest closed the door, than the poodle, who felt that she was "a questionable shape, and he would speak to her;" set up that petulant and continuous barking peculiar to this species of animal; and which neither menaces, nor bribery, nor any thing but the voice of the master can still. A sound was [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-061.jpg) \- external link  - Page 083. ] heard from the oratory. It was too late to retreat, and impossible to go forward, as there was a guard at the outer door, who was to be passed by force, or artifice. In this strait the fugitives glided behind the curtain already mentioned. Here they stood, breathless, while the queen unbolted her door, opened it--- looked round, saying, "Ha! my pet, is it only you?--- hush---hush, I'll soon be with you." She reclosed the door. The priest gave her time to recommence her prayers, and then darted from his retreat, hoping they should reach the outer door before the poodle could renew hostilities; but at the first glance at Ermen he again set up his relentless din. Ermen now took her defence upon herself, and answering to his challenge, seized him by the throat, and dashed him into the bath, and before the little creature had time to recover his breath from the suddenness and fright of the immersion, they had gained the gallery, and closed the door behind them. Here they were challenged by the sentinel, who, however, supposing they had just left the queen's presence, and were going forth at her pleasure, permitted them to pass. There was probably something hurried and stealthy in their manner, that awakened his suspicions, for he immediately followed them, and then checked himself, saying mentally, "I am a fool! It is impossible the priest should have taken the Lady Blanche out of durance without the queen's knowledge. And if he has he must return. The devil himself cannot cheat the Hun guards at the foot of the grand staircase!" This was too true: Father Bernard knew that with those wary and resolute guards, who never wavered from the letter of their orders, neither force nor artifice would avail, and he had taken his measures accordingly. After making two turns in the gallery, they descended a short flight of steps to a platform, where there was a window that overlooked the street, and was about [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-062.jpg) \- external link  - Page 084. ] twenty feet above it. The priest cautiously opened the window, and made a signal, which was returned from below. He whispered to Blanche, "Now, my child, be of good courage. I must leave you, but as true a heart, and a stronger arm than mine awaits you." "The prince?" "Ay, ay, Blanche, the prince, and one faithful auxiliary. I remain here to do one more duty, and then, all perils past, God grant we may meet again--- his shield be over you." He then drew a ladder of ropes from beneath his cloak, uncoiled, and having fastened it to a staple in the window, dropped it. It was received below, made fast, and Blanche descended, and was in her lover's arms. The past, the present, the future, were blended, in one brief instant, of fear, joy, and hope. Such instants outweigh hours of peril and months of suffering. In the mean while Ermen mounted the ladder, which, though it had scarcely felt Blanche's fragile form, stretched beneath Ermen's ponderous frame, swaying backward and forward. "It's the weight of my petticoat," thought Ermen, and most heartily she wished her riches had their usual quality of wings, and would fly away with her, or from her. "Mother of mercy save me!" she cried. "Be silent, woman, and hold fast," said a stern voice from below. "Hold fast, indeed! does he deem me such a fool as to let go, while I'm flying like a kite here between heaven and earth, and t'other place gaping under me;" but this response and prayers to every saint in her memory, were thought, not spoken. Not a sound escaped her till her foot touched terra firma, when her feelings were relieved by one long satisfactory groan. She and her mistress were immediately enveloped in cloaks and hoods, similar to those worn by the prince and his attendant. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-063.jpg) \- external link  - Page 085. ] These disguises were the best security against dangerous scrutiny. Priests and pilgrims might allege a holy motive to account for the irregularity of their hours; and it was not safe to scan too narrowly the profession of sanctity which secured to them their immunities. Scarcely had the fugitives passed beyond the palace walls, when they heard, issuing from its portals, the cry of "Treason! treason!" An instant after the palacebell sounded, and in the space of a few flying moments responsive alarms rung from church and convent-bell. The earth seemed to have given up its dead. The streets, so silent a few moments before, now teemed with swift feet and eager voices. "Keep close to me, and fear nothing," whispered the prince to Blanche. "All depends on our going calmly forward;" and in the next breath, accosting a passenger---"What meaneth this uproar, sir citizen?" he asked. "They say the queen is murdered!" was the reply. "Amen!" cried several voices, not loud, but deep. The involuntary prayer was scarcely uttered before the peal of a herald's trumpet was heard, followed by his voice, demanding silence, attention, and prompt obedience from the emperor's liege subjects. He then proclaimed that the rebel prince was within the walls of the city, and had effected the escape from the palace of the Lady Blanche of Aquitaine, a damsel easily known by her famed beauty, and attended by a servingwoman, brown, short, thick, and elderly---loyal subjects were forbidden to give them harbour or aid. Every house and sanctuary was declared to be open to search, and a munificent reward was offered to him who should apprehend and deliver up the fugitives. "Elderly, indeed!" whispered Ermen to her lady; "they'll not know me by that description. I am but forty my next birthday, and that's a month off yet." The prince communicated for a moment with his associate, and then said, "My dearest Blanche, my [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-064.jpg) \- external link  - Page 086. ] presence but endangers you. If sagacity and good faith can avail aught, you are safe with your conductor. Heaven and all saints guard you---farewell, we shall meet ere the dawn." "Farewell!" replied Blanche, in a voice that expressed the terror and shrinking of her spirit; and as the prince glided away and disappeared from her sight, she, for the first time, felt the horror of her position. A moment before and his presence was peace and safety, and seemed to breathe around her a sheltering atmosphere; now she felt that she had passed from a nun-like seclusion into the midst of a clamorous multitude, and was the hunted fugitive among them. "Oh that we had never embarked in this perilous, desperate enterprise," she thought. Still she was not quite desperate. Her spirit was buoyed up---her strength sustained by the hope of possible escape, and she kept pace with the regular and rapid strides of her conductor. He had just said to her, "Courage, lady! we are near the barriers," when they were overtaken by a detachment of the queen's guards, mounted, and bearing flaming torches. "Stop, Sir Pilgrim," said their leader, "cloaks and hoods are of no avail to-night!" and suiting the action to the word, he stretched out his lance, and with its point drew back the hood of Blanche's protector. Blanche shrunk back, and clung to Ermen, expecting the next moment would reveal her features to her pursuers. But they were checked when they saw on the shaven head of the pilgrim the voucher for his claim to that sacred character with which, not even a courtsoldier might trifle with impunity; and they were overawed when the pilgrim said, in a voice that had more of authority than inquiry, "Shall I proceed, soldier, or will you further profane the holy garb of our order, by searching under the hoods of my young brothers for the runaways from your court?" [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-065.jpg) \- external link  - Page 087. ] "Nay, good pilgrim, God forbid we should farther offend---we were over-zealous in our duty, and we will gladly expiate our offence by whatever penance you shall appoint." "Son, we leave that duty to your confessor; but, if you would make his task the lighter, do us the courtesy to give us your protection beyond the barriers. We had appointed to reach the monastery of St. Denis of the rock before the dawn, and we have already suffered much hindrance from the tumult of the city." "Right gladly will we lessen our offence by doing thee this service, holy pilgrim; and with the more pleasure that, but for this recounter which, God forgive us! began with sacrilege on our part, you could not have passed the barriers. We are now on our way to the eastern portal to direct that none be permitted to pass out till further orders be received from the palace." Nothing more was spoken during the short space they traversed preceded by their duped escort. Every one gave place to the queen's guards. The portal was thrown wide open at their leader's command, and as the pilgrims passed out, "Farewell, good soldier," their conductor said, "for the grace thou hast done us we give thee many thanks, and full acquittance for thy fault, and will fain remember thee in our prayers at St. Denis' shrine." "Heaven reward thy sanctity, most holy pilgrim! What a besotted fool I was," continued the soldier, dropping his voice, "not to know from a glance at the step and mien of these holy brothers, that they were no counterfeits. Look, comrade," he continued, pointing towards Blanche, "at that little low youngster that sticks so close to his fat brother; you see by his dainty steps that he has been convent-bred, and only used to pattering over the cloister's floor at the sound of matin and vesper bells. I marvel if those little feet carry him half way to the Holy Land. Come," he concluded, [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-066.jpg) \- external link  - Page 088. ] raising his voice to the key of authority, "shut the gate. It is the queen's command that, till further orders, none be permitted to pass the barriers in any garb, or under any pretext." These words had scarcely died away on the ears of our fugitives when they turned from the highway into a wood that skirted it, and was intersected by footpaths diverging in every direction. The most obscure and involved was selected, and they were soon in the intricate depths of a forest, amid huge old trees whose mossy branches were so interlaced as to exclude every ray of the feeble starlight. Their conductor was happily accustomed to the tangled and devious way, and he led them with unerring certainty to a path that followed the course of a little brook, around the bared roots of trees, over stones imbedded in moss, and down sharp declivities till it ended in a rich forest-glade. Here man had selected one of God's first temples for his worship. A little hermitage stood on the verge of the green sward, just peeping from the enfolding branches of the trees. Every refreshment that could be obtained had here been provided for our fugitives, and Blanche, oppressed with fatigue, which the delicate habits of her life made utterly overpowering, after a slight repast, and while Ermen was finishing a meal that ill suited an anchorite's cell, lay down on a pallet and was soon in profound sleep. Early on the following day they were joined by the prince, who, having happily escaped the dangers that menaced him, came to assure himself of Blanche's safety, and to conduct her to the place where he had appointed an ample military escort to meet and attend her to the monastery of St. Genevieve, of which an assured friend of Father Bernard was the superior. At the end of their first day's journey they were met by the news that the emperor had been recalled, and was already at the head of his forces. Their [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-067.jpg) \- external link  - Page 089. ] immediate parting was inevitable. Blanche did not speak--- no words could speak the anguish of her heart.--- "My life---my dearest Blanche," said the prince, "do not fear the future. Victory, that has hitherto clung to my banner, will not, cannot desert me now." "But now you have to combat against your father!" The prince's eye fell, and a momentary shade passed over his face; but again the fire of confident hope flashed from his eye. "Ah, Blanche!" he exclaimed, "is not your life cast upon the issue---our love---freedom--- honour---power?---Nay, if there were forty fathers, they should not unnerve my arm, nor abate my courage one jot! Farewell, dearest; when we meet again, we meet to part no more." "In heaven, then, my lord!" The words struck on the prince's heart like the prophetic words of the dying; but, repelling the thought, he replied, "It will be heaven to us, Blanche," and tore himself away. While we leave our heroine to arrive safely, as she did in due time, at the monastery, we must return to the palace. The queen, on issuing from her oratory, found her poodle in a most piteous condition, running about the room, whining, and shaking his streaming head and sides. Immediately, a suspicion flashed into her mind. She went towards Blanche's door to listen---all was still. She opened the door, and found the room deserted. The alarm was instantly given, and at the same moment a secret messenger, who had demanded an audience, was admitted. He proved to be a false wretch from the prince's army, who, having been trusted with the secret of his leader's having rashly ventured within the city, had come to obtain the price of betraying him. In the confusion of the moment the guards had not been examined, of course they volunteered no disclosures, nor was the manifest passage through the [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-068.jpg) \- external link  - Page 090. ] queen's apartment immediately remembered; so that it was concluded the prince had scaled the wall to the Lady Blanche's window, and Father Bernard's agency was not even suspected. The alarm bells had roused every inhabitant of the palace; and lords and ladies, soldiers, guards, pages, and servants had flocked to the great hall, first to learn the cause of the disorder, and then to discuss it. The queen was on the dais at the upper extremity of the hall, chafing like a tigress whose prey has been wrested from her, while a few of her courtiers were trying to sooth her with "Mouth-honour, breath, Which the poor heart would fain deny, but dare not." Father Bernard entered. The crowd opened a passage for his reverend figure, and he proceeded to the vacant space before the queen. "I crave an audience, madam," he said. "Ha, father! dost thou bring us news of Blanche?" "Madam, I ask your patience, and yours, noble lords and ladies." He paused. A breathless silence answered him, and he proceeded---"There was a descendant of the Merovingian race who had twin sons, the one so like the other that their mother could not discriminate them; the one was bred as the descendant of a royal stock should be---the existence of the other was concealed from the world, and, to avoid the evils that might arise from his resemblance to his brother, he was dedicated to St. Stephen, and immured in a cloister, his face being hidden by a steel mask." "What means this?" thought the courtiers; "the holy father surely speaks of himself." "What means it?" thought the guilty queen, and her heart sunk within her. "In due time," proceeded the priest, "he that was [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-069.jpg) \- external link  - Page 091. ] knightly-bred appeared at the court of the sovereign who had usurped the throne of his fathers. That sovereign had a soul befitting royalty---he could honour even him whom he had injured---the knight was trusted and cherished---the wife too of the sovereign graced him with favours." Here the queen's emotion became apparent, and nearly uncontrollable, but she dared not speak, lest she should identify the persons of the narrative. The blood burst from her bitten lip, still she suffered the priest to go on. "It suits not to tell more in the modest presence of these ladies, save that, faithful to his wife, the knight spurned the woman false to her royal lord. Her guilty love turned to hate. The knight was outraged; he rebelled, was vanquished, and pardoned by his sovereign on condition that he should make a pilgrimage to Rome, doing penance before the relics of the saints at every intermediate shrine. He arrived sick and exhausted at the monastery of St. Stephen, near Ravenna, of which his masked brother was abbe. The brothers met. The abbe, to relieve the miserable broken man, volunteered to finish the pilgrimage for him." Here a shriek, half-subdued, but piercing, came from the queen. The priest paused---the stillness of death followed, and he proceeded: "The abbe received on his own innocent body tortures destined for his brother, and inflicted by emissaries sent by the treacherous queen. The supposed abbe\---mark! was summoned to the court to direct the conscience of the queen. She told him that an infant daughter of the knight survived. She would have offered up this last victim on the altar of insatiate revenge, but that the Almighty now visited her with disease, and the terrors of the sure hereafter. The confessor grasped her conscience in this first weakness of humanity, and he has since ruled it. For fifteen years that woman daily unveiled her polluted soul before him she deemed her victim: her very pulses [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-070.jpg) \- external link  - Page 092. ] were governed by his word. She was the dupe, the willing, trembling instrument of him whose name she would have effaced from the earth, while he, the minister of Heaven's mercy to his child, watched over her innocence and safety. This night he has delivered her from the house of bondage, and now," he concluded, unclasping his mask, and throwing it aside, " Hunold of Aquitaine  is avenged." While the queen listened there had mingled a whisper of incredulity with the storm of her passions; but when the priest cast away his mask, and revealed the noble and well-remembered features of Hunold, hysterical convulsions seized her, and she was borne off, shrieking, in the arms of her attendants. In the confusion of the moment, and perhaps favoured by the forbearance of those who had listened in mute wonder to his tale, Hunold glided through a side passage, and escaped from the palace, and was never again seen within the walls of Aix-la-Chapelle. "Oh that the desert were my dwelling-place, With one fair spirit for my minister, That I might all forget the human race, And hating no one, love but only her." Childe Harold . [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-071.jpg) \- external link  - Page 093. ] The Lady Blanche was still in the secure asylum of the Abbey of St. Genevieve. Here, in safety, and in tranquil devotion, she might have worn out life, had that fire never been kindled in her bosom which, once lighted, cannot be extinguished without making a waste and ruin of the tenderest affections. Heavily as her forebodings weighed on her heart, she could no more envy the calm safe sisters of the monastery, than the living, feeling, throbbing form can envy the mute cold statue. The storm might sweep away her last hope, but who that dwells in the land of blossoms, fruits, and hurricanes, will exchange with the natives of the safe and frigid north! Even so thought Blanche, while every day was bringing some agitating rumour from the scene of conflict. By the latest accounts the hostile forces were not far from the valley-lands, overlooked by the abbey. The emperor was at the head of his army, and at the approach of the great sovereign, Pepin's forces were sensibly diminishing. Still he kept the field, without any apparent abatement of hope or activity. Affairs were in this position when, at an early hour of the morning, the repose of the abbey was disturbed by a rumour of the near approach of the hostile armies. The abbess, with her nuns, according to the letter of her duty, hastened to mingle with her matin prayers, [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-072.jpg) \- external link  - Page 094. ] petitions for the downfall of rebellion. Blanche, with her faithful Ermen, stole to a tower of the abbey, where she was destined to endure what a martyr might suffer at the stake, who had a threefold portion of life and sense in every nerve. The valley, or glen, if it might so be called, broken as it was at intervals into ridges and abrupt descents, was encompassed by hills, and intersected by a narrow, deep, and impetuous stream, with precipitous and impracticable banks, which were connected by a single plank-bridge thrown across the stream, where it dashed over a ledge of rocks. At the eastern extremity of the valley, on a declivity, stood the abbey overlooking the domain attached to it---its garden, farms, and the whitewashed cottages of its artisans which were clustered together at the extreme opposite, under the shadow of the hills that appeared there to wall in the valley, and were only separated where the bold little stream had forced its passage. The peace of ages was, for the first, to be broken in this sylvan scene, where even now the stillness was so profound that the chirping of the cricket, and the rustling of the fallen autumnleaf, under the squirrel's fleet foot, might be heard. The trees, save where the firs glittered with dewy webs, were stripped of their summer glory; but, like a youthful face, "touched, not spoiled" by grief, they looked cheerful in their adversity; glittering dewdrops studding their branches, and the glossy bark brightening in the flush of the rising sun. The stream, that leaped and "danced to its own wild chime," was fringed with the last gay flowers of autumn---those bold little heroes that hang out their colours even on the very frontiers of winter. The windings of the stream, far off among the distant hills, were marked by the light warm mist which rose from it, giving a bluish tint to the atmosphere, and nearer, and immediately [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-073.jpg) \- external link  - Page 095. ] under Blanche's eye, settled in dense fog, over the coves, or rolled up the mountains in fleecy clouds. Scarcely had Blanche and Ermen taken their stations in the tower, when the silence was rudely broken by the braying of a war-trumpet that pealed over the valley, waking a thousand echoes among the hills; the tramping of horses followed; and the prince, at the head of his gallant followers, was seen descending rapidly to the valley. His war-cry was shouted and answered by the clamour of the hostile army, that appeared to Blanche like birds of evil omen, darkening the opposite plain. As the prince had the inferior force it was of vital importance to him to command the passage of the bridge; and he gained it by so rapid a movement that Ermen had scarcely time for an exclamation, before he seemed to be disposing his force about it, so as most effectively to repel an attack. "What means that?" said Blanche, pointing to a standard-bearer. "That surely is the banner of my father's house. A fiery sun emerging from a cloud, on a field of white." "But look, my lady, close beside it, at the knight in black armour, with the black plumes. It is your father in shape and bearing, with a little stoop of the shoulders, as if he had some added weight of years; but otherwise the same." "Ah, Ermen, our fancies cheat us; it is the banner that has conjured up this image in your memory. It is an evil augury, this banner of a fallen house." "Think not of auguries, my lady, fortune is on the side of the prince. See how gallantly he rides. His white plumes even him with the tallest. Any one may see he was born to rule, though his poor mother did stand on the emperor's left side. Now he salutes his soldiers. Ha! hear their acclamations---God bless him! he had always the hearts of the commons. Heaven and all saints stand by him, I say, be he right or wrong!" [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-074.jpg) \- external link  - Page 096. ] The "amen" did not stick in Blanche's throat, though conscience would have kept it there; and Ermen proceeded, "Beshrew me if I think it handsome in the abbess and her nuns to be throwing their prayers into the scale of the strongest; they ought to stand aside and let 'em have fair play." Whether Ermen meant that Heaven or the abbess should not interpose, it is difficult to say;---an untutored conscience is very docile--- she probably had some secret misgivings of the righteousness of the prince's cause, and preferred there should be no appeal to a celestial tribunal. The manoeuvres of the two armies continued for some time without an assault from either party. The emperor had not yet arrived on the field of battle. Meanwhile the forces on both sides were concentrating at the bridge. The prince had concealed a reserved corps behind a hill in his rear, in order by his seeming weakness to tempt the enemy to the perilous passage of the bridge, where their numbers would rather embarrass than aid them. They perceived the disadvantage at which they must attack, and hesitated to encounter it. "Ah!" said Blanche, "it is a proud sight to see their steeds prancing, their banners and pennons flying, their lances gleaming in the sun, and those gallant knights unblenching before the face of death, if we could forget what they may be before the sun sinks behind yon hills." "They forget it, my lady, or they would be as very cowards as we women are. I have seen these lordly men who throw down their lives upon the battle-field as if it were but a cast of the dice, I have seen them shrink from a twinge of the tooth-ache, and, if death did but peep at them through the curtains of a sick-bed, their hearts would die away within them. But they have a brute's instinct to fight, and when that is roused they forget pain and death, and all that comes after. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-075.jpg) \- external link  - Page 097. ] Truly, I think, after all their boasting and blustering, we women might dispute the palm of courage with them, for we bravely meet and triumph over those natural enemies of our race, pain, and poverty, and death, which Heaven has made it our necessity to encounter; while they, for the most part, are only brave in meeting dangers of their own creation. I marvel they do not begin---they stand there on each side of the bridge, looking like wild beasts, ready to spring the moment the barrier is withdrawn." Ermen's wonder was scarcely expressed when some of the youngest and most daring of Charles' paladins, unable any longer to brook delay, or endure the defiance and stinging taunts of their antagonists, dashed over the bridge, were encountered, and repelled, or overthrown. Many a daring onset and gallant rescue followed. Suddenly a cloud of dust was seen rising in the distance. The oriflamme was descried. The emperor's battle-cry was heard, and, at the conquering sound, his soldiers, like a pack of hounds at the voice of their master, rushed upon the bridge. They were met and driven back. Pressed forward by their own column, they became pent within the narrow space. Carnage and horrible confusion ensued---men were slaughtered in masses---horses and riders were overthrown, and when the command for retreat was given, the bridge was piled with trampled, struggling, and dying men. "See, see, my lady," cried Ermen, "my Lord Pepin's men toss those carcasses into the stream as if they were sheep slaughtered for the shambles. No wonder you cover your eyes; it pierces my old heart to see those bodies, that one minute ago were full of life, strength, and hope, so broken and dishonoured." "God forgive them!" ejaculated Blanche. "But look once again, my lady! See how daringly the knight of the black plume advances, just so my Lord Hunold would have done; he passes the bridge! [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-076.jpg) \- external link  - Page 098. ] See, with his few followers he dashes on the retreating column---Ah! they turn on him---now, St. Denis aid him!---there goes the prince to his rescue!" "Heaven help us," cried Blanche, "he is lost! Oh, what rashness to pass the bridge! Shame on the cowards, now there are myriads against him, how they set on him---he is surrounded!---his retreat utterly cut off!" Blanche clasped her hands and fixed her eye in breathless apprehension on that frightful melee, "Ah me! Ermen, my head is giddy; I can see nothing, look if you can see him?" "No, my lady, no." "Look narrowly, Ermen, do you not see the top of his plumes?" "No, no, indeed!---nothing but glancing lances and gleaming shields. What can that waving mean? they fall back! Ah, there he is, side by side with the black knight. See, they burst through the close ranks of the enemy---ha! how they trample them down. Mother Mary! how they tread the life out of them---they are already at the bridge---the black plume passes it, but ah! the broken planks fly from beneath his horse's feet. What a horrid gap he has opened for the prince---his steed recoils---his pursuers are on him! Now, Heaven save him from falling with his back to them! their lances almost touch him. Bravo! the leap is made--- he is safe." "Surely," said Blanche, as her heart heaved from the suffocating pressure that was upon it;---"Surely Heaven's shield is before him." "And behind him too, I think, my lady; and a lion's heart within him. See how the enemy seem cowering on their side the bridge, like frightened hawks afraid to stoop to their prey; and my lord's men, bless them! I see by their bearing, that each one feels as if he had the strength of ten men in his single arm. There comes a messenger to the prince with good or evil tidings." [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-077.jpg) \- external link  - Page 099. ] "Heaven grant them good," replied Blanche, "but I fear, for my lord rides hastily off with him." "I marvel the brave paladins endure the taunts of the black plume," resumed Ermen. "Hark! how he dares them to follow the example he set them. Ah! there is my lord emperor---his spirit will not brook being thus kept in abeyance. He calls on his guards to shame the loitering cowards, and follow. I doubt if he knows of that yawning abyss. Ah! now he sees it. But it is too late---he cannot turn back---his fiery steed leaps over. A few follow him---rather death than to desert your master! but every hoof that touches the bridge widens the gap. Mother of mercy, they fall through--- the generous youths!---they are crushed on the rocks--- horse and rider!" Shouts rent the air. Ermen's voice might be heard, like the shriek of an owl, mingling with and heightening the clamour. "Think you, Ermen, the victory is won; that the emperor's mistake is fatal?" demanded Blanche. "Assuredly, my lady: the emperor sees it himself, but it is too late. See how his brave paladins gather round him. They seem to feel no more than their senseless shields, the blows they receive in his stead. They fall, one after another---the last is gone! He is single-handed against a host. What a salvation is a brave spirit! See how he gives them thrust for thrust, and fights as if he were backed by thousands. But, oh!" continued Ermen, her interest naturally shifting, as the inequality of the contest became more manifest, "It is in vain, as one assailant drops, another takes his place. It is too much! Our noble master against such odds! The craven wretches, why do they not give him a fair field! Right royally he still defends himself! Ah! he wavers---his shield has fallen---his left arm hangs like a lopped branch---he must fall!--- see, they press on him. Now God have mercy on [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-078.jpg) \- external link  - Page 100. ] him!---Ah! there comes the prince again---how furiously he rides. Must his hand give the finishing stroke? I cannot look on that---" Blanche sunk on her knees. "Merciful Heaven!" she cried, "let him not lift his hand against his father--- save him from parricide!" "Oh, look up, my lady, once more look up! The prince is striking down the lances of the assailants, and shouting, `Back, villains, back---touch not his sacred life!' " Their arms fell as if they were paralyzed, and they recoiled a few paces, leaving a vacant space, where the steeds of father and son met, bit to bit. The prince dismounted, threw down his lance and shield, and kneeling in the dust, cried, "My liege---my father, forgive me!" Ermen broke into a wild hysteric laugh, and turned to her mistress, but her gentle nature was overpowered, and she had sunk down in utter unconsciousness. Neither saw nor knew, till many hours after, what followed. That the tide of fortune had turned in the em peror's favour, and deliverance from the perils that beset him was near at hand, at the moment the interposition of his son saved him from certain death. A detachment from his army had been guided by one of the loyal abbey tenants, to a fordable passage through the stream. They had wound unperceived around the hills, fallen on Pepin's reserved corps, and cut it off completely; and at the moment the prince was surrendering himself to filial duty, his followers were surprised by superior numbers falling on their rear. He could not look on and see his faithful friends falling in a cause he had abandoned; and giving orders that the hlace where the emperor stood should be considered neutral ground, and sacredly guarded as such, he plunged into the thickest of the fight. Many a long-remembered deed of desperate valour did he achieve; but it [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-079.jpg) \- external link  - Page 101. ] was of no avail: long before the day closed, the din of arms had ceased; the prince, and the handful of his followers who survived were prisoners, and the victorious army was retiring towards Aix-la-Chapelle. The wounded and dying left on the field of battle were, in obedience to the benevolent orders of the abbess, conveyed to the cottages of the peasants, where all that leech-craft could do was done; and when that was unavailing, the last offices of humanity were faithfully rendered. On the spot where the conflict had ended was found the body of the warrior who had been distinguished by the black plume. Though he was quite unconscious, life still tenaciously held its grasp; and the badges of priestly office being discovered on the removal of his helmet and armour, he was deemed worthy to die within the consecrated walls of the abbey; and accordingly he was carried thither. There he was destined to find not only a cure for the wounds of his body, but the skill that could pluck from his memory its rooted sorrows. To women, old Homer (with the spirit of the golden age of gallantry) assigns the art of compounding the nepanthes. And, if there is a human hand skilled to prepare the sweet draught, oblivious of grief, sorrow, and care, it is that of a daughter. Hours of tumultuous passion---years of gloomy self-annihilation were in the memory of Hunold, like a dismal and fading dream, while his eye reposed on Blanche; and he felt, in her assiduous devotion, the healing efficacy of filial love. For the present they were secure from molestation; and of the future they hardly yet dared to think. The apprehensions that racked Blanche's heart were visible in the mortal paleness that settled on her cheek; in her nervous starts at any unwonted sound; and in the touching contrition which she manifested for the frequent abstractions of her thoughts from her father. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-080.jpg) \- external link  - Page 102. ] The ultimate fate of the prince remained yet undecided. Rebellion is the unpardonable sin in the creeds of absolute monarchs; and in this case justice, as well as the almost uniform practice of the times, demanded his death. Still the decree came not, and it was evident that there was some wavering in the sovereign's mind---some leaning towards the milder punishment of the tonsure, and seclusion in a monastery, a penalty equivalent to our "state prison for life;" a convenient mode of shutting out of the world those who were de trop  in it. The partisans of the vindictive queen urged that the death of the prince was essential to the present tranquillity of the emperor and to the secure succession of the legitimate heirs. But the emperor seemed cold to whatever proceeded from the queen's counsels. He had received some faint intimations of Hunold's disclosures; and though he was too discrete a husband to dive into a well because truth was at the bottom, yet it was evident that the spell of her influence was dissolved--- that her royal consort was disabused, and that some change had passed, like that which reduces the seemingly-beautiful enchantress of a fairy-tale to the reality of an ugly old hag. At length the intrigues of the courtiers were ended, and the speculations of the gossips of the city silenced by the publication of the emperor's decree. It ordained that on a certain day the prince should receive the tonsure publicly, at the altar of the great chapel. That after this rite of initiation, he should be escorted in state to the monastery of St. Alban, where he was adjured by the strictest prayers and penances to expiate the sin of rebellion. The ambitious prince was for ever to be severed from the world. The purest, tenderest, and most ennobling of human passions was to be converted to sin. The fire that was kindled to gladden social life, was to be for ever shut up in the bosom, there to burn and consume. Strange [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-081.jpg) \- external link  - Page 103. ] that man should have been so long permitted to countervail the benign designs of Providence! that he should have been suffered to condemn to waste and mouldering the affections that were bestowed to sow the wide harvest-fields of the world with joy and beauty! The day arrived appointed for the ceremony. Early in the morning the gates of the city were thrown open. Nobles with pompous retinues, and rustics with their families, crowded the avenues. Greediness of spectacle has been common to all ages of the world, from long ere David danced before the ark of the Lord to this present moment, when the park of our city is a living mass, gazing at the beautiful illuminations for this centennial celebration of the birthday of our immortal Washington. Church and convent-bells were tolling. Processions of the religious orders filled the streets with the sublime anthems appointed by the church; and the Gregorian chant resounded from the choir of the great chapel. It was remarked by those court observers of straws, who were watching the decline of Fastrade's sun, that the emperor on this day had given the final decision to the great musical controversy that had agitated the empire. The queen had favoured the Gallic or Ambrosian party, but the emperor, who had inclined to the muse of Italy, finally adopted the Gregorian chant; justifying his decision publicly, by the pious illustration that, "as a river is purest at its source, so Rome, being the fountain of all divine wisdom, ought to reform the Gallican music after the model of her own." The emperor and his court, in their ceremonial costume, entered the chapel by a private door, and occupied seats at the right of the altar; the emperor and queen were in a position a little elevated, and in advance of their attendants. There was an unquietness in Charles' manner, and a heavy shade on his brow, that indicated the yearning of his heart towards his son; [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-082.jpg) \- external link  - Page 104. ] and the reluctance with which he had submitted to the usage that imposed the humiliation of a public ceremony. The state smile the queen had assumed did not veil her gratified malignity, while her sallow cheek, and restless and falling eye, fully betrayed her consciousness that she had fallen from her high estate--- that the emperor was no longer the duped husband, flexible to the purposes of her insatiate cruelty. The doors were thrown open, and the eager crowd of spectators, marshalled by officers, were conducted to the seats assigned them, according to their rank. The chapel-bell struck, and the prince, preceded by men-at-arms, and followed by a procession of the monks of St. Alban, entered the grand aisle. His dress resembled that worn by his father on high festivals. A golden diadem, set with precious stones, bound in its circlet a head that looked as if it were formed to ennoble even such an appendage. His buskins were thickly studded with gems, his tunic was of golden tissue, and his purple mantle fastened by a clasp of glittering stones. This royal apparel was meant in part to show forth the ambition that had o'erleaped itself; and in part to set the splendours of the world in overpowering contrast with the humility of the religious garb. The prince advanced with a firm step. His demeanour showed that if he had lost every thing else, he had gained the noblest victory; victory over himself. There was nothing in his air of the crushed man; on the contrary, there was his usual loftiness, and more than his usual serenity. As men gazed at him, and saw the impress of his father on his mild majestic brow, they felt that nature had set her seal to his right of inheritance. He paused as he reached a station opposite his father, signed to his attendants to stop, and turning aside he knelt at his father's feet. Their eyes met as tenderly as a mother's meets her child. Charles stretched out his hand, Pepin grasped it, and pressed it to his lips. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-083.jpg) \- external link  - Page 105. ] The spectators looked in vain for some sign of sternness in the father, and resentment in the son. Little did they dream that the father and son had met that morning, with no witness but the approving eye of Heaven; and had exchanged promises of forgiveness and loyalty never to be retracted in thought, word, or deed. As the prince rose to his feet his eye encountered the queen's, flashing with offended pride; but hers fell beneath the steady overpowering glance of his, which said, "I am not yet so poor as to do you reverence." The emperor did not rebuke, or even seem to notice the omission. His eye was riveted to the gracious tears his son had left upon his hand. The prescribed devotions and pompous preparatory ceremonial of the Romish church were performed. The prince then laid down his glittering crown, and exchanged his gorgeous apparel for the garb of St. Alban's monks, a russet gown fastened at the waist with a hempen-cord. It was noticed by the keenest of his observers that he did not lay aside his sword; but, he might have forgotten it, or a soldier might be permitted to the very last, to retain the badge of his honour and independence. A glow of shame shot over his face as he bent his head to the humiliating rite of the tonsure; and the eyes of the truly noble were instinctively averted, as his profuse and glossy locks fell beneath the razor of the officiating priest. This initiatory rite performed, a hood was thrown over his head, and the soldier-prince was lost in the humble aspect of the monk of St. Alban. A court order had declared that the prince should be escorted to the gates of the monastery by the emperor, the lords and ladies of the court, and the paladins and chiefs assembled at Aix-la-Chapelle. The troops of the late victorious army were stationed in double lines on each side of the course, along which the procession was to pass. The emperor and his son [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-084.jpg) \- external link  - Page 106. ] rode first, side by side. The queen, at an intimation from her royal consort, that savoured strongly of command, had withheld her presence. The bright skies, and transparent atmosphere of one of the earliest days of winter, gave lustre to every object, and clearness to every sound. Banners and pennons were streaming in the light breeze. The burnished shields, and unspotted lances of gala days, reflected from a thousand points the sunbeams. The proud step of the war-horse---the gay prancing of the palfrey---the glittering decorations of the court-ladies---and the state costume of the lords gave to the grand cortege the aspect of a triumphal procession. But how little like a victor looked the prince, whose diminished form seemed shrinking beneath the russet folds that enveloped him; and bending, in dejected attitude, over the fleet and fiery steed that had so often borne him to victory! How the pealing anthems struck on his ear like a funeral dirge, hymning him to his tomb,---and the trampling of his horse's hoofs as they rung on the pavement! "Oh, my generous unrivalled steed," he thought, "were we but once alone beyond the barriers, I would doff this cursed hood, and cast all upon a single chance! Oh, Blanche, were I but with thee in some lone isle, in mid-ocean, or on some far spot of the desert---the world forgotten!" The past, the future, the possible floated before him in perplexed and maddening vision. His breath came gaspingly. It seemed to him that his pulses beat audibly--- his eye "devoured the distance." The procession was within sight of the barriers, and not far distant from them. The gates were wide open, but the way to them was guarded by men with drawn, and upraised weapons. "It is but the soldier's death," thought the prince, "instead of mouldering away within the cloister's walls. I violate no duty to my dear father. In every issue I am dead to him---it is possible! Does Heaven, or do the fiends inspire my purpose! Heaven, [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf342&image=342-085.jpg) \- external link  - Page 107. ] surely Heaven, for oh! Blanche, it is for thee, and thee alone!" This last thought gave the irresistible and effective impulse. He threw off his hood, drew his sword, roused his horse's mettle with a single word, and beating back the spears of the amazed guard, he darted at full speed towards the gate. He cleared the barriers, his horse flew onward as if "the speed of thought were in his limbs;" and before the cries of alarm and pursuit had passed along the ranks, he had disappeared. Clamour, consternation, and confusion ensued. The zealous and officious were posting to the pursuit, when they were arrested by a peal from a herald's trumpet, followed by a proclamation, commanding the emperor's liege subjects to return quietly to their homes, and in future to refrain from any pursuit or quest after the fugitive, as that important duty was to be confided to private emissaries. The measures that were to be adopted, and the success that ensued, never transpired beyond the cabinet councils of the emperor. The ingenious monks, at no period at a loss for the interpretation of an event that baffled common sagacity, maintained that the prince had been spirited away by St. Alban, that worthy saint being indignant at his admission into their immaculate fraternity. But according to our modern creeds, the powers that superstition imbodied in the fancied favourites of Heaven, are within the mission of mortals; and all-enduring, and all-conquering affection, works more miracles than the whole corporate body of calendared saints. A saint there undoubtedly was in the case, for according to traditions long after familiar on the lake of Constance, a creature of beauty, so excellent that it seemed suited "t' envelope and contain a celestial spirit," dwelt on the little island of Meinau, in that lake. She had come thither from some far-distant province, with her father, her husband, and an ancient [
