 [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099fcov.jpg) \- external link  - Front Cover. ] [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099spin.jpg) \- external link  - Spine. ] [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099edgf.jpg) \- external link  - Front Edge. ] [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099bcov.jpg) \- external link  - Back Cover. ] [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099edgb.jpg) \- external link  - Bottom Edge. ] [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-001.jpg) \- external link  - Page ???. ] THE CHOICEST WORKS IN EVERY BRANCH OF LITERATURE MADE OBTAINABLE BY ALL . HARPER &\- BROTHERS, determined to render their press subservient to the  Widest Diffusion of Useful Knowledge , so indispensable to the support of public liberty, and personal usefulness, intelligence, and virtue, in a free community, will hereafter issue their best publications at so reduced a price, that families or in dividuats, with the most moderate means, may easily procure a well-selected and extensive library; the advantages of which in every household, whether for its improvement or happiness, cannot be too highly appreciated  . That they may be enabled to accomplish the object here proposed, they have introduced into their establishment the most approved and efficient machinery, combining every possible economy and despatch in printing,  &-c., and will dispose of their books for cash only, at a very inconsiderable advance on the actual cost, trusting to a liberal patronage and large sales to sustain their enterprise  . The Family Library, already numbering 157 volumes, to be extended to 200, as works of a high character can be obtained, will be issued entire, one volume weekly , AT TWENTY-FIVE CENTS A VOLUME! just half the price they have been sold at heretofore, and then decidedly the cheapest books in the market. These volumes will be illustrated and embellished with numerous engravings, as in the previous editions, printed on paper equally good, and bound in fancy French covers. The publishers feel that it is wholly unnecessary to speak particularly of the merits of this Library, so extensively known, and which has obtained a circulation and a degree of public favour unequalled by any similar collection. It comprises works in every department of science and general literature, by the ablest writers, English and American, in a popular style, and designed for the instruction and entertainment of all classes in the community. Brande's Encyclopaedia of Science, &c. A Dictionary of Literature, Science, and Art; comprising the History, Description, and Scientific Principles of every Branch of Human Knowledge; with the Derivation and Definition of all the Terms in general use. General Editor, W. T. Brande , F.R.S.L. & E., of Her Majesty's Mint; Professor of Chemistry in the Royal Institution; Professor of Chemistry and Materia Medica to the Apothecaries' Company, &c., &c. Assisted by Cauvin, Gwilt, Lindlev, Loudon, Merivale, M'Culloch, Galloway, Owen , &c. To be completed in 12 Numbers, at 25 Cents each. The cost of the English Editionis fourteen dollars  \---the American reader will be put in possession of the same work for three dollars. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-002.jpg) \- external link  - Page ???. ] HOBOKEN: A ROMANCE OF NEW-YORK. BY THEODORE S. FAY, AUTHOR OF "DREAMS AND REVERIES OF A QUIET MAN," "NORMAN LESLIE," "COUNTESS IDA,"  &c. IN TWO VOLUMES. VOL. I. HARPER & BROTHERS, 82 CLIFF-STREET. 1843. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-003.jpg) \- external link  - Page ???. ] Entered, according to Act of Congress, in the year 1843, by Harper & Brothers , In the Clerk's Office of the Southern District of New-York. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-004.jpg) \- external link  - Page ???. ] TO CHARLES SUMNER, ESQ., &c., &c., &c., THESE VOLUMES ARE INSCRIBED, WITH THE SINCERE ADMIRATION AND ESTEEM OF HIS FAITHFUL FRIEND, THE AUTHOR. -  Berlin 28 th September , 1812. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-005.jpg) \- external link  - Blank Page. ] [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-006.jpg) \- external link  - Page ???. ] " Where are Frank and Harry?" asked Mr. Lennox, as the family assembled at breakfast. "I heard them, last night," replied Mary, "agree to go over to Brooklyn early in the morning, and practise with the pistol." "Ah! here they are," exclaimed Mr. Lennox. "Come, young gentlemen, you're just in time." "How many people have you shot with those horrid things?" said Mrs. Lennox. "Nobody but our mark," answered Frank, a young lieutenant just graduated from West Point, "and I think we rather touched that once or twice---didn't we, Harry?" "Which is the best marksman?" asked Mr. Lennox. "I am," said Harry, "but Frank comes on famously." "What are you going to do on your birthday, Harry?" inquired his father. "It's next Thursday, isn't it? and you're one-and-twenty, I believe." "I haven't formed any projects, sir," replied Harry. "I hope you're going to give us some sort of a celebration on the occasion, father?" said Mary, laughing. "I think birthdays ought to be kept in a quiet way," said Mrs. Lennox, "and young people should make their first entrance into the world with reflection and gravity." "Nonsense!" exclaimed Mr. Lennox: "why gravity? There are occasions enough for gravity when we can't help it. On the contrary, let's have some friends to dinner, and in the evening a ball." "I was going to propose a trip to Rose Hill," said Mary. "We might ask the Eltons, and one or two others, and make a pleasant family party---a sort of picnic." "What say you, Harry?" asked his father. "You are the hero of the day." [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-007.jpg) \- external link  - Page 006. ] "Upon my word, sir," said Harry, "I have not even formed a wish on the subject." "If there is going to be a celebration," said Frank, " I prefer Rose Hill." "So I thought," remarked Mary, laughing. "So should I," said Harry. "At a ball, I suppose, I should be metamorphosed into a sort of lion, and I fear I should feel more like Bottom the weaver than the noble animal himself." "That's right, Harry," observed his mother; "be modest, my son." "But, now I think of it," said Mr. Lennox, "I can't very well leave town Thursday: I have an engagement." "If you mean the affair of Brinsley, I can attend to that, I think," said Harry. "And you," replied his mother, "how can you then join the party?" "Oh, I don't mind. I shall rather prefer to stay in town." "Well, that is one way to celebrate one's birthday, to be sure," said Frank, laughing. "Harry is so odd," exclaimed Mary. "I believe he really dislikes to be with his own family. He's all day at his business, and all the evening at political meetings, or clubs, or the theatre, or heaven knows where! He don't dine at home half the time, and when he does---" "Young men will be young men," said his father; "nothing is gained by curbing and advising them; though, to say truth, Harry, you have been rather erratic in your way of life lately." "I'm sorry you think so, sir; but you often say men want not only severe application, but a knowledge of life." "Certainly, my dear boy, certainly; you are quite your own master. As to Rose Hill, we shall be obliged to give that up for Thursday. I'm sorry, too, with this magnificent weather. But I'll make another proposition, which I hope won't shock your mother's sense of gravity. We'll have no celebration at all, but a quiet family dinner, with your uncle and aunt Henderson, and go in the evening to the theatre and hear Horn." "I should like that better," said Mrs. Lennox. "And I," echoed all. "Good; it is so decreed, then," said Lennox. "And, father," said Mary, "we'll ask the Eltons to dine, and take them with us. What say you, Frank?" [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-008.jpg) \- external link  - Page 007. ] "Who! I?" exclaimed Frank. "Oh, certainly. Anything for a quiet house---anybody. It's quite the same to me." "Oh, you hypocrite!" said Mary. "You've no preference for Mrs. Elton! certainly not!" "What do you mean by that, Mary?" asked Frank. "And why not Mrs. Elton?" said Mr. Lennox. "She is a very charming lady; a gay, amiable, excellent, and very handsome woman; a little eloquent, perhaps; but I like her because she has a heart. Mrs. Elton is one of my beauties, although she is fifty." "Why, so are you fifty, father," said Mary, laughing, "for the matter of that." "Don't mention it, I beg," cried Mr. Lennox. "I don't believe it. It's too ridiculous! Why, I don't feel a bit older than I did when your too susceptible mamma first fell furiously in love with me." "Nonsense! Nor a bit wiser!" said his wife. "Wisdom? A fig for wisdom! What is it but caution and cunning, after all? What do we live for? Happiness. Thank Heaven, I've enjoyed it, and I shall leave it within the reach of my children. Let the unfortunate study wisdom; but for me, true wisdom is to enjoy. And yet fifty! I really can't believe it." "It is nevertheless so," said Mrs. Lennox. "And there's Frank, a man, with a pair of, I must say, very impudentlooking whiskers, and a commission in the army. Here's Mary, a tall woman already; and as for Harry, he's actually growing old and serious. Ah, my children! you little know how short life is to those who look back ." "Very true!" observed Lennox, intending to be grave, but failing in such a droll way as to make every one smile. "It seems but yesterday when I used to think a man of fifty a regular old codger, done with life, gouty, with a cracked voice, gold-headed cane, and a brown wig; and yet now, although arrived fairly at that awful age, I still feel myself the same wild, good-for-nothing young dog as ever." "And I don't see any particular difference in you either," said his wife, looking at him half reproachfully, half affectionately, "only you've grown rather younger and wilder." "To be sure I have," replied he; "and why? Because I have not troubled myself with wisdom! I've never [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-009.jpg) \- external link  - Page 008. ] fretted and moped about what couldn't be helped. I never thought an hour in my life; never studied more than was just necessary for the morrow. I've taken the world as it came, and not striven for what it did not give me. Do you suppose that, had I pleased, I could not have been as great as any of them? Couldn't I have shone at the bar, and shaken the Senate? To be sure I could. But I disdained it. Fortune made me rich, and my own good sense kept me happy; and, if that is not the true wisdom, I should like to know what is." "To do you justice," said Mrs. Lennox, with a smile, "when you came to visit me---let me see! five-and-twenty years ago---you certainly were much graver and more sensible than you are now. I never saw such a gentle, low-spoken, modest person. If I could have known what a hair-brained young madeap you would turn out at fifty, I shouldn't have had you!" This was received with renewed laughter by the happy family circle. "And how they have gone, those five-and-twenty years!" added Mrs. Lennox. "And I wonder where we shall all be five-and-twenty years hence." "Be? why here," replied Mr. Lennox; "a little changed or so, but just here, Mary, looking very much what you are now. Frank commander-in-chief, with his eyebrows and whiskers a little more bushy (if possible), and Harry a senator, or Secretary of State, perhaps, for he hasn't unfolded yet any actual designs on the presidential chair." "How can you speak so lightly of such solemn things?" said Mrs. Lennox. "How can you close your eyes to the possibility of a very different picture?" "I tell you what, madam," said her husband, gayly, "I'll thank you to give us none of your wisdom . If you choose to go, why that's your affair: I don't; on the contrary, I mean to stay, and I don't think I need despair of providing myself with another helpmate. I know twenty fine women at this moment who would take me, and say `Thank you, sir!' " "I haven't the slightest doubt of it," replied his wife, laughing at a reckless good-humour, to which she was too well accustomed to misunderstand it, and looking at him with an admiration which the five-and-twenty years aforesaid, whatever other revolutions they might have effected, had not changed. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-010.jpg) \- external link  - Page 009. ] "Nor I," said he, elevating his chin a little, throwing back his shoulders into something of an attitude, and with a glance into a large mirror opposite, which was intended to pass for affectation, but in which, nevertheless, was no want of a little real vanity. "I think I'm tolerably well preserved! Hair---a touch of gray, perhaps; complexion--- a little richer than falls to the lot of inexperienced youth; a line or two in the face, here and there, only visible in the daylight; and, in fact, altogether---" "Pray take a warm cake, sir," interrupted Harry, laughing. To say the truth, Mr. Lennox was a very handsome man. His once dark hair was not the less luxuriant or becomingly disposed, from the very general and decided change of colour which he was pleased to denominate a "touch of gray." His complexion showed the natural effect of a long course of good living, in a gentlemanly ruddiness which scarcely detracted from his good looks. His person was tall, well formed, and dignified; his voice manly and pleasing, his eyes fine, and his manners particularly fascinating. In short, he was one of those persons whose appearance and address remind you of a duke or a prince, before you have time to reflect that dukes and princes are, by nature, no handsomer than other men. The benevolence, good humour, and esprit of his character discovered themselves in all he did and said, and the sort of thoughtlessness, which might appear startling in any other man of his age, threw around him only an air of originality. "To come back to Mrs. Elton, however," said he, while he arranged upon his plate, and duly provided with pepper and salt, a piece of fresh, boiled shad (an exquisite delicacy, peculiar, we believe, to the United States, and some of the rivers of Spain), "if I should be under the necessity of seeking a new helpmate, which, nevertheless, I hope won't be the case, Katy my dear, it wouldn't be the old lady I should make up to, by any manner of means. She has rather too redundant a flow of conversation for my quiet and retiring disposition. I should carry the war into another quarter." "And, pray, who would it be, father?" inquired Mary. "Whom would you give me for a second mamma?" "Why, that little witch Fanny, to be sure." Mary and her mother here interchanged glances, and [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-011.jpg) \- external link  - Page 010. ] laughed with a significance which appeared, as Othello says, to "mean something." "What are you laughing at, miss?" demanded her father. "Oh, nothing, sir!" answered Mary, laughing still more. "Come, now, I insist upon knowing." "Why, only," said Mrs. Lennox, "if you have any serious intentions that way, your pride may have a fall." "What do you mean?" "You stand some chance of being rather---rather---" "Rather what?" "Rather cut out , father," said Mary. "What! Fanny Elton?" exclaimed Mr. Lennox, evidently surprised. "Is it possible? And who is the fellow, pray?" A glance, full of good-natured mischief, which Mary cast towards Frank, appeared to throw some light on the mystery. Frank returned it with a look of great indiguation, but, at the same time, coloured obviously. "What! the lieutenant?" cried Mr. Lennox. "What, sir! you have had the audacity to---to---hey, sir?" "It's the most absurd thing possible," said Frank. "Mary is always full of nonsensical ideas." "You need not look so angry," said Mrs. Lennox. "There's nothing to be ashamed of." "Ashamed?" repeated Frank, with a certain dignity, rather thrown away, however, upon the company, "I'm not ashamed; but I think Mary might devise more profitable occupation than---than endeavouring to discover facts, and circulating reports of things which---which do not exist." "Hoity toity! what a grand speech!" rejoined his father. "Your indignation," said Mrs. Lennox, "reminds me, Frank, of the first time you ever put on a long-tailed coat. Mary had been teazing him all day about it, for she is a shameful teaze, and at last capped the climax by speaking of it to some ladies who were paying me a visit. I shall never forget how Frank drew himself up, in his grand way, and said, `Mary's a mere child, and is always endeavouring to attract attention to every passing circumstance!' Poor Frank!" "Frank's famous for making memorable speeches," said Mary, while all were laughing heartily except the object of the merriment. "Do you remember what he once told me about reading history? I had asked him some question [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-012.jpg) \- external link  - Page 011. ] concerning one of the personages in Hume, whom he could not remember till I related several events of his life. `Oh,' said he, `when I read history, I always skip the names and dates!  ' " "I hope you have not skipped Miss Elton's name," said his father, "and the date of your first meeting? Hey! you young dog?" "Upon my word, it's quite ridiculous," replied Frank, amid the general smiles which these youthful anecdotes had provoked; "I'm sure I might skip Miss Elton herself altogether, for all the truth there is in Mary's accusation. She may be a very decent sort of girl---I've no doubt she is; but as for---in respect to---so far from there being any danger of---" "Hold your tongue, sir!" cried his father. "How dare you have the impertinence to speak in that way of the loveliest little being that ever grew off a rosebush? If that young lady, sir, has deigned to honour you with an instant's attention---if you've received so much as an accidental look from her, and not gone crazy, you young scoundrel, you're no son of mine." "You're rather hard upon Frank," said Harry. "He cannot publicly acknowledge a hope without also intimating that such a hope has some foundation. Frank is not only not one of those who would not boast of favours not received, but he would even not boast of favours received." "Well, really, Harry," said his mother, laughing heartily, "it seems to me you are almost as bad as Frank with your speeches. You are not in love too, I hope?" "Favours! received and not received!" said Mr. Lennox. "Why, what's all this? Are you such a coxcomb," addressing Frank, "as to suppose that young lady fancies you worthy of the least notice?" "No; and that's what I've been trying to say. Nothing whatever has passed between Miss Elton and myself which---that in the least---" He coloured again. "Come, come!" said Mrs. Lennox. "I won't have you all on Frank in this way. Hand you father the cakes, and let us leave the things of to-morrow unto to-morrow." "The lucky young rascal!" muttered his father; "and ashamed of it!" [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-013.jpg) \- external link  - Page 012. ] "Really, sir," said Frank, with something more of emphasis than became the relation between him and the person to whom he spoke, "as this is a discussion not altogether agreeable to me, and as I have quite finished my breakfast, I must beg leave to withdraw." He rose from the table and was leaving the room, when his father called him back. "Here, sir! Master Frank! Lieutenant Lennox! one thing let me say to you!" "What is it?" "If you think the attentions of this young lady importunate , had I not better forbid her the house? Ha! ha! ha!" The door was closed with a decision which a good observer might have remarked above the merry laughter occasioned by the sally of Mr. Lennox. "Poor, dear Frank!" remarked Mrs. Lennox. "You really press him too far." "I wish all my children," said Mr. Lennox, "to be able to stand jesting good naturedly, and to learn the art of constantly governing their temper. Frank is quick as lightning." "But it's soon over," replied his mother. "Go after him, Harry, and soothe him. This matter is, I fear, too true for jesting." Harry rose, and followed his brother out of the room. "The young dog!" said Mr. Lennox, "what an actor he would make! Did you ever see such a splendid countenance! such haughtiness! and to me , too! Our names will live hereafter, Kate, in those two boys. I have frittered away my life in peaceful pleasures. Instead of seeking power and fame, I have confined myself to a narrow circle, without influence, without a name. But if men want to know me hereafter, let them look at my sons . Is Frank really attached to Fanny Elton, though?" "Certainly," said Mary; "I have long seen it. They love each other passionately." "I have sometimes half thought," said Mrs. Lennox, "that Harry---" "Oh no! mother, not at all! He never goes near her. I think, on the contrary, they are perfectly indifferent to each other." "I confess," said Mrs. Lennox, "I should like no one so well for a daughter-in-law as Fanny Elton." [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-014.jpg) \- external link  - Page 013. ] It is not easy to say what sense there is in jesting at young lovers. If they are entering into a union destined to be favourable to their happiness, there is nothing ridiculous in it; if not, it is rather a serious affair. Miss Elton had been like one of the family for years, and the Lennox children had played with her, and quarrelled and romped in happy freedom from the feverish malady which goes in the world by the name of love. But Time, that revolutionizing old gentleman, always busy with everything, and never leaving the smallest blade of grass one day what it was the day before, had almost imperceptibly altered the individuals in question. He had advanced the little, sturdy, hoop-playing Harry into a promising young lawyer; and Mary, with her short-cropped, boyish hair and pantalettes, into a slender girl of a little over fifteen. Frank's round jacket and smooth, rosy face were metamorphosed into an officer's becoming coat, and a manly, whiskered countenance, very much browned by the sun, where, however, as yet lurked all the transparent beauty and ingenuousness of a boy; while Fanny Elton, from the sweetest little rosy-cheeked, bright-eyed child that ever was seen, who had a kiss for everybody that she loved, without particular reference to age or sex, had, somehow or other, acquired a new form and new ideas. And, in the intervals of Frank's military education at West Point, when he came home on a visit, or the family spent a day or two at that enchanting spot, he saw, year after year, the riotous little, beautiful tom-boy softened and subdued into gentle and lovely girlhood, inches and feet added to her stature, new lines and graces to her countenance, new charms and wonders to her form, timidity, blushes, expression, thought, feeling, and opinions unfolding themselves like hues and leaves in a rosebud, and with a fragrance which touched his senses as strangely. The romping and kissing, the shouting and quarrelling, had ceased. He was deep in the manly mysteries of mathematics, engineering, and other accomplishments indispensable to a soldier and a gentleman, and she---we might here attempt [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-015.jpg) \- external link  - Page 014. ] to trace, in a magnificent poetic style, the nature of the silent and enchanting changes which had come over her; but the indulgent reader will doubtless let us off with the simple annunciation that she had shot up into a tall, sweet girl, and that, to make a long story short, Frank was desperately in love with her. In his present condition, he was not altogether, however, at his ease, as what lover ever is! He had no reason to suppose himself disagreeable to her; on the contrary, their long acquaintance, the intimacy of their childhood, the tender and close attachment and companionship existing between her and his sister, placed him on terms of perfect familiarity, and gave him not only the constant access of a favourite cousin, but of a brother. Lovers have been, who, for a moment's solitary interview with the object of their affection, for one touch of the peerless hand, one lock of hair, one worn riband, would have risked their lives. Frank's case was different. He was with this young person as often, as much, and as unobservedly as he pleased. He shook hands with her frequently. He occasionally walked with her from his father's house quite alone. He had already made a tolerable collection of ribands, shoestrings, old roses, etc., in the indefinite augmentation of which he did not see any particular danger or difficulty; and, had he boldly and plumply asked her for a lock of that rich auburn hair, on the occasion of his departure for Prairie du Chien , where he was likely to remain six or seven years, it is probable that, although the request had been preferred at dinner, before the whole family, the warm-hearted, sunshiny girl would have clipped him off a good bouncing handful without a moment's hesitation. Yet here he was, soon to start off for a place so many miles distant, without any probability of seeing her in seven long, changeful, horrible years, and yet he had not dared to venture any actual statement of his case, either to her or to any one else. The profound passion which steeped his soul---for young lieutenants of twenty can, if fairly put to it, love, when they meet such women, as well as other and older men---had led him only to break his repose by frequent moonlight promenades, to a considerable outlay of sixpences and shillings for real Havana cigars, to much melancholy meditation, to many mournful sighs, and to divers valorous resolutions of decisive action, which melted into thin air at the presence of the laughing, lovely girl, who had made all this havoc with him. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-016.jpg) \- external link  - Page 015. ] One thing, however, he had supposed, viz., that the state of his heart was unobserved by others. He had fancied it in his power to be with such a girl, in the presence of other women, and those women his mother and sister, without betraying himself to them, and perhaps he was not unreasonable in such a supposition. For how could he, in his innocence, fear that, what he had endeavoured so long and ineffectually to communicate to the object of it, had been divined by two comparatively uninterested spectators. The onset of his whole family at breakfast had cast a new light over the affair. He had been detected, exposed, and quizzed. At first he seriously thought of setting out for Prairie du Chien that very morning, without bidding good-by to anybody, and taking with him only his hat and cane. Then he resolved to throw himself at the feet of Miss Elton, and ask her, just in so many words, whether she would have him or not. Then he conceived the idea of crushing in its bud a passion which could not be fortunate, and all these fiery impulses ended in his choosing, with some care, a cigar from a silver box on the mantelpiece, lighting the same by a pretty fire machine at its side, sitting down in a comfortable fauteuil by an open window looking into a garden full of lilach and other flowers, and smoking furiously. In this state Harry found him when, at his mother's request, he left the breakfast-table on his affectionate commission. "You'll ruin your health, smoking as you do, Frank," said he, by way of opening the conversation, and with something of the paternal authority of an elder brother. "You smoke altogether too much. One or two cigars a day are enough for any one. Beyond that---by-the-way, those are very nice ones. Where did you get them?" "I ordered a box home yesterday from Bininger's---try one---they are superb. Look there! Did you ever see anything richer than that?" And he held out the cigar he was smoking, which, although nearly finished, retained its original form---a phantom of snowy ashes nearly two inches long. "I don't care, for this once, if I do smoke one with you, though I generally postpone it till after dinner." The luxury of the cigar is not confined to the mere physical solace. Its management aids conversation, and the attention to be paid to it fills up the pauses. If the [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-017.jpg) \- external link  - Page 016. ] smoker be an awkward person, it furnishes employment for his hands; if there is any embarrassment in the interview, it covers it. Could the thing have been, barring the impoliteness of it, and could Frank have had Miss Elton at his side while he smoked his cigar, he would have dared and known his fate long ago. Some consciousness of this peculiarity of the cigar appeared to pass through the mind of Harry. Perhaps he did not fully know himself why he smoked on the present occasion, and contrary to his advice and habit. He turned his cigar over several times in his mouth, as if trying to get the smoke out of it, although there was no occasion for such endeavours, it being a perfectly good one. He then puffed away rapidly, almost as much so as Frank had done, with a nervous uneasiness, and scarcely had the ashes begun to appear, when he knocked them off with a smart blow of his little finger. At length he said, after emitting one or two clouds, not with the measured self-enjoyment of a smoker who feels the charm of what he is doing, but with an abrupt air, "Frank! what's all this fun about you and Fanny Elton?" "Nothing," said Frank, "but Mary's nonsense." "Do you tell me, on your honour, that you have no attachment for her?" "On my honour? Who said anything about honour?" "I ask you in earnest." "Then, in earnest," said Frank, with another blush, such as is sometimes seen in a lieutenant, but is rarely known to exist in any higher rank, "yes, I do love her." "And you mean to marry her?" "Certainly---if she'll have me." "Does she love you?" "Ah! my dear fellow, that's cutting rather close!" "No matter: answer me." "I think---I hope she does." "Has she said so?" "No, not exactly said so." "Have you ever spoken to her on the subject?" "Never." "Have you good reasons for your hopes?" "Yes---no---certainly." Harry paused, but went on smoking at rather a rapid rate. "Very well; that's enough. I thought it but fair to ask [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-018.jpg) \- external link  - Page 017. ] you this. The whole family seemed to think so, and you ought not to deceive them or the young lady herself. I congratulate you, my dear fellow. She's noble girl, and I hope you may win her well and wear her long." "Where are you going?" asked Frank. "I've business in the office." "Stop one moment. I have answered all your questions, Harry, have I not?" "Certainly." "Well, now then, if you please, you must answer one of mine." "What do you mean?" "Confidence, Harry, begets confidence, and no one puts such broad questions as you have asked me, without laying himself open to be cross-examined in his turn." "Well, there is truth in that," said Harry. "I have no objection to answer you anything, I'm sure, but you would nevertheless oblige me greatly by not asking." "That is a favour I can't grant. You must tell me, now, do you love Miss Elton?" "No. I cannot love a woman who loves another." "Have you ever loved her?" There was a pause. "Yes. I once fancied so." "And have you had reason to suppose she loved you?" continued Frank; and the blush had now given place to a very unmilitary white. "Never; on the contrary---a year ago, for a short time, I nourished a sort of foolish idea, but it has entirely vanished of itself, and I have always found her cold and shy." "Do you think she knows you loved her?" "No, I don't think she has the remotest idea of it. On the contrary, she thinks I despise her, and so," he added, bitterly, "I almost do." "Despise Fanny Elton? And why?" "I think her capricious---a coquette." "There is only one excuse for such a sentiment," said Frank. "And what is that?" "Love! disappointed, perhaps, or imagining itself disappointed, imbittering your criticism, and blinding your judgment. I see how it is. You too love her." "No, by Heaven, no. If she were kneeling at my feet, [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-019.jpg) \- external link  - Page 018. ] I would not marry her. I avoid her presence, and shut my heart against her beauty. If she marry you and make you a good wife, that may reconcile me to respect her in time: nothing else can." "Softly, my good Harry. What cause have you to hate and despise her, unless a cause growing out, not only of love, but of an idea that you had made some progress in her affection. No, it is clear to me you love her, and doubtless she loves you. I am glad you have disclosed this to me before I made a fool of myself by going any farther. I wonder I never thought of it before. She has been in the constant habit of seeing you since I have been at West Point. It would be strange if she did not love you. But better late than never. Now go, Harry, I have no more questions. I shall take my course." "And what do you propose to do?" "Leave here at once and forever. Set out to-morrow morning for Prairie du Chien , and bury the rest of my life in the West." "You can do as you like," said Harry; "but you must understand me better than to suppose me capable of taking advantage of your departure to seek the affections of Miss Elton. It was not my intention, when I entered the room, to say anything of my own feelings. On the contrary, I thought, and I still think, your union with her would give me pleasure. You have become possessed of my secret by accident; but, since you have discovered it, let me prevent your supposing it other than it is. I will therefore tell you, in perfect frankness, the whole of it, that you may see how the land lies. I really did think Miss Elton liked me, till one day, about a year ago, I commenced telling her so, and she did not appear to be offended. We were interrupted, I don't remember how---a door opened or shut, or something of that sort, in the next room, and she ran off. I hoped for an opportunity to finish the matter; but no, I've never been able to find one. From that time till now, my young lady has kept from being alone with me an instant, and when with me in company, she's altogether a different person from what she used to be---polite, gay, but no more confidence, no more---you understand me. Of course, when I saw how matters were going, I withdrew. Ha! ha! ha! I abdicated. I'm not a man to be extinguished by a tender passion, nor have I time to waste in studying Miss Elton's [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-020.jpg) \- external link  - Page 019. ] character and caprices; so for the last six months I've had nothing to say to her more than simple politeness required. On the whole, I've come to the conclusion that she never did really like me, or if she did, she's changed, that's all, as she certainly had full right to do, and devilish lucky it is for me that it happened before matters went any farther. There---now you know all." "I'm glad you've told me this," said Frank: "I also shall abdicate." "No, you will not make that resolution." "Why not?" "Because I don't see the necessity of it. I have already made a similar one, which I certainly sha'n't break. Besides, I have more cause than you to suppose her affection either never existed or has ceased to exist. It is possible, in her girlish inexperience, she might have fancied she liked me, and afterward discovered her mistake. She may have been inspired with that sentiment by another---by you, perhaps. Go forward---win her hand; it will relieve me from all farther unhappiness. Marry her, Frank, for Heaven's sake, and make all three of us happy." "And do you think," said Frank, "that I will be excelled in generosity?" "What's to be done then?" said Harry. "Why, I see only one way to settle the difficulty," said Frank, ingenuously, "and that is to try our fortune, both of us  . There can, after all, be no real conflict of interest here. Fanny Elton wouldn't marry either of us unless she loved. She must know her own mind, and, if she ever mean to do so, she must already have felt a preference for one. In fact, after all, I don't see how we can interfere with each other." "True---quite true," said Harry, in spite of himself showing the relief he felt at the turn the conversation was now taking. "We have, then," continued Frank, "only to try; we must each take our chance. The decision of the question does not depend upon us, and we have it not in our power, after all our professed readiness for self-sacrifice, to make her accept any one not agreeable to her. The present state of her heart is probably unalterable, as far as regards us. I have thought myself certain, but, when I look back, I see I might easily have mistaken the familiarity of indifference [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-021.jpg) \- external link  - Page 020. ] for that of affection, while you may have thought the shyness of love the coldness of dislike. You are, and always were, as delicate and doubting in such matters, as I have been, I fear, rash and sanguine. Let us enter the arena, then, fairly and kindly. I confess I could never see the sense of quarrels between lovers of the same mistress, unless by supposing the woman a fool." "I agree," said Harry, "because I believe that my failure will lead to your success." "And he who succeeds will be the sufferer," said Frank, "because his happiness will be dashed with the thought that it is reached over the heart of the other." "No, not so," said Harry. "My heart is not so easily shaken, or, at least, broken." "Well, I will not argue. Who shall make the first trial?" "You. But no, I think the advantage will be with the second. Should the first be rejected, the other has his own time, and perhaps what is now simple friendship, time may ripen into love." "Let chance decide," said Frank. "A game of whist--- a throw of the dice." "No," said Harry, "we will not gamble for such a prize. Nothing so common shall interpose between us, but something as frail as my hopes, as idle, and as bright. Look yonder!" A large butterfly had just lighted upon the rosebush in the window, and stood stirring his broad, powdered wings, spotted with black velvet and gold, as if drinking in at every pore the sweetness of the balmy June air. "If he fly," continued Harry, "before the expiration of a minute, by the second-hand of my watch, I will take the first chance; if not, you." "Agreed." "Agreed," murmured both; and the two brothers drew cautiously near to watch the soft, golden creature, on the caprice of whose airy mind they supposed they had staked their earthly happiness; for beneath their restrained and sometimes apparently gay demeanour, each felt an agitation which amounted to pain. Their mutual affection was sincere, and, in their ordinary moods, each would have been willing to surrender for the other life and happiness. But the struggle for, what almost seemed to them, in this moment, the love of Fanny Elton, filled them with mixed [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-022.jpg) \- external link  - Page 021. ] emotions of hope and fear, selfishness and magnanimity; for selfishness, at some time or other, enters every human heart. In one it comes and goes, partially banished by better impulses; some hug it through their entire lives, till they are powerless in its embrace as in the coils of a serpent; few succeed in rising above it completely: yet there are such. Harry held his watch. The bright sunshine fell full upon it, and upon the superb hues and gently moving wings of the little brilliant air wanderer, which, reposing on its crimson couch, seemed in no haste to depart. There was a profound silence. The brothers stood breathless, their eyes fixed, now upon the watch, now upon the gorgeous arbiter of their fate. Suddenly a crow floated low over the housetops, and uttered his hoarse, repeated cry. The insect changed its position, but did not fly. Several swallows next darted almost into the window with their sharp scream of joy, but as instantly rose again. Each of these interruptions sadly startled the hearts of the two observers. The minute was more than half gone, when a flock of pigeons, from the lower roof of an adjoining building, rose together with their whirring wings, and, rapidly wheeling in a close circle, swept off overhead, darkening for a moment the sunshine in which they stood. The fragile visiter stirs--- it flies. No! no! Those sweet sounds of Nature were too gentle and familiar to disturb even Nature's lightest creation. All relapsed into silence, broken only by the distant roar of the town, the barking of the far-off dog, or the exulting crow of a neighbouring cock, proclaiming to earth and heaven his joy, valour, and defiance. The hand wanted only ten seconds of completing the minute, when the insect, which had stood all the interruptions unmoved, from, who can say, what impulse of its tiny mind, and little dreaming what important consequences hung on its motions, bent backward, forward its spotted wings, rose lightly in the air, and floated, fluttering and glittering, down the sunshine. "Go," said Frank, "Fanny Elton is yours." "This night, Frank," replied Harry, "you shall sleep without fear of me." [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-023.jpg) \- external link  - Page 022. ] It happened, as Harry descended the stairs, that Miss Elton was going into the drawing-room on an early visit to Mary. A courteous, but not very lover-like salutation passed between them, Miss Elton entering the room, and Harry continuing his way down towards the office. Suddenly he stopped, crossed by a determination peculiar to his character. "Why should I delay? why waver?" thought he. "No choice is left me. What I must do, why not do instantly? That she scorns me is plain. Yet, were all the hatred and contempt of the human heart concentrated in one word, and I knew she would utter it, I would do what I have now engaged to do---for Frank's sake, not for mine. His heart shall not beat one moment in unnecessary suspense." He advanced towards the room and stopped. "But Mary! how to get rid of her?" The coincidences of life sometimes look so like the contrivance of malicious or ministering spirits, that it is difficult to regard them as accidental. While he stood in perplexity at the recollection that his sister was in the room, she came suddenly out, and said, "Go in one moment and entertain Fanny, will you? I want to get her my new cape." And off she ran up stairs. "Now, then," said Harry. He opened the door, entered, closed it after him, and was alone with the object of his hopes and his fears. His countenance and manner must have betrayed emotion, for Miss Elton, who was standing by a table carelessly turning over some new engravings, on looking up, exclaimed, "Why, Mr. Lennox, what's the matter?" "Nothing, Miss Elton, only I have resolved to delay no longer addressing you on a subject which seriously interests me." She looked surprised and coloured, and there was a very awkward pause. "Miss Elton," at length resumed the poor fellow, in a [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-024.jpg) \- external link  - Page 023. ] low voice, "I have resolved to throw myself upon your generosity. I come frankly to make an offer of my hand, trembling lest you reject, and scarcely hoping that you will accept me." "Sir!" said Miss Elton, preserving a cold, undisturbed voice, "I do not understand you." "Fanny, how have I offended you? Is it possible that I have misunderstood or in any way annoyed you?" "I do not wish any discussion, sir." And she was about leaving the room. "I would not be importunate, but some mystery is between us, and a strange necessity hurries me along to know at once---" "I trust, sir," said Miss Elton, with haughty astonishment, while the colour which had gradually overspread her face now left it entirely, "there can be no serious necessity for you to hold, or for me to listen to such language. I never supposed I could be subjected to an insult from you." There did not exist a man prouder or haughtier than the young person who, amazed and shocked, heard this observation. But the love which had for so many years been strengthening in his bosom, and for a long time past had been acquiring the force of a strong stream accidentally obstructed, mastered even his pride. It was now his turn to grow pale, but it was more the pallor of anguish than indignation. The immediate prospect of death could not have shaken him more than these words from the lips from which they fell. "Miss Elton," he stammered, "you cruelly misunderstand. There is certainly some inconceivable error." She walked to the door, and would have left the room, but he barred her passage. "If it is your determination," said he, "to treat my proffered love with scorn and insult, let me, at least, request you to hear me explain before I leave the subject forever." "I cannot choose but do so. I am not free to go," said she, coldly. "Go, go, Miss Elton; I no longer stop your way." She advanced, but paused on seeing the expression of his face. "What do you wish to say? I will hear you." "With that haughty frown on your brow, with that cold scorn in your voice, I scarcely know, Miss Elton, what to [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-025.jpg) \- external link  - Page 024. ] say, or how to begin a tale of love; but, nevertheless, I will do it. My whole life, since first my early boyhood felt what love was, has been filled with your image. I loved you before you yourself were old enough to understand my deeper feelings. I once dared to hope you had discovered, and did not disapprove my affection, till, in a moment of boyish imprudence, I dared to betray my feelings, the strange cause of your present resentment. From that time to this you have chosen to alter the relations which I supposed existed between us. I have felt myself cast off, and have acted accordingly." "Oh, you must excuse me," said she, again going. "You will forgive my frankness," continued Harry: "my happiness, however indifferent you may be to it, I cannot see wasted and wearing away without taking some measure to preserve it. I will not so humbly bend beneath your words as to say I must be dependent on you for it always: you can bestow it upon me now, but you cannot always deprive me of it. There are other paths---other---" "Women!" interrupted she. "Even so, Miss Elton. If you love me, say so, and I am yours. If your words are a true indication of your feelings, independent of any error, say so, that I may know what to believe, what to feel, and what to do." The strange mixture of love and rudeness in this speech appeared only to confirm the displeasure of the young girl. "Mr. Lennox," said she, "I have heard you, that I might reply distinctly. You speak of a necessity, and of your trembling lest I reject you. Let me equally free you from your necessity and your fears: I cannot love you." He appeared borne down by her decisive words and scornful eyes. "Fanny, pause one moment before you separate us forever. Pause one moment, till we are both cooler, and can conduct more prudently a conversation which may be for the happiness or misery of us both, and which I shall never resume if you reject me now. My whole happiness, my prospects in life, perhaps my life itself, hang on the breath of your lips in this moment. Give me time to ascertain the cause of your anger (for there is some hidden cause), and to call back the feelings for me which once inspired you. Do not reject me, or I solemnly swear I never will resume the subject." [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-026.jpg) \- external link  - Page 025. ] Miss Elton looked at him a moment, and then very calmly replied, "Notwithstanding your formidable threat, Mr. Lennox, permit me to say, I not only reject, I despise you! " and she left the room. It would be difficult to convey to the, we trust, comparatively happy reader, a just idea of the thoughts of the young man. In his bosom raged the passions of youth untempered by reflection or experience. Perhaps, among the subjects on which time and observation give us light, there are none less understood by the young than themselves, and the manner in which they would feel and act on yet untried occasions. He had supposed a rejection by Miss Elton would end his love by arousing his pride, and that the certainty of her indifference would speedily enable him to resume his own. Alas! he now perceived with consternation that she had acquired only more charms; that he had never before been aware how beautiful, how noble she was. She became infinitely dearer to him than ever. So far from pride being able to overcome love, it was itself overmastered. He could scarcely collect his senses to comprehend the full force of those decisive words, that cold contempt which amazed him from its total unexpectedness. She might have declined his addresses, rectified his boyish mistake, regretted her inability to reciprocate his affection, and promised him, in return, esteem and friendship. For this he had been tremblingly prepared. This he could have scarcely borne. But here were scorn, derision, insult, inflicted with a cruelty as insupportable as it was inexplicable. He was pacing backward and forward through the room when Mary and Miss Elton re-entered. His sister did not seem to suspect that anything unusual had taken place, but was laughing and talking, and pointing out the peculiarities of the cape, on which Miss Elton appeared to bestow all the desired attention. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-027.jpg) \- external link  - Page 026. ] "It's very pretty indeed," said she, in an indifferent voice. "I will get one like it." "Will you be good enough to call Frank down stairs, Harry?" said his sister, suddenly. "He has made an engagement to ride with us. Tell him we're waiting for him, will you? The horses have been at the door a quarter of an hour." He went out without at first venturing to look at Fanny, but, as he closed the door, he turned to steal one glance. There was an expression in her face, unexpected, indescribable, which renewed all his grief and all his love. Frank was sitting alone, lost in thought, when he entered, but said immediately, "You have seen Miss Elton?" "I have. I have offered myself to her. She has refused me. Go: she is yours. God bless you both!" "But, Harry, you amaze me: so soon?" "Not a word---never a word more on this subject, I entreat. It is done. I have fulfilled my part---go and do yours. They are waiting for you in the drawing-room. Go, I beg of you. "My dear Harry, you are agitated." "Frank, are you coming?" said Mary, at the bottom of the stairs; "are you going to keep two ladies here and three horses waiting for you all day? You're a fine beau, to be sure!" Frank left him. He locked and double locked the door, went to his drawer, took from it a pistol, examined the charge, cocked it, and held the muzzle to his forehead. At this moment a dim idea of God came over him. He had never thought of his Creator before. About to rush into His presence, it struck him that there might be a reality in future, invisible things. He paused: the reflection of his face from a mirror on the table startled him. Suddenly there was a knock at the door. He felt like a guilty wretch, and thrust, trembling, the deadly weapon into the drawer. "Who's there?" "Your father is waiting for you in the office, if you'll please to come down." "Yes, in one moment." It was the voice of little Seth Copely, one of the clerks, [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-028.jpg) \- external link  - Page 027. ] who, having delivered the message, withdrew. He heard his steps retreating down stairs till they died away. "My father! my mother! God! the future! What new thoughts are these? Pause, madman. At least not yet, not here, not so. What you do, do wisely, deliberately. Do nothing rashly, nothing ignorantly." As he spoke, a sudden debility came over him. His violent excitement abating, the natural reaction followed. He sank into a chair, overpowered by an irresistible revulsion of feeling, covered his face with his hands, and wept in silent agony. Suddenly, recollecting the summons of his father, he exerted all his strength of character, of which he had an ample share, though unregulated and misdirected, as well as a certain power of concealing his emotions, which he had mistaken for the power to govern them. Copiously bathing his head, therefore, in a large basin of water, washing away the traces of his tears, and arranging his dress and hair, he went down stairs, calmed by the outbreak of emotion to which he had just yielded. No one with whom he came into contact suspected he had a few moments before been prevented, only by a casual thought, from discharging a pistol into his brain. At dinner he expected to meet Miss Elton, but she had excused herself on the plea of indisposition. A REJECTED lover generally fancies himself very miserable, even if his fate have been communicated in the mildest manner. But Harry's offer had been disposed of so very unceremoniously, that the young gentleman had a good excuse for being rather out of spirits. There was something inexplicable in it. He knew that he could not have been mistaken in her former obvious affection, or in the certainty that she had been alienated from him by some extraordinary error, to which his utmost conjectures could furnish no clew. From the dinner-table, whence he perceived his rashness [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-029.jpg) \- external link  - Page 028. ] had banished his sister's friend, and a favourite and frequent guest of the family, he started off on an excursion, he scarcely knew whither; but he found his strong wish for a change of scene had driven him over to Hoboken in one of the ferry-boats, and that he was pressing his way through woods, over fields, and up the steep acclivities of the Weehawken heights at a most prodigious rate; stopping sometimes, however, in the midst of his peculiar meditations, to admire the beauties of the various views which broke upon him, of the river, bay, shores, and distant city, now all bathed in the silent, mellow light of a summer sunset. In the course of this love-sick ramble he had various very serious reflections and sensations, which were more interesting to him than they would be to any one else. Among them were mingled images of despair and resentment; resolutions of flight, of marriage with some one else, of suicide, and of a stoical return to calm and sober reason, to all of which, however, there were certain objections or difficulties, and all of which were melted to air every time the face of Miss Elton crossed his imagination, looking, as she generally did, particularly pretty. One determination, however, he did take. After such a rejection, he might love the young lady or not, according to circumstances, but he certainly would not make her any more declarations. He would meet her hereafter with a lofty insensibility, and if his heart should break outright, he would never let her know anything of it. While engaged in these reflections, the hours rolled rapidly away, and he heard the bell of the last ferry-boat ringing violently. Hastening his steps, he crossed once more the broad and noble river, and took his way along the streets, now glittering with evening lights, and filled with crowds of pleasure-seekers. Here he wandered till a late hour, endeavouring to deaden, by rapid motion, his sense of unhappiness, which he at length so far succeeded in doing that he felt a consciousness of more than ordinary hunger and thirst, induced by his long and fatiguing ramble, and the exciting nature of his thoughts, after a dinner which, as the young reader may suppose, had not been a very hearty one. He had come to the conclusion that a world in which such a person as he could be so cruelly and contemptuously rejected by such a person as Miss Elton, must be a very wretched one---must be given over to blind chance, if not to [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-030.jpg) \- external link  - Page 029. ] the sport of an evil demon. He was not an infidel, but he was by no means a Christian. He belonged to the large class who, perpetually engaged in the cares, pursuits, and pleasures of this life, have no time or inclination to think about anything else. With a sort of buoyant recklessness, he resolved to shake from his thoughts the circumstance which had so much affected him, or, at least, to drown present recollection in a hearty supper and a bottle of wine. He continued still to wander rapidly on, for he cared not how long, scarcely knowing whither he went, when he found himself before one of those elegantly-furnished ordinaries which, notwithstanding the lateness of the night, was open, to catch such as roamed abroad in search of pleasure. His mental anguish abated a moment at the prospect of refreshment, which his exhausted body greatly demanded. An ample and tempting meal called him from his gloomy reflections to the keen pleasure of his repast, by which he sought, and, for the moment, with success, to lose sight of his wo. He ate heartily and drank freely, to drown the saddening and tormenting thoughts which would obtrude themselves upon him. He looked around. The room where he sat was entirely deserted, with the exception of the barkeeper, a young lad, worn out with late hours, who sat, half asleep, retired at some distance, betraying, had there been any one in a situation to observe him, by many an ill-suppressed yawn, his longing for the departure of his ravenous customer, and thinking, perhaps, as he beheld the amply-loaded table, with the honest man in the farce, "If all this is to be devoured by Mr. Morgan, He must have a deused good digestive organ!" But Harry was in no such haste. The fumes of his supper, and the inspiration of his bottle of Champagne, gave him a feeling of joyous relief, which kept sleep and the desire of sleep far enough from his eyelids. Here he sat, and ate, and drank, and thought, till the various persons who came in had satisfied their wants and gone out again; till the wine mounted into his head rather more than he intended, and till the idea of blowing his brains out for Miss Fanny Elton, or any other young lady whatever, appeared to him one of the most ridiculous and amusing things he had ever heard of in the whole course of his life. Finishing, at length, the meal, wine, and reflections [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-031.jpg) \- external link  - Page 030. ] together, he called for the bill, with as steady an air of gentlemanly ease and dignity as he could assume, though with a decidedly confused idea as to where he intended to go, or what he proposed to do when he should have resumed his walk. He was considerably struck, too, with a symptom by no means usual with him, viz., a strong inclination to smile without being particular as to the occasion. Thus making his way out of the eating-house, he issued into the street, he scarcely knew how, with his hat thrust down very much over his eyes. He was just sober enough to know that he was intoxicated, and to feel that the cool, fresh air was most grateful to his flushed cheeks. The pavement, however, heaved so beneath his feet, that he could not very well walk, and he caught hold of the balustrade of the Park to prevent his falling. He looked around and up. The moon had now risen, and was shedding a pale, golden gleam upon each object, filling the air with her gentle glory, as he stood holding on firmly to the iron railing, not without an effort preserving himself from lying at full length upon the stones, which seemed to rock like the deck of a ship at sea. He commenced singing a song, but, overcome by the deliciousness of his sensations, and fully aware of the absurdity of his ridiculous position, he began to laugh aloud, and remained thus giving full vent to the overflowing merriment of his soul. At this moment a figure came towards him, but, on seeing his condition, crossed over as if to avoid an encounter. Urged by some new impulse, however, the person came back, and looked him directly in the face. "Hallo, my old cock!" said Harry, "what may be your business?" "What! Harry Lennox?" said the voice. He turned to look at the speaker, and discovered Emmerson, his father's partner. "The devil! How are you?" cried Harry, assuming a very grave and sober look. "Why, my dear sir," said Emmerson, smiling, "what's the matter with you?" "Oh, I have been unwell this evening, and I have come out to (hiccough) take a little walk." "You're now going home, I hope?" "Oh, y---y---yes! my dear fellow. I was just going when you came up. Delightful evening!" [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-032.jpg) \- external link  - Page 031. ] "Delightful!" "How are you? and how goes bu---bu---business?" "Very well, I thank you. Good-night." "G---good---night, my dear boy. Won't you have a cigar? But you don't smoke, I believe. Hallo! he's gone. I think I'm a little drunk---ha, ha, ha!---but he has not the least suspicion. Mum's the word! I had no idea I could have done it so well. I wouldn't have him see me flustered--- him , of all men---not for a pipe of the best old Tokay that ever---ha, ha, ha! Hold on, my fine fellow!" A little sobered, however, but with his head still reeling, laughing occasionally aloud, despite his efforts to keep serious, he staggered on, and reached his home without meeting any farther interruption. Harry breakfasted with the family the next morning as usual, and thence went to his ordinary duties in the office. A certain awkward feeling came over him as he met Emmerson, but, from the manner of that gentleman, he could not gather any reason to suppose he had detected his state at their last night's meeting, and he concluded, with a hearty feeling of relief, that in the darkness of night, and from what he presumed had been his own power of self-control, his intoxication, which he firmly resolved should never be repeated, had entirely escaped his attention. "You have a pamphlet in your room, I believe, from the office library, which I wish very much to consult," said Emmerson to Harry in the afternoon. "Yes, I took it to look at the proposed --- Bill." "Why, that's what I wished to look at," said Emmerson. "Perhaps we are occupied on the same subject," said Harry. "I'm going to address the meeting to-night." "You! you address the meeting?" said Emmerson. "Certainly: why not?" "Oh, I do not say ` not ' at all," said he, with a smile, "only I did not know it was your intention. Have you prepared anything?" [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-033.jpg) \- external link  - Page 032. ] "A few notes. I shall scarcely use them, however. When I speak I very soon get beyond my notes." "Let me see them, will you?" said Emmerson. "It is barely possible I may wish to say something, but not a speech." Harry handed the notes, and Emmerson looked them over with an air of no great interest. "Oh! ah! that's the view you take, is it?" "Yes; but the most important I don't put on paper, or only a single word, to bring the point to my memory. I am resolved not to accustom myself to dependance on memoranda, but to begin young, and throw myself at once upon all the uncertainty, or perhaps," he added, with a smile, "others may think it the certainty, of extemporaneous speaking; that is---" He was going to explain, but Emmerson interrupted him. "Well, I see your drift here. It is good, certainly; but hadn't you better leave out this---for instance, this paragraph?" "Oh no: why so? that is a common opinion." "But your mode of proving it is not so common, nor do I think it quite correct." "Well, if you think so, I'll leave it out in deference to you." "You had better: though I really think you give yourself more trouble, in speaking at all, than the matter is likely to be worth. The subject has no real interest. I have not made the least attempt to go into it by previous study." At dinner Harry was a breathless listener to an interesting conversation. The family were speaking of Fanny Elton, and Mary insisted that something had occurred to displease her. "She is not the same in her manner to me," said she; "she is cold and reserved. Her refusal to dine with us yesterday, I am convinced, was not caused by indisposition, although she really is not well. But how often has she come to us when she was not well? What harm could it have done her just to have dined here instead of at home? And she refuses to come to-day, refuses to dine with us on Thursday, and to go to the theatre with us in the evening." "Nonsense," said Mr. Lennox. "Who would---what could offend Fanny, I should like to know? She could not suspect any one in this family of an intention to offend her, [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-034.jpg) \- external link  - Page 033. ] and I don't think she is the sort of person to be offended when she knows there has been no intention." "How do you account, then, for these three refusals---this sudden withdrawal of her consent to go to the theatre on Thursday---for her curious manner?" "I'll go round this evening," said Frank, "and see if I can persuade her, and you shall go with me." "No," said Mary, "I will not. To say the truth, I am a little hurt and offended, and she saw plainly that I was, and yet did not in the least alter her decision." "So," thought Harry, "Frank has either not made his offer, or" (and his heart sunk within him at the thought) "he has made it and been accepted." "I feel sure," said Frank, "I can make her alter her determination." "Nonsense," said Mrs. Lennox; "why, in such an ingenuous creature as Fanny, look for any other excuse than the one she assigns? She is not very well, is out of spirits, and therefore will not come." "Well, if you think so," resumed Mary, "I'll go with Frank; but I don't understand it." "So," thought Harry, "she avoids me. That of course: but in a way which must betray the insult I have received. This I must prevent." He therefore wrote the following note, and, after a brief explanation, intrusted it to Frank: "Mr. Henry Lennox begs Miss Elton to forgive and forget the error into which he has fallen, upon his assurance not to repeat it. He hopes she will not make it the cause of interrupting her intercourse with the family, rather than which he will himself withdraw, till time shall test the sincerity of his resolution never to offend again. If he have reason to fear his presence prevents her usual visits and engagements, he will carry into effect a desire he has long had of spending a few years in Europe. Should she, however, be disposed to accord this, the only favour he can ever ask of her, he need scarcely add, he considers himself bound, as a gentleman, to protect her from the annoyance of his society, as far as can be done without exciting attention." [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-035.jpg) \- external link  - Page 034. ] This was the evening of the great public meeting, called for the purpose of passing resolutions respecting a measure pending in Congress. The subject was one which young Lennox was acquainted with, as it had long engaged his attention. Miserable as he was at this moment, a desire to escape from himself led him to be thankful for such a distraction, and while Frank and Mary were gone to Eltons's, he repaired to deliver his address. On arriving at the large room which had been designated for the purpose, he found many distinguished citizens assembled. His father and Mr. Emmerson were already there. The hall rapidly filled to overflowing. An eminent man was elected to the chair, and several secretaries appointed. Many speakers were anxious to express their views on the subject, and two or three did so, and were received with interest. At length Mr. Emmerson rose. He was listened to with respectful attention. His remarks showed the results of study; for, as Harry afterward discovered, he had been long and laboriously preparing himself for the occasion. Distinction was his passion, and to it he had resolved to devote himself. But he was regarded as a cold, dry man, laborious in details and learned in facts, without enlarged views, or original inferences or ideas. His discourse, while it made a favourable impression, did not produce any particular effect. Harry was rather surprised to perceive that he had made use of several arguments similar to those contained in his own memoranda. He set it down, of course, as accident, for there was scarcely a man whom he would not sooner have suspected of anything wrong, so highly was he esteemed for purity and gentleness of mind and manners. He was, however, fairly puzzled, on hearing him, as he proceeded, deliver some remarks in support of a delay in the passage of the offensive bill, an exact counterpart of those which, at the intimation of Emmerson himself, he had proposed to omit in his own observations. After Emmerson rose a Mr. Holford, a gentleman of [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-036.jpg) \- external link  - Page 035. ] large stature and dignified personal appearance, with a sonorous voice and an apparent familiarity with public speaking. He occupied the attention of the audience an hour with fine words and high-sounding phrases, frequently eliciting applause by the artful recurrence of patriotic sentiments. But Harry perceived that this person belonged to the class of mere demagogues, who, by dint of impudence and perseverance, not only thrust themselves into prominent places, but maintain themselves there triumphantly, while men of merit and modesty remain in obscurity. Notwithstanding very general applause, his eloquence was made up of superficial commonplaces and phrases, borrowed, ready-made, from the floating oratory of the day. A part of what he said was good, but that was not his own, and, whenever he ventured into anything like original argument or declamation, he betrayed the poverty of his attainments and the smallness of his understanding by flimsy sophistry or swelling bombast. It was all received, however, with the unexamining approbation characteristic of a public meeting, and which evidently made the speaker (although he repeated the quotation that he was "no orator as Brutus is") believe himself a much greater orator than that ancient or most other modern gentlemen. At length Harry rose, striving to fly from himself, and to lose in any manner the keen sense of his late disappointment. We have not ventured to describe him, but the reader must imagine a young man rather above the middle stature, as noble in person as expressive and handsome in countenance. His features had a manly gravity and even sternness, which gave place to sweetness when he smiled. His eyes were dark and full of expression, and a voice, more soft, flexible, and, at the same time, powerful, was rarely heard. He had not uttered ten sentences before every one became aware he was no common man. Free from embarrassment, he presented by far the clearest view of the case which had been given, drew enlarged, unexpected, and striking inferences with the logical precision of a more matured orator, and in language the most eloquent, enchained, delighted, and convinced everybody. With all the knowledge of details and facts of Emmerson, and a far more chaste and rich flow of language than Holford, he added that kind of light and fire which only genius and sincerity know how to throw around what they touch. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-037.jpg) \- external link  - Page 036. ] Warmed by the exertion and by the consciousness of his success, he triumphantly completed the argumentative part of his address to an audience who gave neither the cold respect awarded to Emmerson, nor the noisy applause elicited by the clap-traps of the pompous Holford, but the attention of men whose minds are really awakened. In conclusion, when his points were clearly proved, and the objections raised by the opposite party had been undeniably silenced, he ended by an appeal to the clear judgment and higher feelings of the nation, in a strain not often heard at public meetings, and which showed a speaker as far above the petty desire of self-display as the mere interested influence of party views. A pause followed his concluding words, for his auditors preserved a moment's silence, unwilling to lose a syllable, till a simultaneous burst of applause, ended, resumed, hushed, and prolonged again, told that the minds and hearts of all present had been under the spell of eloquence . He was acknowledged the speaker of the evening. On descending from the stage, he was received in triumph by his friends, and heartily congratulated before he could reach and accept the hand of his delighted father. By the side of the latter stood Emmerson, silent and motionless, and with a peculiar expression of discontent on his dark features. Harry was struck with it, and felt it chill the warm flow of his blood and the pleasure of his success; and had he not known him, he would have thought he saw on his countenance only the workings of mean selfishness and pale envy. "What's the matter?" asked he, as he perceived his proffered hand was not accepted. "Oh, nothing," said Emmerson: "the crowd---the heat." Then, with a singular look, which afterward often rose in Harry's memory, he added, "I did not expect to see you so soon in public, when I met you last night, you know! " "Last night!" repeated his father: "where?" "What do you mean by that?" said Harry, sternly. "You knew I intended to address the meeting, Mr. Emmerson." "Yes, certainly; but---ha, ha, ha---you have proved yourself a Demosthenes." Harry did not understand the tone of voice in which this was said. The meeting immediately passed the intended [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-038.jpg) \- external link  - Page 037. ] resolutions, availing themselves of various suggestions made by Harry, and the curious " last night, you know! " of Emmerson, passed from his mind. After the adjournment, Mr. Lennox, Harry, and Emmerson were standing together, with several others, conversing, when the chairman, Mr. Lawrence, an influential leader of the politics of the state, came up, and shaking Harry warmly by the hand, acknowledged in strong terms the pleasure he had received from his address. "You must sup with me," he added, "you and your father. I have something of importance to say to you." "To be sure---to be sure," said Mr. Lennox; "and as for my Harry, I tell you what, that young gentleman is destined to be, one of these days, the ornament of whatever office he chooses to desire. You don't know that boy." "I hope he knows you, sir," said Harry, modestly, "or else he will mistake the language of your heart for that of your judgment." "Why, you impertinent young dog, what do you mean by that?" "It's all very well, sir---it's all very well, sir," said the pompous Holford, rubbing his hands, and assuming a look of dignity, which did not hide his vexation and jealousy. "These boys just out of college are full of fine words, but we want a knowledge of things! " "We do indeed---at least some of us ," said Lennox, with an emphasis. "They've missed the most important resolution, sir---the most important, sir, by far!" said Holford. "I rarely address promiscuous public meetings: I have other and more important duties. But the resolution omitted spoils everything, sir---spoils everything! I'm sorry I spoke. The meeting will do more harm than good. I'll be d---d if I don't regret I have appeared at it." "If that be an error, as perhaps it is," said Mr. Lennox, coolly, "you will have an opportunity to repair it on future occasions." "I didn't address my remark to you, sir." "I addressed mine to you, Mr. Holford." "Come, gentlemen, my supper will be cold," said Mr. Lawrence. "Mr. Lennox, and you, sir" (to Harry), "you must not give us the slip. I have something to propose to you." [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-039.jpg) \- external link  - Page 038. ] He added no other one to the party, and Emmerson silently withdrew. They repaired to the house of their host, where the supper-table was already spread. The ladies of the family, after a gay half hour, retired, and the gentlemen were left to discuss subjects which exclusively interested them. It was at once suggested by Mr. Lawrence that Harry should accept an early seat in Congress. "Well," said his father, "what say you? As you don't appear wanting in the valuable gift of speech, you can answer for yourself, I suppose." "I think," said Harry, "it requires time for reflection; but I should, of course, be guided by your wishes, if I remain in America." "Remain in America! Why, where the devil do you expect to remain?" "I have had some desire lately to go abroad." "What! a short tour, eh?" said Lawrence. "A tour, but not a short one." "May I ask what you mean?" said his father. "You have the intention of going abroad for a long time?" "Yes, sir; a plan which, with your approbation, would be a very pleasant thing for me." "What! leave us, Harry? Spend half a dozen years abroad, and come back at last to find some old sexton, who sings while he works, coolly pointing out our respective graves: `Mrs. Lennox's, sir!' `Miss Mary's, sir!' `The old gentleman's, sir---that one with the flowers!' Is that what you call `very pleasant,' with my approbation?" "My dear father, I did not intend to discuss the point with you---at least not here; but, in respect to the seat in Congress, I scarcely feel myself able---" "Nonsense!" said Mr. Lawrence. "You are only a boy. If every one had your modesty, where should we find men to make up our tickets? You'll meet there (for I never flatter , young gentleman) men infinitely above you in learning and mind, to equal whom you might with profit spend all the years of your life, and be satisfied if you half attained your object." "I am fully aware of it, and that is why, or one reason why, I hesitate." "But," continued Mr. Lawrence, "you will find yet more inferior to you in all these respects---men who do not [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-040.jpg) \- external link  - Page 039. ] hesitate, on that account, to take place among legislators and statesmen." "Fill your neighbour's glass," said Mr. Lennox---"(I beg your pardon, Lawrence; I make myself at home, you see), and then your own, and let me, if you please, hear no more of your going abroad at present. As for the seat in Congress, I shall state at once my views. If I were as rich as I ought to be, and could leave you, and your brother and sister, a hundred or two thousand dollars each, after having handsomely provided for your mother, I might, perhaps, feel a pride in seeing you take your place, where your talents" (Mr. Lennox always said what he thought) "could not fail to be of service to your country, and to reflect a lustre on your and my name." "Bravo!" said Lawrence. "But I am not such a Croesus as you appear to suppose. Do you know how much I am worth?" "No, sir." "Well, just enough to provide, in case of my sudden death, a decent independence for your mother, and another for your sister, who must be portioned like a sweet girl and a gentleman's daughter as she is." "I hope so." "Then there's Frank. He has chosen a profession where, even if he be not ingloriously scalped to begin with, he will have no great opportunity to amass a fortune. His expenses are great, his pay scandalously small, his danger not inconsiderable, his chance of glory quite so. Yet he must live like a gentleman. He has the tastes, habits, and feelings of one; and where is he going to get a fortune if I don't leave him one?" "Very true!" "But, my good friend," said the benevolent Mr. Lawrence, amused and interested by this glimpse of a family scene, "if you leave all your property to your other children, what remains for Harry?" "I have given him a first-rate education. He is fully fitted to go forth into life. He is a scholar and a gentleman, and, what is equally to our present purpose, a superior lawyer. If he attend to business, the honourable profession to which he belongs, and of which he can easily become a most distinguished member, as you may see by his display this evening, will be to him, in twenty years, an ample [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-041.jpg) \- external link  - Page 040. ] fortune. Should he then wish it, and he will still be a boy---" "Your ideas of boyhood," said Harry, "are rather comprehensive." "Hold your tongue, sir! If he then desire to descend to politics, why, he does it, at least, with the advantage, that if he fail, he has a place to stand on and a hole to creep into. Politics undertaken from the hope of pecuniary gain, or the more selfish ambition after place and power, cannot fail to deprave the moral character as much as it must injure and pervert the mind and destroy the reputation." "True, very true," said Lawrence. "There's Holford now," continued Lennox, his fine face beaming with the contempt he felt for everything mean, "a mere ass! an empty demagogue! as ready to do any dirty work as a street scavenger. He was always a paltry fellow, for I knew him at school; but had he adopted a more noble scheme of life, he might have enlarged and enriched his mind with knowledge, and perhaps redeemed his character. But watch the course of that man, and you shall see that every year will make him less particular in his actions and less honest in his opinions. Age will overtake him in the exercise of all his lower faculties and meaner passions, and while, perhaps, he may succeed in his exterior designs, for such characters often do, he will do so, not only at the sacrifice of his honour, but at last of his fame and happiness. He will be obliged to resort to discreditable tricks for advancement, and to perform degrading tasks without reference to the delicacy of a gentleman or the duty of a man of honour. Having started an ass, he will never have time to make anything more of himself, till at last the conviction that pure and noble things are unattainable by him will cause him to despise them, pecuniary dependance will make him a slave, and an old age of neglected insignificance and contempt will end a life of empty assumption and usurped honour." "Oh, I hope better of my old friend Holford!" said Lawrence. "He is not very strong, perhaps, in the upper story, but he has good points." "Doubtless! all men have; but I do not wish my son to resemble him. Therefore, as he has to carve his own way with his own good sword, it is time for him to know it, and to perceive the necessity of applying himself to his [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-042.jpg) \- external link  - Page 041. ] profession steadily, resolutely, and severely. I myself am not a business-man. I wish I were; but I hate business, and I shall gradually endeavour to withdraw from the office, leaving the whole toil and profit of it to you. You have Emmerson, an inestimable, unassuming man, the most honest and excellent partner in the world, and, withal, a sharp and able lawyer; one of the few who unite integrity of character, gentleness of heart, and mental ability. You and he must manage matters. In a year or so I shall begin to require a little repose, and think a tour abroad for your mother and me would be more proper than for you. Nevertheless, I am gratefully obliged to you, Lawrence, for the honour you have done this youngster, and, in his name and my own, I thank you." "I must say," said Mr. Lawrence, "that, while I regret your decision, I approve it." They separated. Harry had not distinctly followed all his father's long harangue. His reveries had wandered to the stern, beautiful face of Fanny Elton, to her cold words and flashing eyes; but he had heard enough to learn that his plan of foreign travel and foreign adventure was likely to be opposed by divers more serious objections than had at first presented themselves to his mind; that, notwithstanding the wealth of his father, he was to start in life without much benefit from it; and that, unless he were to break forcibly away from many tender ties and some sober duties, he was likely to be kept a prisoner in his native city. " Would she receive his note?" such were the thoughts which filled Harry's mind during another very love-sick ramble. "Would she answer it?" (What meant the throbbing of his heart at the idea?) "Would she comply with its request? Would she dine at his father's table to-day? Would she dine and go to the theatre the next day---his birthday---and thus acknowledge and sanction a kind of communion with him, a yielding obedience to his dictation, and a consideration for his wishes, his feelings, his [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-043.jpg) \- external link  - Page 042. ] happiness, perhaps? More! Would she accept Frank? Had she accepted him?" The peculiar relative position of the two brothers acted as a check upon their usual confidence. He had requested Frank not to touch upon that subject again. Had the latter made his offer and been rejected, he would probably have communicated his fate at once---he was under a sort of honourable obligation to do so---but if accepted, delicacy, love for his brother, embarrassment, would all combine to make him shrink from such a confidence. He had been accepted, then; or, last, faint hope! he had not yet made his offer. Had there been no doubt to be solved, perhaps he might have succeeded in diverting his thoughts from the subject; but the dinner-hour was to decide the fate of his note, and all the interest of his life now concentrated itself upon this single point. "Do you know how I'm getting on with my boys, Emmerson?" asked Lennox, of his friend, the morning after the meeting; for Lennox's communicative nature confided everything to those about him. "What new plan?" asked Emmerson, with a smile. "Time is dashing along," said Lennox. "I feel it every day more forcibly; but, when looking on these young rascals, I can't believe my own eyes. They are scarcely out of their round-jackets---at least, so it seems to me---and yet one is going to marry up to my warmest hopes, and the other---" "To marry!" echoed Emmerson, with such signs of interest as surprised even the sanguine father. "Yes, marry!" "Bless my soul," said Emmerson, fixing his keen, dark eyes upon the speaker. "Yes," continued Lennox: "I trouble you with affairs in which few men in your situation would take any interest. Yes, he is going to marry, and I am truly glad of it." "Certainly, certainly; and I suppose the lady is Miss Elton?" "It is!" "Indeed?" "Yes; I hope she will accompany him, at least for a time (although I don't know, after all, if the young dog will [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-044.jpg) \- external link  - Page 043. ] ever be content, with his views, to remain in the army), I hope she will accompany him to Prairie du Chien ." "What? Is it not your son Harry , then, who is to marry Miss Elton?" "Harry? certainly not. What put that into your head?" "Bless me! this is very unexpected, isn't it?" "Why yes; these lieutenants have a military brevity of conducting affairs which is rather edifying. I only heard of it myself a morning or two ago." "I fear," said Emmerson, "this union---but are you sure?" "Sure? No, not absolutely sure. It is not actually and formally settled yet between the young people, only I understand so from my wife and daughter, and from the demeanour of Miss Elton and my son. Pray, do you know anything in relation to it?" "No---yes. I was under the impression that your son Harry was---indeed," he continued, in a whisper, and looking cautiously behind and around him---"I know he is also attached to Miss Elton." "You surprise me!" "I think I may tell you all," continued Emmerson; "but you will give me your word not to reveal it." "I assure you it shall go no farther." "Then I have reason to know Harry is attached to Miss Elton. She is also attached to him. Any difference between them must be but some lover's quarrel. Perhaps the young lady is going to take a step from pique , which will sacrifice the future happiness of both herself and Harry, as well as that of Frank, who would not like to wake from his dream of happiness to discover his wife in reality attached to another." "You distress me beyond measure," said Mr. Lennox. "I am sure Frank loves her; but I am infinitely obliged to you. This must be looked into. I am really infinitely obliged to you." "I should not be willing to intrude my interference into such a delicate matter," said Emmerson, "but---" "I know, I know; nor shall you suffer by such disinterestedness." "I must repeat, however, that what I say is under the seal of secrecy. You know what these young people are! you know what friends and relations are in these cases! You know what love affairs are!" [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-045.jpg) \- external link  - Page 044. ] "My dear Emmerson," said Lennox, "you may put your mind quite at rest." "I have one other thing to say, which duty will not permit my concealing. You may have observed that Harry has been of late rather irregular in his hours and habits." "Yes, yes, it has struck us all." "I met him the other night," continued Emmerson, in a pale whisper, "quite intoxicated in the street." "What, Harry?" "Harry." "I would not believe any other human being but yourself." "His love for Miss Elton, interrupted, probably, by this affair with his brother, is driving him into habits of intemperance." "I thought he was peculiarly attentive to business." "Before you," continued Emmerson, in an agitated whisper; "but I see more . His mind is shattered---his spirits gone." "But you heard him last night, how well he spoke." "Ah!" "What do you mean?" Emmerson made no reply. "What! you don't mean to say that Harry has been assisted? " "Ah!" "Have you aided him?" "Don't ask me, my dear sir; only believe me, I have no motive in this disclosure but your and his good. I fear his mind is, at least at present, unfit for business. As to the young lady, I have scarcely seen---cannot say I really know her. But if you value Harry's happiness and health, you must stop this union with his brother, or delay it. I have the most sincere interest in the happiness of Harry. Such a fine young man!" "Drunk in the street!" said Lennox; "yet that I could forgive. Shakspeare says, `any man may be drunk some time of his life;' but a mean use of another's talents---parading in borrowed plumage like a peacock, and yet not like a peacock either---for he has, at least, his own gaudy feathers to strut in." "He is but a boy, that will come right in time! I can't say he borrowed from me. We only spoke together on the subject!" said Emmerson. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-046.jpg) \- external link  - Page 045. ] "I don't recognise Harry in this at all." "You had better not say anything to him, however; rather leave it to time." "And what do you advise?" "To send Frank off for some years---he is, in fact, too young to marry---and see what time will do. Perhaps a voyage for Harry also would be of use. These young folks very easily take new impressions." "I really supposed Harry very much above anything of this sort. Do you know he has had the offer of a seat in Congress?" "Ah!" said Emmerson. "Mr. Lawrence, I suppose?" "Yes." "You know this Mr. Lawrence?" "Know him? Who? Lawrence?" "Certainly." "A nice, benevolent man, but---" "Why, Lawrence is one of the noblest fellows!" "Ah! that's as people think. I have nothing against him personally; but I have heard curious things." "But Harry! This is a painful discovery. Why, he is not fit to marry that sweet girl; he is not worthy of her. Poor Frank!" "We must not be too severe on him," said Emmerson. "Does he know you are aware of his attachment to Miss Elton?" asked Mr. Lennox. "Not a word," said Emmerson, in another whisper. "And how did you discover it, if not from him?" "I overheard him telling her so one afternoon when they thought themselves alone. The door was ajar; I was passing along the entry, and could not help hearing." This was also said in a whisper, close to the ear of Lennox, and with an expression of face so agitated that Lennox could not but be struck with it. "Why, that's nothing so very terrible, my good friend," replied the father, smiling. "It's no more than most men have done at some time of their lives or other." "Oh, certainly," said Emmerson; "but I only want you to see I am not mistaken in my opinion." Mr. Lennox had the utmost confidence in his son, but this intimation of plagiarism, thus reluctantly and accidentally drawn forth, made a very disagreeable impression on his mind. In the irreproachable Emmerson he believed he [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-047.jpg) \- external link  - Page 046. ] had found perfect disinterestedness united with unusual penetration, while he saw that Harry was of a character yet unformed, and exposed to all the dangerous influences which beset youth and passion. When the family assembled at dinner, Fanny was not there. Her vacant place was next Harry's. His father was silent and grave; Emmerson talkative and gay. In Frank he could not detect anything unusual, except a disposition to sink into revery. His mother was thoughtful. It was but a trifle, the absence of a young girl, who could never be anything to him; yet his faculty of self-government was so uncultivated, that he suffered during this repast a kind of pain like that of the nightmare. He dared not ask, and no one made any remark from which his curiosity could be gratified. Every time the door opened to admit a servant, the violent beating of his heart taught him how deep-seated his fever was, and he could scarcely refrain from starting up under his insupportable emotion. Her absence he could not rationally be surprised at, yet it had not been expected by him. He imagined all eyes were fixed on him, and could scarcely keep from giving vent, by some word or act, to the feelings which swelled his breast, yet he went on eating like one in a dream. The door opened, and a servant presented a note to Mr. Lennox, who read it and handed it to Mrs. Lennox. "Miss Elton, feeling herself still indisposed, begs Mrs. Lennox to excuse her from dinner to-day." "I hope Fanny is not going to be ill," was all his mother remarked, and they separated without any other recurrence to the subject. "So! she is, after all, cold and selfish. She will not come. She will betray her power and my unrequited love. She wishes to do so. She feels a pride in it. She is, after all, a commonplace girl, a coquette, trifling with me, laughing at me, ten chances to one. They will ask her, at length, respecting the change in her conduct. She will answer, with seeming reluctance, `To save myself from the importunate addresses of your son.' And this is a woman! How true the poet: " `Most women have no character at all.' Her beauty makes her vain. Her very sensibility makes [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-048.jpg) \- external link  - Page 047. ] her go too far. Her ambition on earth is to subdue man, her master. I swear the libertine, who revenges himself on her sex, is not so bad, after all. "I must go, then. I must leave my father's house. Not a message---not a word---not a line! Then farewell, country and friends; farewell, prospects, ambition, study, perhaps life. And what difference does it make? Since happiness is a dream, life must be a curse." A very equivocal piece of reasoning. But men of twenty and men at forty take different views of things. The next day was Harry's birthday. He did not spend the morning in the office, as usual, but absented himself in the indulgence of his love of solitude. His father, when he saw him, looked grave, but said nothing. For the first time a cloud had come between them, and both were conscious of it. The dinner-hour at length arrived, and with it the company. He was early in the drawing-room, and felt calmer than usual, for his resolution was taken to go abroad, if not with, then without his father's approbation. But few guests were expected, and they punctually came. Mr. Emmerson was among the first, who blandly made his congratulation. He was speedily followed by Henderson, the brother of Mrs. Lennox, and his wife. At length came Mr. and Mrs. Elton, and with them, to the extreme astonishment of Harry--- for such an event had not once entered his thoughts--- Fanny! Every one expressed surprise. She was received with such a burst of affectionate welcome by all the family that both her confusion, if she felt any, and that of Harry were safe from observation. "My dearest Fanny! this is so unexpected after your severe illness yesterday." "She would come," said her mother; "we did all we could to keep her at home; but those young girls are such unaccountable beings. The other day she would not come [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-049.jpg) \- external link  - Page 048. ] when all persuaded her to do so; now, for my part, it reminds me of---" Mrs. Elton was a talker, and she went on with a much longer series of observations, which, however, were only collateral to the conversation of the rest of the company. Mr. Elton and she, however, both came up to Harry to shake hands with him, and to congratulate him upon the occurrence of this happy festival, and to wish him a thousand returns. "A thousand would be rather more than my share!" said he, with all the gayety he could assume. And then Fanny came forward to the old friend of her childhood, and frankly gave him her hand. He took it, poor fellow, and held it a moment in his, while he listened to the few words she said, all the rest being engaged talking together. "I also congratulate you, Mr. Lennox," said she, "and hope you may pass many and yet more happy birthdays, surrounded by all who love you and whom you love." She was pale, and her face and voice betrayed debility and illness; but her manner was full of its usual gentleness and calmness. "You have been ill, I fear, Miss Elton?" "Yesterday and the day before, very." "And how could you venture out to-day?" Their eyes met. That look was full of reproach, mingled with the least possible scorn. "But of course you do not go to the theatre this evening?" "Oh yes. The party is made up. I feel much better, and think it will do me good. You know I am as great an admirer of Horn as you are." " I shall not be able, I fear, to hear him to-night," said Harry, in a low voice. "Fanny! my dear Fanny!" said Mary, looking her tenderly full in the face, and passing her arm around her waist to press her to her bosom. "And did I dare to believe you were not really ill? I shall never forgive myself." The dinner was announced. Frank led in Fanny. There was a vacant seat next hers when Harry passed round; but he went on, and took a place at the other end of the table, between Mr. Henderson and Emmerson, more in love than [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-050.jpg) \- external link  - Page 049. ] ever, hating and despising himself, yearning to pursue at leisure the new thoughts which thronged on him, and yet resolved to tear her from his heart, cost what it might, or else to tear himself away; for this vicinity to her, these exposures to interviews with her, this necessity of feigned familiarity, so dangerous and enervating to his resolution, he saw plainly were beyond his power to resist. "So you're going to take Fanny to the theatre with you this evening?" said Elton. "I don't half like it." "When your consent is asked, my good friend," said Mr. Lennox, "it will be time enough to express an objection. I rather think it the present intention of the party to take her, whether you like it or not." "My dear Mr. Lennox," said Mrs. Elton, "I really admire your address. I have been trying all kinds of ways to persuade Mr. Elton to allow of her going, and I do not think he had made up his mind; but you put the question at rest. I had already---" "Fanny is not looking well just now. I don't know what's the matter with her," said Mr. Elton; "the day before yesterday she fainted: she never did such a silly thing before in her life. I don't know what to make of it." Harry stole a glance at her---her eyes were drooped thoughtfully down---he felt like a scoundrel. "I shall take care she sha'n't faint again!" said Lennox. "I should like to know how you'll do that; besides, you know, I am no friend to theatres at all." "My husband is too strict on that and a great many other points," said Mrs. Elton. "I am not of his opinion, however. I think the mind that is pure is pure everywhere, and certainly, were I to---" "So thought your amiable ancestor Eve," said Elton; "yet it would have been quite as well for her, and us too, if she had stayed by her husband's side, and not gone off where she had no business to be." "As for me," said Mrs. Elton, who always interrupted everybody, and never stopped till she was interrupted herself, and generally not even then, talking over her competitors with the greatest good-humour in the world, and not the least idea of what she was doing, "I think much may be learned at the theatre, and there can be no reason to fear anything. I know, when I was a girl---" [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-051.jpg) \- external link  - Page 050. ] "Much may be learned everywhere," said her husband, gravely; "but sometimes the lessons cost too much." "And I know," continued Mrs. Elton, without stopping, "that when I was a girl, my father used to take me often and often, and really, my dear Mrs. Lennox, I cannot discover that I am any the worse for it. For why should---" and she went on with her argument. "She shall go to-night, as she and you wish it," said her father; "for she is a good girl, and I don't mean to disappoint her; but, as a general thing, I think theatres objectionable." "Did any man ever hear such nonsense!" said Mr. Lennox. "Theatres are a delightful recreation. The language is improved, the mind restored to its good-humoured elasticity after labour and chagrin, and home is never more delightful than after returning from such pleasures abroad. I have always brought up my children to---" "And as for me," interrupted Mrs. Elton, "I could never be of the opinion that young people were better for being kept in ignorance of life. If I had sons, I should send them everywhere all alone, never mind, be as wild as they might. Better let off their wildness in youth than have it when they're old. Now, do you know, there's Mr. Franklin, our excellent friend, you know, my dear Mrs. Lennox, they say, when he was a young gentleman---" "For to-day," said Mr. Elton, "I yield; but, miss, hereafter we shall be a little more strict." "I have got excellent seats," said Harry, anxious to say something; "you will have the Wilmingtons in the next box." "Ha! ha! ha!" said his father, "that is an odd piece of logic. You have got excellent seats, we shall have the Wilmingtons in the next box; as if the vicinity of the Wilmingtons made the seats any better, particularly the old fellow, a sneaking, sly, creeping scoundrel, who would desert his best friend in the hour of need, if he could save sixpence by it." "My dear husband!" said Mrs. Lennox, in a deprecatory tone of voice. "Mr. Wilmington is a good man!" said Henderson. "Good? Oh, excellent! in old Shylock's sense of the word," said Lennox, "but in that only. Why, sir?" "My dear husband," said Mrs. Lennox, "I won't have [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-052.jpg) \- external link  - Page 051. ] you going on in this way about people whom you dislike merely because they don't exactly act up to your idea of what is right, and for the sake of his wife I always like him." "Yes, certainly, she's well enough; a nice little body---" "Nice little body! She's a very sweet woman." "I'm sure," said Mrs. Henderson, who seemed to be rather a dry lady, with an expression of face as if she felt a sort of malicious envy for every one and everything she saw, "I'm sure I ought not to speak against her, for she's been uncommonly polite and kind to me , but she is a very odd person! I don't know what to make of her; she pleases at first sight, but when you come to know her more \---" "Frank is saying the most extraordinary things to Miss Elton," interrupted Mary. "What's the matter now?" said Lennox. "We, like you, have been conversing on the merits of Mrs. Wilmington, and on my saying, among various other causes why I admired her, that I liked her because she was so fond of Fanny, Mr. Frank takes it upon himself to exclaim, in the most rude way, he thinks that must be allowed to be among the least of her merits! " "How, sir?" said his father; "I will thank you to explain what you mean by that!" "Really, Frank," said his mother, laughing, "I don't know how Miss Elton may take such a speech, but I should demand a written apology." "Mary knows, and I hope Miss Elton also, perfectly what I mean: I mean that it's no merit to admire Miss Elton ," said Frank. This lucid explanation produced a general laugh, and even Miss Elton turned her eyes on him with a look of amusement, not quite unmingled with surprise, which added to the dilemma of the poor fellow. "I hope you also do not pretend to misunderstand me," said he to Miss Elton. "Upon my word," said Fanny, "the only meaning I can find is, you don't think better of any one for liking me ." "Well, that is exactly what I meant," said Frank. But the expression of politeness in his face so much contradicted the apparent meaning of his words, that Miss Elton could not herself help joining in the renewed mirth of the table. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-053.jpg) \- external link  - Page 052. ] "Ah, Frank, my boy," said Mr. Elton, "you are a bad beau, but I don't think the worse of you for that." "If that's the way you pay compliments!" said his mother. "You never heard a gentleman, or a person pretending to be a gentleman, speak his mind so plainly to you before, Fanny," said Mary. "Frank in name and frank in nature," said Emmerson. "You are all very dull if you really do not understand the idea I meant to express," said Frank. "Nonsense," said Harry, "they understand you very well, Frank; they are only laughing at you for being so unsophisticated." "No, upon my soul," said his father, "I don't understand at all, and I beg you to explain yourself at full. Come, we're all attention." "They were praising Mrs. Wilmington," said Frank, "for a variety of virtues. She speaks the truth. Well! that is a virtue. She is of a gentle disposition. Well! that also is a virtue. She is charitable, graceful, handsome. Well! it may be said we like her the better for all that sort of thing. But her friendship for, her attachment to, her admiration of, Miss Elton, is a thing which---since everybody--- who---as---" The burst of laughter which greeted this regular breakdown appeared to distress Frank as much as it offended him. He coloured, pushed back the chair, and was apparently about to leave the table. "Frank!" said his father. "Sir." "Stop!" To that voice he had ever been taught implicit obedience. "Sit still. Where are you going?" "You can scarcely be surprised," said Frank, forcing himself into a sort of gayety, "if I withdraw from a circle where I have not the power of making myself understood." "Hold your tongue. Sit still. You are not a boy." "I don't know," said Fanny, archly, looking at him with an expression of almost affection, which at least compensated for her share in bringing down on him this reproof; "I'm afraid---" "How will you get through life," said his father, "with such a quick temper as that? Learn that it is the first duty [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-054.jpg) \- external link  - Page 053. ] and the highest accomplishment of a gentleman always to keep his temper, particularly in the presence of ladies." Frank did not appear altogether to relish this lecture, and before Miss Elton, too; but there was something in his father's manner at once playful and firm, which took off the asperity of command without lessening its power. "I tell you what, Frank," said his mother, "we must lay a penalty on you for this outrageous attack on Miss Elton." "Fifty years ago," said Elton, "you would have been obliged to drink a gallon of wine, or brandy perhaps; but we are past that, I hope." "Let him explain his meaning to Miss Elton herself in a poem," said Harry, generously coming to the aid of his successful rival, as he now considered him, for he had seen the look cast on him by her. "Excellent!" said Mary. "You are condemned to write an impromptu ." "Yes," said Mr. Lennox; "an extempore-metaphysicotragico---" "Comico---" interrupted Miss Elton, with another look. "Explanatory poem," continued Mr. Lennox, "before we leave this house for the theatre. The company shall assemble ten minutes earlier, to hear the document publicly read." "By me," said Mary; "for I suppose the repentant author will be too much overcome to read it himself. There, Frank, you can go into the next room; you will find my desk, and pen, ink, and paper." "Decreed!" said Lennox. "The punishment is severe," said Frank, "if, indeed, the terms are not impossible; but I have no alternative, and if Miss Elton will accept such an expiation of my unfortunate attempt at a compliment, I will do my best; only she must pity and forgive me." "Do so," said Miss Elton; "you have my forgiveness, but not my compassion. I can never pity a gentleman in any dilemma caused by attempting a compliment." "Why, what a horrible little tyrant you are!" said Mr. Lennox, as the company rose, pinching her cheek, till one, at least, wore its usual healthy colour. "Oh! you hurt me," said she. "You're worse than Frank, a great deal." "And they have even had the impudence," said Mrs. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-055.jpg) \- external link  - Page 054. ] Elton, who had been all this while talking away upon various subjects not in the least connected with that which occupied the rest of the company---"they have even had the impudence, do you know, my dear Mrs. Lennox, to say that he did not know how to spell." "He! Who?" said Mrs. Lennox. "Why, General Washington, notwithstanding manuscripts of his own, which certainly ought to put the question---" They all retired, and the door closed upon the company, till Mrs. Elton's voice was lost to Frank's ear, like the unceasing gurgling of some persevering little mountain stream which forever fills the wood with its music. For to him it was music, not only because she was one of the kindest-hearted, most excellent, and noble women in the world, full of sunshine and love to every human creature, and every other creature, too; and not only because she talked well and always generously of every one, and particularly of the absent, but because, still handsome and stately in her person, and really beautiful in countenance, there could be traced in her face some resemblance to the young lady who just at this moment had nearly driven him crazy. As soon as his tormentors had fairly left him, and his gay, audacious father had dared to touch that cheek---which, had any one else done it, might have induced the enamoured boy to throw him out of the window at least---and as soon as he found himself in quiet and solitary possession of the apartment, and had spent some moments envying the carpet which had been pressed by her foot, wishing himself the air she breathed, and other various matters, which all that part of our readers who have actually felt true love in early youth will understand without farther description, and all that part who have not will set down as the most absurd nonsense possible, and the mere idle invention of fancy--- he began to reflect that the sooner the poetry was commenced the sooner it would be finished, and the sooner it was finished, the sooner he would stand a chance of feeling to his trembling heart one more of those looks which made it ache with happiness so. Seizing, therefore, pen and ink, and a sheet of paper, which happened to be at hand, without waiting to go into the next room, which his sister had designated, he began to rack his imagination to comply with [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-056.jpg) \- external link  - Page 055. ] the conditions of his punishment. Harry knew he wrote poetry with ease and sweetness, and had made the proposal in the hope of at once extricating him from the rebuke of his father and the merriment of the company, and of affording him an occasion, if, indeed, he had not yet found one, to declare to the object of his love something of the state of his mind. An impromptu would have been no difficult matter under any other circumstances, or even now, perhaps, if it were to be read by Fanny alone. But the desire to do something particularly fine was a heavy drawback upon his inspiration, and the wish to say something significant to her, and yet in which the uninitiated should be able to find only a commonplace piece of politeness---these were sad labours, before which Hercules, Sisyphus, and other ancient gentlemen might have paused. He pressed his forehead between the thumb and finger of his left hand, contracted his brow, threw himself back in his chair with his eyes fixed, sometimes on the ceiling and sometimes on the floor, and impatiently dipped his pen full of ink, and shook it as impatiently out again, to the occasional damage of his facetious papa's splendid mahogany dining-table, and after the universal fashion of poets in the composition of the flowing impromptu. It was, however, for a long time in vain. He wrote---erased---wrote again--- tore off---chewed up and filliped out of the window, in the shape of ingeniously-formed little balls, several invocations of uncommon elegance and deep pathos, but whose merit was impaired by the peculiarity of their not going farther than the first two lines. Rather red in the face (for, if anything can add to the sensations of a man publicly forced upon an impromptu, it is being obliged to execute the same immediately after a hearty dinner; an event so unusual in the life of most true poets, that the muse seems to fly at the very idea), he murmured over what he had written in a low, declamatory tone. Oh thou! whose dark eyes, half life and half fire, commandest (erasure)---compellest (erasure)---conferrest--- "Ah, bah!" He turned the sheet upside down, and commenced on the top of the other page in a new metre. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-057.jpg) \- external link  - Page 056. ] When Beauty speaks the sweet command To pour the glowing line; When mischief and when malice, and, Sweet maid---the look divine---the heavenly wine---immortal wine---shine---refine---mine---whose soul once mine. "Ah, bah! was ever anything so stupid?" When mischief, and when malice, and--- Ah, ha!" When innocence combine To force the feeble poet's hand--- "Feeble poet indeed!" Upon the trembling lyre--- "That'll never do---heighho! Let us try it again." And, as if caught by a new idea, he went on writing for a few moments very fluently. "There," said he, after having finished something which he liked better, "that'll do; but, bless me, the theatre commences at seven: it's now six o'clock, and---hallo! what the devil's that?" The last exclamation was called forth by the discovery of something on the floor. It was a glove. He rose and approached it. He recognised it in a moment. It was Miss Elton's, and it still wore the shape of her hand and breathed the incense of her presence. With a not unnatural impulse, he raised it to his lips and printed upon it an impassioned kiss. "This at least," murmured he, "sweet girl! I will bear away in spite of fate." A slight rustling behind him caused him to turn suddenly, and Miss Elton herself stood before him, fully betraying, by her look of embarrassment and surprise, that she had been the witness of this tender folly. She would have withdrawn hastily, but the bold and ardent boy placed himself between her and the door, and seized her hand with the gentleness of a lover, but the firm determination of a man. "Stay! dear Fanny, stay!" "I beg you, Frank---what nonsense is this? Give me my glove and let me go. They are waiting for me." "No, Miss Elton; why should you avoid what I wish to tell you? and why should I conceal what you have already discovered?" "My dearest Frank, what a child you are! Give me the glove and let me go. You don't wish to make me angry, I hope?" [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-058.jpg) \- external link  - Page 057. ] "Fanny, I love you. I am serious---I am sincere. Be so yourself. I love you to distraction, and can never be happy without you." "What folly! what a freak is this? Frank! Mr. Lennox! indeed, let me go---" "One moment, Fanny, hear me; and, as you value my happiness, answer me, can you love me? will you be mine?" "My dear Frank! love you? Let me go! to be sure I do, most sincerely. No friend, no brother, could ever be dearer." "No brother! you cruel girl! can you trifle with me at a moment when---" "You astonish and distress me, Frank. Consider, if any one should come; what do you mean by detaining me so?" "I mean that I love you, seriously, passionately---that I am about leaving New-York for many years, and that I will not go without learning from your lips whether the long and ardent attachment I entertain for you is, or can ever be, requited." "Frank, this is foolish---ridiculous---impossible. I request you to release me." The blush faded from her cheek, and she lifted her eyes gravely, almost coldly upon his. Startled by her tone, the reserve, the dignity of her manner, and the expression of her face, the young man released her hand, and bent his eyes inquiringly and reproachfully upon her. "Let me leave you, Mr. Lennox, and forget this moment, as I shall." "No, Miss Elton," said Frank, firmly, "I shall neither forget this moment nor suffer you to leave me willingly without at least once earnestly repeating the declaration I have made and the question I have asked." "You are a foolish boy," said Miss Elton, "and have been taking too much wine, I believe!" "I have told you I love you," said Frank, very seriously. "I am not trifling, and I request a reply. It is important I should know. I have no right to coerce your affections, but I have a right to ask if they are mine. As for your accusation of having taken too much wine, I presume you are jesting. I am not." "I feel for you so much friendship, such a sister's love, my dear Frank," said Fanny, "that I cannot, without both [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-059.jpg) \- external link  - Page 058. ] pain and embarrassment, answer you seriously, or believe at all that a demand so unexpected is intended to be seriously answered." And then she added in a different tone, and extending her hand, while moisture glistened in her eyes, "You foolish---foolish boy! how came you ever to have such a thought in your head? You are too young, ardent, and susceptible to know what will ultimately be your choice. Leave this subject forever. Your friend I hope always to remain; your wife I can never be ." "Miss Elton," said Frank, haughtily, but tears gushed to his eyes and grief choked his words, and he murmured in accents of deepest tenderness, "Dearest Fanny, do not inflict upon me the agony you are now doing, without an unalterable cause. If you have never felt towards me any return for the enduring and tender love I shall never cease to entertain for you, wait and see whether time and my devotion may not inspire you with it. Answer me, but pause before you do so. I am young, I know, but who, capable of loving, will count a few months? You have several times called me a boy. I am not one, believe me. If years can ever bestow upon me strength to love or passion to suffer, believe me---believe me, I possess them now." "Mr. Lennox," replied Fanny, after a pause, "you take this too seriously. Hear me calmly." "I will, I will; but whatever you have to say of the present, oh leave the future to decide for itself. Give me one beam of hope that you may hereafter become my wife, when, at least, I shall have made myself worthy of you." "You are worthy of me now, more than worthy," said Fanny, greatly affected; "but I never can be your wife, and I have listened so long, dear Frank, only to end forever all such thoughts. I sincerely value your friendship. Do not withdraw it because I reply firmly, and without appeal, to your love. Hope nothing from the future . I never can love you. I never will--- I never can become your wife ." Much affected by her gentleness, her beauty, her grace, and her tears---subdued, overmastered---he lifted his pale face to hers, and presented her his hand. "I bow to your decision, Miss Elton. I will never address you as a lover again. Simple friendship I cannot certainly render you; but, while I shall always love you [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-060.jpg) \- external link  - Page 059. ] devotedly, you shall find me as careful of the feelings which you have now made me acquainted with, as if you were"--- and his voice trembled as he spoke---"already the wife of another." "Noble, generous Frank!" said she, giving her hand, "you merit a better and a happier heart." "Go, then, Miss Elton! for I check the terms of endearment which rise to my lips; go! may God bless you! I shall never cease to love and respect you; and should you ever stand in need of a friend to shed his life's blood in your cause---" "I should not hesitate a moment, dear Frank, to call on you. And be sure, on my part, no recollection of this scene shall remain but the admiration of your noble magnanimity and manly self-government. Good-by, dear Frank." She left the room; but the moment she was gone, relieved from the sense of her beauty and the enchantment of her manner, Frank began to feel indignation and wounded vanity come to his aid. "She's a little, impertinent, unfeeling coquette, who has gained all and given nothing in return. A capricious, insufferable jilt!---that's what she is. I have not the slightest doubt she's laughing at me heartily at this very moment. What a simple shepherd I am, to be sure. By Heaven! I wonder I did not see through her. But if she thinks she's going to break my heart, she shall find herself finely mistaken. She shall never see the shadow, no, not the shadow of a shadow on my brow." He sat down, lighted a cigar, and lost himself in reflections which, notwithstanding his stoical resolution, brought a very black shadow to his brow. At length, puffing away, his eyes occasionally full of tears, which glittered through heavy clouds of smoke, he brought his cigar to a premature conclusion just as Harry came in. "Hallo!" said Frank. "Well, what's the matter?" "The deed is done." "What deed?" "My deed! I have offered myself to Miss Fanny Elton. like an ass." "Well?" "And am rejected, as if I had, indeed, been that elegant and long-enduring animal." [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-061.jpg) \- external link  - Page 060. ] "You don't mean to say," cried Harry, with a singular feeling, not joy, but certainly not grief, "that Miss Elton has refused you? " "No! I don't mean to say it, if I can help it, at least to any one but yourself; but I mean to say it to you, and I hereby make the satisfactory disclosure, in return for the little, polite confidence you have been so obliging as to make me, somewhat in the same line. It seems Miss Elton is difficult. By heavens! she not only rejected me, but she wound me round her finger as if I had been a child of six, scolded me for my folly and impertinence, and explained the impropriety of my conduct in the clearest manner. I think we've been rather jilted, Harry. Why! where the devil is the fellow? He's off too! agreeable family I've got into! No matter: I'm young, as she very correctly observed. But there's an old adage she did not repeat, though I swear I thought once she was going to do so, viz., `There's as good fish in the sea as ever came out of it!' and---ah, Fanny!" said he, as the affectation of this flippancy became too much for him, "I'm a villain to wrong you with one light thought." While the poor fellow, who had sat down in an attitude of deep reflection, was thus agitated with a (to be sure, somewhat miniature) tempest of love and despair, the door of the adjoining drawing-room was suddenly burst open, and in came Mrs. Elton, talking as hard as she could possibly talk, followed by Mr. Lennox and Mrs. Lennox, laughing heartily at something which appeared to have been already said by somebody, and Elton, exclaiming with a benevolent harshness, "Now, sir, we've come to arrest you for your debt," and Emmerson, gliding in softly behind the rest, with an uneasy expression on his brow, and the only silent one in the company, and Mary, actually dragging in the blushing and yet (if any one had taken the trouble to observe her, they might have seen) obviously distressed Fanny, and Mr. Henderson, saying something to his wife, who, without listening to him in the least, was saying something to him. Such a noise, to be sure! and so sudden was the irruption, and they all made so quickly for Frank, as he sat leaning his elbows on the table and his face on his hands, with the inkstand and pen significantly beside him, and two or three sheets of paper, all scribbled over with broken lines and great black erasures, scattered about, and one sheet lying before him, which he had quite forgotten, with a small poem fairly written out, headed, in large, flowing letters, [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-062.jpg) \- external link  - Page 061. ] " To Miss Elton ." As this clamorous apparition broke upon his solitary meditations, Frank started up with such a look of serious amazement, that those who had not laughed before laughed now, and those who had, laughed yet louder. "There he is! There's the lieutenant!" said his father. "Ha! ha! ha! reposing after his toils." "Now then!" exclaimed his mother, "for the `warrior bard!"' "Come, Frank, produce! bring forth! which is it?" cried Mary, laughing. "Which is it?" echoed Elton. "Here are a dozen at least." "This is the one," cried Mrs. Elton. "See! look! To Miss Fanny Elton  ." "He really has done sixteen lines," remarked Henderson. "I'll read it," said Mrs. Elton. "No, I"---"No, let me," cried several voices. But Frank had snatched up the paper when he recollected himself. "I beg your pardon," said he, with dignity, which seemed to amuse every one wonderfully; "it is not finished. I beg---I request another time." "Read it, then, yourself," said his mother. "No." "Frank," cried his father, "give it up this moment. Do you dare to back out---to trifle with the feelings of the public in this way?" "It is not fit to read." "Give it me, sir." Frank obeyed. "We'll forgive your blushes; in a young lieutenant, with such a furious pair of whiskers as yours, they're rather interesting than otherwise. But the penalty must be paid; it's a debt of honour to a lady. Odds hearts and darts, as Bob Acres would say, the thing's inevitable." "Well, let me go out, then," said Frank, blushing deeply. "Not a step. Elton, mind the door. I declare military law. See that Miss Elton does not escape, some of you. She seems also disposed to desert. Attention! now, in the court. Officer, keep silence. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-063.jpg) \- external link  - Page 062. ] " To Miss Fanny Elton . "When Beauty speaks the sweet command, To pour the glowing---" "That's the wrong one," said Frank, with something very like drops of perspiration on his forehead. "What! are there two?" "I've no doubt the poor fellow has written twenty," said Mary. "Well! let us see. He shall have only justice and his bond ." "Please to let me off," said Frank, earnestly. "No, sir. Officer, keep silence there," cried Mr. Lennex. "To pour the glowing line---" "Pour a line? Why, what sort of a process is that, Frank? You might as well say `write a glass of punch!"' "Read the other one," said Mrs. Lennox, observing Frank's embarrassment. "Well, here it is. Hear ye! hear ye! hear ye! A flowing impromptu, composed by a young lieutenant of the great North American standing army, of five thousand men, to the eyebrow of the most beautiful, young, blushing, blueeyed lady that ever was seen. Done, after a hearty dinner, in the mansion of his distinguished parent, and read, by the delighted latter gentleman, to a select circle of the New-York nobility and gentry, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and---" "Do, for Heaven's sake, read!" said Mrs. Lennox. "In order to explain what he meant," continued Mr. Lennox, "by declaring that it was no merit to like the blueeyed, bewitching young lady, as aforesaid" The  peal of laughter with which this Frank to get the better which he did with a very looks and gesture the noisy merriment of the to a delighted but complete silence, passed his hand over his own good-humoured countenance, as if to bring down to the tone of dignified gravity required in a public reader, and proceeded as follows: " To Miss Fanny Elton . 1\. "So charming her figure, her features so fair, Her manners so gentle the while; You say all the graces reside in her air, While love lies concealed in her smile. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-064.jpg) \- external link  - Page 063. ] Whatever the charms of her form, they're excelled By the virtues that shine in the breast; And then--- she loves roses! but, surely, I find Of her merits , the last is the least . "With the best of intentions her soul is inspired; Her feelings with charity glow. For a saint, could perfections more rare be desired? And then---she loves roses also! You may praise, if you will, both her mind and her heart, If, indeed, they're so tender and true; But I ask, can they claim, as a merit , her love Of music, or roses--- or you? " "Now, what are you to do with such a young villain as that?" said Mr. Lennox. "Really, he has made it out admirably," said Mary. "Admirably?" exclaimed his father. "Why, Moore's nothing to him!" "I never heard of virtues shining in anybody's breast," whispered Mrs. Henderson to her husband. "Besides, the word charm occurs twice in the first stanza." "Poor Frank!" said his mother. "The lines are really beautiful." The whole company broke out into exclamations of admiration and delight very complimentary to the poet; but, on looking around to find where he had hidden himself, it was perceived that, taking advantage of Mr. Elton's attention to the reader, he had quietly made his escape. "No matter," said his father; "I shall insist upon criticising them before him to-morrow!" And he pinned them up in full sight against a curtain. Frank's character was lighter than his brother's. What the latter to madness almost, drove him at first of suicide, and afterward to lose the sense of his , but, nevertheless, keen despair in intoxication, only touched Frank's heart with grief, and then awakened new hopes. He had received a dismissal, too, of a very different kind from Harry's. It was gentle, affectionate almost, [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-065.jpg) \- external link  - Page 064. ] confidential, and good-humoured. He was completely convinced that Fanny had never thought of such a thing as his being in love with her. Her surprise, her pain, her earnest desire to save his feelings by throwing over the whole affair the character of a boyish frolic, and, at last, her unequivocal, explicit manner of putting the extinguisher upon his little, unexpected flame, left him no room to doubt that the young girl had acted in good faith, and that at present there was an end to his fine dreams. "But what then?" thought he. "Now she knows I love her, it will be another thing. She has supposed me a boy , it seems! I don't know what there is about me so very young , I'm sure," and he arranged his whiskers and brought them forward into a more prominent position. "I have five or six months before me. If I can't in that time succeed in changing her opinion, why, then, it will be time enough to despair." These reveries were enjoyed in the pit of the Park Theatre, whither Frank had gone to sit a while and behold the countenance of Miss Elton before he took his place by her side. The pit of the theatre has been the resort of many a mournful lover to gaze and gaze on the bright star of his worship, without boldness or the fear either of observation or interruption. He was aroused from his reveries by a touch on the shoulder. On turning he recognised Mr. Earnest, a young lawyer with whom he had a slight acquaintance. As the act curtain fell, though Frank was scarcely conscious it had been up, this gentleman addressed him to beguile the interval. He was a little fellow, with large black whiskers, piercing eyes, over-dressed, over-perfumed, with a variety of rings on his fingers, and a rather startling brooch in his cravat, which was spread voluminously out over his breast. Although Frank had met him once or twice at his father's house, where he occasionally presented himself, he scarcely considered him among his friends, and he was rather surprised at his perfect familiarity of manner. "Hallo, Frank! that you? How are you? How do you come on? What a devilish stupid thing this opera is? How disgustingly Horn sings! Isn't it very odd that the public allow themselves to be gouged in this way?" Frank did not think the opera stupid, and he admired Horn; but, not disposed for a dispute, replied only in general terms. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-066.jpg) \- external link  - Page 065. ] "If I couldn't sing better than that, I would not sing at all," resumed Earnest. "And do you sing?" "Why yes, a little! at least, I know enough of music to see the difference between what is bad and what is good. Since I have returned from abroad, I can't put up with the same fare as others. I'm not to be fobbed off with such trash as this." "Were you long abroad?" "Six months. I made the whole tour: I saw everything and everybody." "Really?" "Oh yes. I went to see, and I did see. I found the character of a stranger, a traveller, and an American, a passport everywhere." "Indeed?" "There is scarcely a thing worth seeing that I haven't seen a great man I haven't spoken with, or a sovereign I have not been presented to." "Well, as for me," said Frank, "I confess that, although I am interested in seeing great men, I have no desire to know them." "Ah! bah! they like it; it is incense to them. Besides, they are as much interested in us as we are in them, and are always glad of an opportunity of procuring living information. A conversation with an intelligent man just from the spot is worth to them a pile of musty folios or pert books of travels. Why the kings of France and of England talked with me a good half hour. Metternich kept me chatting till I was tired to death. I dined with Scott; and as for Moore, Byron, Rogers, and those fellows, by Jove! we're hand and glove together." "You must have some delightful recollections?" said Frank. "Yes, rather. But it has spoiled me for home. Everything here seems little, mean, and vulgar. I really think there is no excellence of any kind. Our great men all strike me like provincial actors to one accustomed to a metropolitan theatre. Our statesmen make long-winded, declamatory, schoolboy speeches, and take two days to say what a clever member, what, indeed, any member of the House of Commons would say in ten minutes." "Why, it seems to me," said Frank, "that such men as [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-067.jpg) \- external link  - Page 066. ] Webster and Clay are as good as others. I would not do our distinguished men such injustice as to attempt to enumerate them in a short conversation." "We have had one or two clever fellows; but I think our greatest men of the present day would be only fifth rate in England." "Well, I won't debate with you," said Frank, not sympathizing with the blind admiration of foreign things, which rendered his companion unable to see excellence abroad without denying its existence at home---the sure indication of a small mind. "Then look at our society," continued Earnest. "What a mere trumpery collection of heterogeneous material, a mere m elange , without a standard of manners or any systematic principle of exclusion or organization." "As to exclusion," said Frank, "if report and books speak truth, the highest society of Europe is not, with all its exclusiveness, free from vulgar people." "But then I feel here, as the saying is, like a cat in a strange garret," said Earnest. "I see nothing of the splendour and gorgeousness that I've been in the habit of being surrounded with. Where are our public walks? our magnificent, shady parks? our picture and sculpture galleries? Where our stately equipages? our chasseurs? our footmen with powdered hair and gold-headed canes? our men of science? our beautiful women? Going abroad has ruined me forever as an American." "Then I think," said Frank, gravely, for his love of country was not only a principle, but a feeling, "it is a great pity you did not remain at home. As for our comparative inferiority in some things, it is undeniable. In others our superiority is equally apparent. Royal parks! there are none, because there are no kings, expensive governments, and wealthy aristocracy! I cannot feel less happiness because I don't see chasseurs and footmen with powdered heads and gold canes! I believe Providence means the English should love their country and we ours, and if travel only impairs our patriotism, then travel is an evil." "I don't agree with you at all," said Earnest. " I go for truth, and I embrace the truth wherever I find it. Society exists as it is, and man, if a philosopher, wishes to see it as it is  , and not under any delusion or prejudice, amiable or unamiable. There are people who talk in the same way of [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-068.jpg) \- external link  - Page 067. ] religion. They believe because they wish to believe. If Christianity be not true, I don't wish to believe it. Do you suppose the great characters of antiquity believed in their gods, and miracles, and all that? certainly not. Give me truth! I set up for a man of sense, and I don't care who knows it. I also set up for a man of courage, moral as well as physical. I wish to see things as they are , whether the discovery be pleasing or not. I seek truth even before happiness; truth, if it mean death or annihilation after death." "Certainly," said Frank, who, during this harangue, had been leaning his face back and away as much as possible, but who was followed up close by the youthful philosopher, and greatly annoyed at finding himself entrapped into a metaphysical dispute with a person whom travelling and his own self-sufficient mind had rendered rather disgusting, "certainly, truth is the object of life, but one cannot be too guarded against illusion." "Oh yes, but I am sure I have found truth." "You're a lucky fellow." "Yes, I am, and it is travel which has opened my mind. Before I went abroad I don't think there was a greater fool to be found anywhere than I. Perhaps you remember me?" "No! I do not." "I was badly dressed, bad-mannered, and backward, without any confidence in myself, and blushing like a red cabbage when any one---particularly a lady---spoke to me. Now, egad! I have seen the world---but I am wrong. It is not travel alone which has opened my mind." "And what else is it?" "Love!" "Love?" said Frank, almost with a start. "Love," repeated Earnest. "You've no idea how you get on in that way abroad. I was in love with three married women. You know no one falls in love with any one but married women on the Continent." "No, I did not know that. I fear I am as backward as you were before you left America." "One was a countess at Vienna, one a baroness at Paris, and the third the wife of a general---a very good creature--- in Milan." "And did all these ladies return your passion?" asked Frank. "Why, that is scarcely for me to say," replied Earnest, [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-069.jpg) \- external link  - Page 068. ] modestly, "at least of all of them. They were very kind--- particularly so. If I had had time---at least I may say there were some little ` passages ' between us---ha! ha! ha! Hey? and I assure you this sort of thing has rather steeled my heart against home attacks." "Home attacks?" "Yes, the Yankee young ladies." "Really?" "Yes. Dark eyes, bright eyes, tall or short, fair or brown, tender or haughty, it's pretty much the same to me. Thank God! I have seen men , and women too, my lord, hey? and, moreover, I have seen the world. I am rich--- that is to say, I have de quoi vivre . I don't mean to marry, unless I get something very superior. Now your cousin yonder---isn't she your cousin?" "She? who?" "That devilish pretty Fanny Elton." "Miss Elton is not my cousin." "No? I thought she was. She's a devilish nice little piece, though; I say, you've no intentions that way, have you---hey?" "I? no, certainly not." "So I thought, otherwise you wouldn't be here in the pit while she was sitting in the boxes with a vacant seat beside her. Well, then, I wouldn't say anything to hurt your feelings, but since you're not carrying on operations in that quarter, I will candidly confess that I myself, at one time---" Frank turned his glance so sternly on the speaker that most men would have observed it, but Mr. Earnest was too much occupied with himself to pay much attention to others. "You see, my friends wanted me to marry. The old gentleman is getting rather rickety, and the mamma wants to see the hopeful son settled before she shoots the pit. So I did allow myself to be persuaded to look about me, and she, on the whole, appeared to be about the best thing in the market. Wherever I went it was always Fan Elton . I called to see her several times---but---" he twisted up his mouth to express the total failure of Miss Elton in her desires to please him---"it was no go! I did not exactly think she bore a close view. She's pretty---at a little distance--- but her manners are not precisely---besides---matrimony--- when one is brought to the point, you see, hey?---so I rather shied. In short, I withdrew without committing myself, [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-070.jpg) \- external link  - Page 069. ] though I fear she, poor girl! must think my abrupt clearing out very odd." Much disgusted, Frank turned away, scarcely preserving his temper sufficiently to avoid openly insulting the little puppy, whose perfect satisfaction with himself was so provoking. The curtain rose just at the moment, and the occupants of the pit, with their usual dogmatical commands of "hats off," and "down in front," arranged themselves to enjoy the drama on the stage---few dreaming what a drama was going on their side of the orchestra. For one moment the awkward possibility had flashed across Frank's mind, that there might be some truth in the representation of Earnest. Miss Elton might have refused himself and Harry in consequence of a passion for another, and that other Mr. Earnest . He was---at least some people thought him---good-looking. His features, though irregular, were rather spirituelle (or Frank fancied them so at this moment), his complexion was clear and fine, and his eyes unquestionably good. He had travelled, was rich, and reputed "a young man of talent." He certainly was a clever lawyer, a ready speaker, a spouter at public meetings, and a great ladies' man, though an inherent pertness and self-conceit could scarcely fail to repel persons of discrimination. Was it within the range of possibility that Miss Elton had---for love does sometimes play such curious pranks---fancied this youth worthy her attention? He watched with renewed interest, vexation, and delight, her face as it changed in its mobile features with the incidents on the stage---now shading over with the sadness of a tender scene---now lighted up in the enjoyment of a sweet song, and now, alas! forgetting all around her once more in her own apparently not happy reveries. The act was finished before he was well aware that it had been begun, and as the curtain fell, said Earnest, leaning over, "I say, my boy, do you know those gentlemen that have just come into your folk's box, and are sitting exactly behind Fanny?" "No." "They are English officers---stationed in Canada---here on leave of absence. I knew them in London, and have renewed the acquaintance here. The younger is Captain [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-071.jpg) \- external link  - Page 070. ] Glendenning, the other Captain White---first-rate fellows--- high bred---the very tip-top." "Indeed?" "They're here almost incog ., on a sort of frolic; go nowhere, though, if they chose only to present themselves, they would be honoured to death by our toad-eating fashionables. That Glendenning is the greatest devil that ever breathed. In London he is always getting into the most astounding scrapes. It is his passion. I should not be in the least surprised to see him walk up the aisle of a crowded church on a Sunday, take the clergyman by the nose, and walk out again. It would be just like him---exactly. And his friends have bought him into the army, and got him over to Canada, to keep him out of the way of temptation, or, at least, of disgrace in England." "I beg your pardon," said Frank; "I believe I'll go and join my party." "Just stop a moment, can't you," said Earnest, "till this big chap next you gets out? One day he rode a spirited horse directly into a crockery shop, slap! dash! crack! and nearly killed an old woman who was sitting behind the counter; and when the owner came out to remonstrate, he knocked him down senseless with the butt-end of his whip, and left him for dead, for he's as brave as Caesar---a magnificent fellow!" "Really," said Frank, "he has not the appearance of being such a desperate rascal. What were the consequences of all this to him?" "Oh! by Jove," said Earnest, "don't apply quite such plump expressions to him, or he'll knock you through some third story window one of these days. The consequences to him were nothing. He was fined five pounds, I believe, by the magistrate. He paid it, of course (he's a thousand a year), winked to his worship, and left the room. I heard, however, he made, of his own accord, a very handsome present to the poor crockery chap; for he is an excellent-hearted fellow, and just as generous as he is wild." "I should doubt the excellence of his heart as much as I do that of his head," said Frank, coolly. "Oh, it's nothing at all---only a frolic; boys must sow their wild oats. `We young men must live,' as Jack Falstaff says. One day he was at the races in England, when he saw a man walking with a pretty girl. He went [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-072.jpg) \- external link  - Page 071. ] up to him in the politest way and said, `I say, sir, that's a d---n pretty girl! where did you pick her up?"' The stranger, who was a merchant's clerk, replied, `She's my wife, sir, and you're a puppy, or you would not address me in such a way;' upon which Glendenning knocked him down as flat as a flounder, for he's a capital boxer. When the clerk, a Mr. Heckson, or Hickson, or some such name, got up, he refused to box with Glendenning, because he saw he was a bruiser; but he calmly offered to fight him with pistols. `Your rank?' said Glendenning's friend (for he was, of course, some low fellow!). `Your rank, Mr. Tapeyard , does not permit you to invite a gentleman to meet you.' `If the gentleman, as you call him,' said the stranger, `has the baseness to insult a man beneath him in rank, he ought, at least, to have the courage to meet him.' `You're perfectly right,' said Glendenning. `I'll meet you whenever you please.' They did meet, and Glendenning, had he chosen, could have killed him just as easily as kiss his hand, for he's a first-rate shot; but he only winged him---broke his arm, I believe, or something of that sort. Now, I want to know, who could behave more handsomely than that? I like him amazingly. He's just after my taste. Don't you agree with me?" "No; on the contrary, I think your friend must be a desperate blackguard!" said Frank, without trying to soften by his manner the bluntness of his remark. Earnest appeared to feel that this was intended as an offence, but, not liking the idea of quarrelling, changed the conversation. "Well, I swear, Fanny is looking sweet to-night! I've a great mind to go up into the box with you." "When I speak of that young lady," said Frank, "I always call her Miss Elton; and if you were a gentleman , you would do the same." "Hallo!" said Earnest. But Frank had already risen, and was making his way out of the theatre without deigning him any farther attention. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-073.jpg) \- external link  - Page 072. ] Earnest was now insulted, yet he dared not resent it. Although he professed to have found truth, he had not been so fortunate in respect to courage. He was a coward. But in proportion to his fear of the flashing eye and manly arm of the indignant young soldier, was his vanity, and his hatred of him who had wounded it. When men are in that state of passion, the father of evil is generally ready with opportunity to gratify it. The young man saw the departure of his enemy, and presently perceived him seated almost immediately behind Miss Elton, and occasionally interchanging a remark with her. Jealousy added force to his revenge; for the reader need scarcely be informed, that his withdrawal from addressing Miss Elton was in consequence of the cool dislike discovered by the young lady, in a way, gentle and polite indeed, but by far too unequivocal to leave him the slightest hope of success. He had, therefore, in fact, not much more friendly sentiments towards her than towards Frank. The opera was at length concluded, and Earnest left the theatre in no enviable mood. As he was passing into the street, he felt a friendly, though rather emphatic slap on his shoulder, and a "Hallo, my little fellow! where do you come from?" showed him Glendenning. Their greetings were warmly interchanged, and, with Captain White, they agreed to go in next door to Windust's and take supper together before the farce. "And how goes the world with you?" said White, as each one began to discuss his delicious steak. "How can it go other than well?" said Earnest, secretly congratulating himself that his companions had not been witnesses of his late humiliation. "With such a steak as that, and a bottle of Champagne by me, the world always goes well. How long do you mean to stay in New-York? How do you like our Yankee metropolis? Where are you going next?" "Did any one ever hear such a rattle-pated madeap!" [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-074.jpg) \- external link  - Page 073. ] said Glendenning. "How many mouths do you think I have, to answer such a discharge of questions as that and eat such a supper as this at the same moment? Have you been into the theatre?" "Yes. I saw you there. How do you like Horn?" "What! another question?" said Glendenning. "Cut that cork, will you? I really don't know. I didn't hear him." "No? Why I saw you there!" "Don't talk to Glendenning; he's crazy, as usual," said White. "I always wanted his old man to put him into a madhouse. Do you know he has fallen monstrously in love to-night, poor swain! with a girl he never saw before, and never will again. Here, hold your glass, young Romeo. We jest at scars that never felt a wound! This is devilish nice wine." "I'll bet a dozen of it I see her again, and speak with her too," said Glendenning. "Who are you raving about?" asked Earnest. "I don't know." "Ha, ha, ha! capital!" "She's a very beautiful Yankee girl, that sat before us this evening. You ought to know your own town's people." "There were two," said Earnest; "both pretty enough, and both old friends of mine." "The one with a rose in her bosom," said Glendenning. "Waiter! another bottle of Champagne. Tell me who she is, for I have never felt the keen arrow of the little boy go so deep before." "The one with a rose on her breast is a Miss Elton." " A Miss Elton? Thou speakest like a withered lawyer. Miss Elton! the Miss Elton! The only woman I ever saw in my life." "Ha, ha, ha! Here's a man to have under one's care," said White. "His old gentleman committed him to my prudence, and I'd rather drive an unbroken colt before a park of artillery. Ha, ha, ha!" "Who is she? What is she? Will you make me acquainted with her?" said Glendenning. "No, not I. She's a demure coquette. She's jilted me , and I've no more to do with her. I rather think she's consuming the youth behind her---the one next you. He's one of her flames, too, I suspect." [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-075.jpg) \- external link  - Page 074. ] "A coquette, is she?" said Glendenning. "I should like her to try me ." "Oh, you'd have to fight your way through two or three fellows. This chap has a brother, both would-be cocks-of-the-walk . The one with her to-night is a lieutenant in the army." "What, a militia lieutenant? A `Jefferson Guards' or a `Tompkins's Blues' man?" said Glendenning. "No, a regular lieutenant; a proud, conceited, free-spoken, upstart sort of a fellow; very rich, very saucy, and, by-the-way, no great admirer of yours." "How's that?" said Glendenning, in whose cheek and eyes the effect of the wine was already visible. "What does any Yankee lieutenant have the audacity to say of me?" "Nothing, but that you're a desperate blackguard ," said Earnest. "What!" said Glendenning, laying down his knife and fork. "Just now---in the theatre---to me. I heard him. I would have knocked him over if it had not been in the theatre." "Waiter!" said Glendenning. "Now you're for a row!" said White. "Don't go back. What do you mean, Earnest, by such a statement as that of a man who does not know either of us, and can know nothing but what you must have told him?" " I? I told him only some of your frolics," said Earnest, sturdily, "and that was his reply. I'll take my oath of it." "Waiter! the bill!" said Glendenning, mildly. "Here, let me pay!" said Earnest, putting his hand violently into his pocket, and rattling his money and keys as soon as he saw the bill was paid. "No matter!" said Glendenning, "the next time! I'm very much obliged to you, my dear fellow. Let's finish the bottle!" "And where are you going then?" said White. "Back to the theatre to see the farce ." "Yes, to act in it, perhaps! Glendenning, you shall not go," said White. "Nonsense." "I know you perfectly well, and you've taken too much wine." [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-076.jpg) \- external link  - Page 075. ] "Look at me," said the young rou e; "am I drunk? " "I don't say you're drunk, but I say you're quarrelsome. If you wish to notice the, I must say, ridiculous statement of Earnest, do it, at least, in a proper way; send a message. Earnest may take it, if he likes." "Oh no! not for the world. You must not betray me . I told it you in the strictest confidence," said Earnest. "Well, I won't send him a message." "Then you shall not go back to the theatre!" said White, grasping his arm. "White," said Glendenning, "I give you the honour of a gentleman, I won't disturb this Lieutenant Hancock." "Lieutenant Lennox," said Earnest. "His name is Lennox ." "Well, Lennox, then. I don't want a row any more than you." "Your word of honour?" "My word of honour. I want only to see this girl, because she's so pretty." "Well, then, for half an hour let us go back." "I have my seat in the pit ," said Earnest, and he sneaked off to resume it. Frank sat with his party between the play and farce. When White and Glendenning left the box he felt relieved, for their admiration of Fanny had been so apparent as to inspire the susceptible young lover with some not very placid sensations. His gratification, however, was of short duration, for, after the lapse of fifteen or twenty minutes, which he had spent talking to his mother, the two officers both returned. Thinking, perhaps, that the sight of a gentleman conversing with the object of their rude attention might either abash or intimidate them, he moved nearer and addressed her. "I've been looking at you, Miss Elton, from the pit," said he, "and considering what a fool you must think me." "To be sure I do!" said she, smiling, and extending her hand; "but we are friends for all that." [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-077.jpg) \- external link  - Page 076. ] "I really don't quite know!" said Frank. "You're a spoiled child," said she, "and I shall tell your mamma of you." "A child? my mamma? I am no child, Miss Elton. Do you know I'm twenty in less than a month?" "No! What a venerable old fellow you are. Is that your own hair? Why, my poor child, I'm old enough to be your grandmother! How do you like the opera?" "Not much. It's very good. I haven't heard a note of it." "Lucid being! your ideas are so clear! " "And you have the cruelty to laugh at me? You! " "I must answer you in your father's style. `Hold your tongue, sir!' How dare you have the impertinence to address me in that way?" He was going to reply, when the younger English officer leaned deliberately forward, and took the rose from Miss Elton's bosom. For a single moment amazement and incredulity kept Frank motionless, till he saw the two strangers rise as if about to leave the box, when, with a deep exclamation of fury, and his large eyes flashing sparkles of fire, he leaped upon the aggressor, and struck him a fearful blow in his face. There was a shriek of horror, a shout of wrath, and Frank and his foe were linked together in a deadly hug. The audience rose en masse , supposing the house on fire, or that some part of the building had given way. The truth, however, became immediately apparent, when a vociferous burst of voices rose from all quarters, with "Hustle 'em out! Turn 'em out!" But the combatants were already in the lobby, which was close thronged to suffocation. The terrified family of Frank shrieked after him in vain. They could not even get a sight of him. Harry had also stolen into the pit of the theatre to look at Miss Elton. He had beheld the incident above related, and the effect upon his high-wrought temper may not be easily imagined. Exerting all his strength, he forced his [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-078.jpg) \- external link  - Page 077. ] way, not out of the theatre, but through the crowd towards the box, and, leaping over the balustrade, he hastened into the lobby. It was, however, too late. The combatants were already gone, he knew not whither. The family had also disappeared. "Where are they?" demanded Harry of a by-stander. "A lady fainted, and they have taken her home." "But the combatants?" "Oh! gone off in one coach, four of them; but where is more than they mentioned. The police are after them, but I wish they may catch them, ha! ha! ha! One of those young chaps has got to be made cold meat of before sunrise." Where , indeed, thought Harry. Which way to go was now the question. To the police? to Hoboken? at length he sprang into a hackney-coach, and directed "home." On arriving, he rushed into the house. He could not rationally expect to meet Frank there, but he felt a shadow of horror on finding he had not yet been heard of. The family were in a delirium of grief; his mother walking up and down the room, wringing her hands in despair, and his father very pale, but calm. The supper-table was set, but, as may be imagined, was untouched. The servants were running to and fro, peeping into the room and slamming the doors in haste and confusion, and there was poor Frank's poetry pinned up against the curtain. "My son! my son! where is he?" cried Mr. Lennox. "Then he has gone," said Harry. "To the police. Oh, go to the police," cried the women. "No!" said Lennox, "he must go through with the affair: no police!" "I will go to the police," said Elton. "I beg, I command," said Lennox, "that no one interfere." "Pardon me," said Elton, hastening out, "I must not desist from my duty." He went. "God have mercy on him," murmured Fanny. "Police---no. They must meet, and they will meet. An English officer and an American officer cannot go so far as that without going farther. I trust he will lay the scoundrel low, and teach a bully and a blackguard a manly lesson. I hope to meet him presently, safe and successful from his stern duty, and to clasp a hero and a gentleman to my arms," said Lennox. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-079.jpg) \- external link  - Page 078. ] "And I too, father," said Mary, firmly, but with streaming eyes. "I would have loaded his pistols for him rather than he should have failed to do---act as he has done." "And hear me too, Almighty God!" cried Mrs. Lennox, falling solemnly on her knees, "rather than a murderer , let me see him brought back a dead corpse! " "Catharine," cried her husband. "I could better bear, oh Eternal Father!" continued she, without paying any attention to the interruption, "I could better bear to see him taken by thee. Take him---his mother asks it--- let him die in his youth, in his beauty, rather than---" "Dear Mr. Lennox," said Miss Elton, "hadn't you better go out and see what can be done to stop this dreadful affair?" "No, never!" said Lennox. She then turned to Emmerson, but, on finding him taking some refreshment very quietly in the back room, she appealed to Harry. "And will you see your brother murdered or become a murderer, when, perhaps, you might prevent it?" "I fear it must take its course, Miss Elton," said Harry, gravely. "The police are already informed. I could in no way aid them." "Then go to the ground," said Miss Elton, "where you think they will repair. Make at least an effort to find them." "Were I on the spot," said Harry, "what could I do? They will not obey me. Nor, in fact, could I advise Frank to do anything but go through with the affair." "You may reach the place in time to receive his dying breath, perhaps some last request," said Miss Elton. "You are right," replied Harry, shocked and rebuked. "Go, then." He hastened out and leaped once more into the carriage, when a police-officer stepped up to him. "It is quite useless," said the officer: "the gentleman's name is Captain Glendenning. He lodges at the City Hotel. We have sent there, and also over to Hoboken. It is too late, however. The meeting can't be avoided. It is now two---day breaks at three, and they will not probably wait for much light, for they are in earnest. The mischief, whatever it turn out to be, is done, and that's the end of it." Harry felt this, and that all exertion on his part would [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-080.jpg) \- external link  - Page 079. ] prove fruitless. The chance was very slender of his being able to find the parties. But the idea suggested by Miss Elton had given him a new impulse. His affection for his brother was warm and tender. He might find him, perhaps, wounded, gasping his last sigh, alone, abandoned, or deserted by all but strangers and hirelings. This new thought seemed to wing his soul with lightning. He directed the coachman to drive instantly and rapidly to the foot of Courtland, or any of those streets leading to the Hudson, and where small boats might be procured. The man obeyed, and he presently reached the wharf. Boats were found, but no oarsman and no oars. He leaped at length into one, in which, probably by chance, a pair of old oars had been left. The night was clear and calm. The water stretched itself peacefully out till its gently-heaving surface was lost in the dusky shadows. The strongly marked, heavy shapes of the receding town lay indistinct and black on the flood--- a few dim forms of vessels at anchor, only half discernible; but, without stopping to claim any more assistance, Harry rowed with all his might out into the broad stream, and was soon surrounded only by sky and waves. Unaccustomed, however, to this violent exercise, he presently found himself breathless and exhausted. Dripping with sweat, agitated and impatient beyond endurance, he was obliged to cease from his exertions, and suffer many long intervals to pass away in passive despair. Then he seized the oars with a new impulse of madness and rowed again, and so more than half an hour elapsed, till, in the east, to him the most dreadful sight, a pale, silver light began to steal upon the long, sleeping clouds, and to touch with a deeper transparency the tender sky. At daybreak they would doubtless meet. Perhaps, by the aid of these soft and slowly strengthening beams, the brother whom he loved with a passionate tenderness which he could scarcely endure, was presenting his heart to the [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-081.jpg) \- external link  - Page 080. ] deadly aim of his enraged and murderous enemy; and so the day broadened, and the green, pellucid waves heaved and broke with their gentle, soothing sound, and streaks of rosy red shot in arrowy lines up to the mid-heaven, and the now distant city began to be unveiled beneath its light covering of smoke, and mist, and shadow, and the green, delicate shores of New-Jersey grew more near, more distinct, more vividly lovely; and he could hear the birds warbling in the woods, and the plaintive cry of three or four snipe, that occasionally rose and alighted again on the winding beach, and the meadow lark shot upward with its joyous scream; and then---the report of a pistol, and then another. He paused and listened till his blood grew cold and his heart dead. Nothing more could be heard but the ordinary sweet sounds of nature, the dash of the waves, their rolling murmur as they broke on the pebbly beach, the carol of the lark, and the melancholy cry of the snipe. With the strength of a giant, he now resumed his rowing, and for a few moments the little boat shot swiftly on towards the land, when, in the eagerness of his efforts, one oar broke short off and the other fell into the stream. With a deep imprecation, he struck his clinched fist against his forehead. We will not repeat his blasphemous maledictions, his dark, unbridled rage, his oaths of vengeance on the murderer of his brother, even if he should be obliged to stab him in the street. Nothing but fiendish fury and black, relentless hate and despair held possession of his mind; not a prayer, or a thought of Him who created and sustained him. He had not remained long in this state, endeavouring, in a very inefficient and clumsy manner, to propel the boat, with the aid of one of the board seats, by what boatmen term sculling, when he perceived three figures come hastily down, and disappearing behind a little cove, they presently reappeared in a small boat, which began its rapid flight across the stream towards the city. They came near enough for him to see them. They were strangers. He thought he could recognise the person who had taken the rose from the bosom of Miss Elton. His brother was, then, killed. He shouted to them to arrest their attention; but the little boat held on its way, and was soon diminished to a speck. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-082.jpg) \- external link  - Page 081. ] With great difficulty he neared the land, and, leaving the boat to take care of itself, he leaped ashore and plunged into the thickets and lanes, shouting his brother's name, and looking to behold on every green sward, beneath every flowery and odour-breathing hedge, his body extended and weltering in its gore, or dragged along by some trembling, blood-stained, and guilty-looking friend, to be huddled out of sight, like something worthless and vile. At last he left the search, with throbbing temples and fevered veins. An early Hoboken ferry-boat was crossing just in time for him, and he found himself at length once more in town. At Mr. Lennox's all was yet despair and confusion. It is needless to attempt to paint, what cannot be comprehended but by the unhappy sufferers, the horror, suspense, and anguish of a family while waiting news of a duel, in which some beloved son and brother is engaged. Lennox, although, in the commencement, so obstinately determined to allow of no interference if he could help it, had long since yielded to his feelings,and had despatched several messengers in search of news, and to prevent, if possible, the meeting. Mary was unable to do anything but weep. Mrs. Elton, whose loquacity had been silenced by exhaustion, had gone home ill. Mrs. Lennox and Fanny alone were calm. Both had the support of a communion with their Maker, and in humble prayer had found strength and resignation. And now, in the broad morning, the whole city was awake, and the roaring streets gave notice that the business of the day had commenced. News of the result, whatever it might be, could not be much longer delayed. Several friends and neighbours came in to inquire and to console, and knock after knock seemed to carry the trial of the poor expectants to the highest supportable pitch. By-and-by Mr. Earnest arrived, with a countenance highly expressive of pleasure. "I come," said he, "to bring good news. I have just [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-083.jpg) \- external link  - Page 082. ] heard a report, from a person who came direct from the City Hotel, that your son has met and killed his man." Another knock. It was Mr. Elton. He was pale as death. "You know then," said Mrs. Lennox, wildly. "Yes, yes, I heard it at the wharf." "God have mercy on us," said Mary. "God have mercy on him," said Mrs. Lennox, with ashy cheeks and quivering lips. "I could have borne anything better." "He fell at the third fire," said Elton, "and never breathed again." "Who fell?" said Earnest. "Frank---poor, poor Frank." The wild shriek of utter horror which this intelligence produced from Mrs. Lennox, and which showed how little she knew the strength of her feelings, was scarcely attended to in the general tumult of grief it occasioned. Mary threw herself into the arms of her friend, and Mrs. Lennox upon the bosom of her husband, as if for protection against the awful scene which was to follow. The servants wept aloud and wrung their hands. Cries of despair and half-uttered prayers were heard. "He is gone! he's dead---my son! my son!" said the distracted mother, wildly. "But let us be cool in all cases," said Mr. Elton. "If this heavy grief have fallen on you, we must try to meet it calmly; but we have yet only contradictory reports." Here Harry entered, stained with dust, and sweat, and water, and looking himself more like a corpse than a living man. "Your news!" asked Miss Elton, for the rest appeared to have lost the power of speech. "Mother, you had better go up stairs," said Harry. "No," said Mr. Elton; "if you have to tell the worst, tell it: and may Almighty God strengthen your hearts to hear it. Is your brother dead?" "Don't answer, Harry," said Mr. Lennox, covering his face with his hands. "Give me a moment---" At this instant there was another knock. "It is the body!" half shrieked the servant-maid. "My wife, my poor wife!" murmured Lennox, as she sank, gasping, on his bosom. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-084.jpg) \- external link  - Page 083. ] "Ah, Frank, my son! my son!" said Mrs. Lennox. "My poor, dear brother!" sobbed Mary. A rapid, light step was heard on the stairs, a crowd of servants rushed into the room with exclamations of "Here he is! Here he is!" the door was flung forcibly open, and " Frank! " "My son!" "My brother!" "Oh, God, I thank thee!" broke from every quivering lip; for Frank---no stiffening, marble, bloody body, no murdered, mute, senseless corpse, but Frank himself, the living, glowing, triumphand Frank, his cheeks like roses, his eyes beaming with delight, in all the reality of youth, health, and, as it seemed to them, most transcendent beauty---stood laughing before them. Mrs. Lennox was for a moment forgotten, but she was engaged in fervent prayer. "Why, what's the matter with you all?" said Frank, as the rest pressed about him, embracing him, covering him with caresses, kissing the very skirts of his coat, and almost suffocating him with their joyful affection. "Frank, my boy, let me look at you. Get out of his way! Come here, you noble-hearted hero. God bless you, my son!" "Why, anybody would think---" said Frank, in the most careless manner, but the affectation of indifference was too much for him. He burst into tears, and, as he clasped each one in succession in a convulsive and convulsively-rendered embrace, as he pressed to his own the white and trembling lips, the cheeks from which terror had drained all the blood, and grasped hands, he scarce knew whose, which shook with the tumult of emotion, he could only, in broken words, exclaim, "Thank God! I beg your pardon. I came as soon as I could; but I was arrested on my way back by a rascally police-officer, and I'm only this instant released. See, my mother!" and, after tearing himself away from their fond arms, he knelt at the side of Mrs. Lennox, who, reaching out her hands and laying them on his head, could only murmur, "O God, I thank thee!" "Welcome back, Frank," said Harry, after a moment's pause, and with an effort struggling to preserve his indifference; "welcome back, my boy." "My dear Harry!" [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-085.jpg) \- external link  - Page 084. ] "You are ill," said Miss Elton, her eyes swimming in tears. "No, no," said Harry; "I want only air. It will pass in a moment." "Miss Elton," said Frank, "he will never insult you again." "Is my son, then, a murderer?" demanded Mrs. Lennox, shudderingly. "No, mother. But I did my best. I would have laid him low enough if I could." "I hope you have at least winged the scoundrel?" said Lennox. "Oh no, sir; no scoundrel, but one of the noblest fellows that ever breathed. I love him like a brother." "Frank forever!" said Mary, smiling through her tears. "I shouldn't wonder if they become bosom friends." "Last night he did not know what he was about," said Frank. "He had just been supping and drinking." "Intoxicated!" said Mrs. Lennox. "A poor excuse for a cowardly action." "No, he is no coward," said Frank, disentangling himself from the hands and arms which still grasped and were wound around him, "but a noble fellow. Five minutes after he had dared to touch the rose in the dress of Miss Elton, it was arranged we should cross immediately to Hoboken in two small boats, and meet at the earliest daylight. "I found Sussex by a lucky chance, who stood my friend like a magnificent fellow. We fired, and missed, but I had the pleasure of spoiling a very handsome new hat for him. Glendenning had coolly discharged his pistol in the air. Our friends here interfered, and said the affair had gone far enough, particularly as Glendenning had wasted his shot. While those gentlemen were disputing what sort of apologies ought to be made on either side, Glendenning stepped forward, against all rule, and superior to all selfish calculation, and said, `I require no apology. Lieutenant Lennox has done nothing but what any one in his place would have done; I have been exclusively in the wrong. I should have apologized long ago, but that I could not do without a meeting. Now, I trust,' he added, showing his hat with a smile, `the reconciliation may take place. I therefore make a full apology for an offence of which I am heartily ashamed." ' [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-086.jpg) \- external link  - Page 085. ] "A noble fellow!" said Lennox. "With that we shook hands; and then stepping to his second, Captain White, he took from him this rose , returned it to me, and said he should be happy if the lady from whom he had taken it in a moment of excitement could be persuaded to pardon him. Tell her, said he, I throw myself on her magnanimity, as I do on that of your friends and family! This rose," continued Frank, with something of a proud air and pulling his whiskers forward a little, "I believe belongs to you , Miss Elton!" "Bravo! my boy!" exclaimed Mr. Lennox. Fanny accepted the rose with an enchanting grace, and said: "Frank, I can scarcely tell you how much I admire your manly courage, how sincerely I feel that you would never shrink where duty called, but you know, for we have often spoken on the subject, that I cannot approve---" "Come! come!" said Lennox. "You are a little Puritan, and I won't have any sermons on my boy. He has risked his life for you, and if there is anything wrong in the matter, it must be borne by the shoulders of society at large (which are good broad ones, you know), not by any individual, and, most of all, not by my Frank." "Breakfast ready, sar!" said Simon, an old attached black servant of the family, throwing open the doors, his cheeks wet with tears. "Come on; take Miss Elton's hand. Lead her in," exclaimed Mr. Lennox. "You have won the honour, and I hope she will not refuse to bestow it. Here---hallo! who now? Mrs. Elton, recovered by the news, and Emmerson again! Come along! we'll kill the fatted calf, for the young prodigal has returned." The well-ordered domestic arrangements of Mrs. Lennox's family moved, in their various operations, almost by themselves, and an abundant and tempting breakfast had risen up with the agreeable facility of Aladdin's palace. The English books of travel have already informed the European reader that, although the Americans are marvellously good-for-nothing creatures, with unfortunate institutions and a bad government, they do know how to serve a good breakfast. There were tea, coffee, and chocolate, hot rolls and Indian cakes, toast, sausages, steaks, and broiled shad, with other dainties to suit the demands and various tastes of the somewhat large company who sat down to enjoy them. To [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-087.jpg) \- external link  - Page 086. ] crown the whole was the genuine spirit of hospitality, the ever-delightful attendant at the table of Mrs. Lennox. It would have made a good picture, the breakfast of this family, on the present memorable morning. Joy had burst upon them like the sunshine after a stormy night, and shed upon all but a few hearts the sympathy of happiness. Mrs. Elton had recovered her appetite, her health, and her radiant smiles, and was talking away for dear life's sake, without any one having the least idea of what she was saying, though each person to whom her pleasure-beaming eyes were successively directed nodded understandingly, with his mouth full, and said, "to be sure!" and "certainly! certainly!" Fanny, relieved from the harrowing apprehensions of the night, had forgotten all her own annoyances. Mr. Elton inclined to be a grave observer of the scene which, however gay, had its origin in a principle shocking to humanity and in violation of the laws of God and man, was still unwilling to disturb the charm of the hour by solemn debates or animadversions which could have but little chance of being listened to. Frank was in the seventh heaven of triumph and hope. He had given to Miss Elton a testimony that he was not quite a "boy," a term for which he began to have all the hatred of Coriolanus, and, besides, he rejoiced in the e clat with which he well knew the duel must surround his name; for let moralists muse as they may, the public opinion yet deals leniently with the offence, and, under most circumstances, delights to honour the offender. Harry was happy in the escape of his brother. So far was his from being a selfish heart, that his own grief was, for the time, merged in the happiness of once more beholding Frank, not only alive and well, but covered with glory, and in witnessing the vivid happiness of his delighted home. Perhaps no face showed more clearly the traces of mental suffering, for he had been exhausted by the emotions and exertions of the past night; but he was even contented to be miserable himself while he saw others around him, whom he loved, relieved from their misery. One countenance alone had a strange, discontented look. It was Emmerson's, whose naturally cold and selfish heart felt little real sympathy with either the anguish or the joy even of his best friends. He seemed really to look a little darker after Frank's return than before. Keenly and morbidly alive to whatever related to himself, he regarded the affairs [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-088.jpg) \- external link  - Page 087. ] of others with the calmness of a philosopher. Had Frank been brought home a corpse, he would not have failed to manifest, and perhaps to feel, all the decorous sentiments of grief and horror, but it would not have broken his sleep, or in any way impaired his enjoyments, and he would, perhaps, have worn the dark face, which now struck like a discord upon the general happiness, with something more of an effort. " Well , my boy," said Lennox, as the appetite of all began to subside, "this is better than a bullet through the head." "What a frightful thing!" said Mrs. Lennox. "Only a few mornings ago we were seated in this very room at breakfast, counting on remaining here twenty years. A few hours pass away, and yet what a change! But for the mercy of God, Frank might have been either murdered, or himself a murderer. Oh Frank! if Christianity is true, you have this day committed a crime." "Pho!" said his father, "I doubt whether we can ascribe every such event to Providence, or whether the Creator can desire to know all that passes here." "Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing?" said Mr. Elton; "and yet not one of these falls to the ground without his will." "Ah, that's a figure of speech, sir," said Harry. "One is surely not expected to believe that so extremely accurate an account is kept of such unimportant matters?" "No, certainly not," said Lennox. "I don't see how it would be possible," said Harry; "and, if possible, I don't know what good it would do. Even a father in this world, the most strongly interested in the fate of his children, would not wish to keep an account of the exact number of their hairs, or how many times they breathed a day, and all that sort of thing. Imagine only a big book in heaven, and an industrious angel, with a huge quill behind his ear (at least it ought to be a steel pen), putting down, from age to age, to eternity, ` So many sparrows [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-089.jpg) \- external link  - Page 088. ] in Jerusalem fell such a day,' `so many in Rome,' `so many at New-York  ."' "It is easier to ridicule holy subjects than to understand them," said Mr. Elton, mildly. "But you cannot ridicule Shakspeare, or Newton, or Euclid so." "Supposing that to be the case," said Elton: "do you thence draw the inference that the Scriptures are untrue?" "Oh no! Only that they are too strictly interpreted." "But you appear to consider the persons you have named as rivals, and, apparently, successful ones, of our Saviour." Harry felt it impossible to conceal the thoughts and opinions which had been lately stirring in his bosom. His decisive character loved to take a course at once, and to do whatever he meant to do immediately and openly. The whole table listened to the conversation. "You would not pardon me---you would consider me guilty of a heinous crime---if I said yes," replied he. "Upon my word I should not," said Mr. Elton, with sincerity. "On the contrary, I think the scheme of Christianity must be doubtful to many who have not carefully examined it, which I perceive you have not done, and I like to see a man honest in expressing his opinions on proper occasions; only have opinions one way or the other. There is hope for all but those who pass the subject over as not worthy of attention. I have been a doubter, and some of my friends, now very firm Christians, have totally disbelieved in all revelation." "Then," said Harry, "without being flippant, or meaning to wound the feeling of persons who think differently, I confess I believe all religions only indirectly revealed from the Creator." "That is, not revealed at all," said Mr. Elton. "My son! my son!" exclaimed Mrs. Lennox. "The claims of Christianity upon the credulity of a man of sense are not, at least, without serious objections," replied Harry. "It has been two thousand years in the world, and it has not at all effected its purpose. Men are no better, and some of the wisest and best don't believe it. Of the billion inhabitants of the globe, not one fifth even profess it. Of that small proportion, a very great one, and among them men like Gibbon, Voltaire, Hume, and Byron, reject it. Incredible things can't be credited by thinking [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-090.jpg) \- external link  - Page 089. ] men. I don't believe Joshua made the sun stand still. You see modern astronomy has thrown a new complexion upon that story. I don't believe in the miracles of Moses and Aaron, and the Egyptian magicians. I don't believe in---" "My son," said Mrs. Lennox, with an air of alarm and grief, "if you do not wish me to leave the table, have the goodness to go no farther." "Why, I am only a rationalist. All I ask is, that Christianity be made intelligible, and that men be not called upon to believe impossible things, or to be governed by impracticable precepts." "Let me give you, my young friend, one piece of advice," said Elton. "I do not mean to discuss the truth of Christianity in so light a way as this. I am a very poor debater, nor have I much faith in debates. Belief will come to you at the proper time, or it will never come. But I recommend you not to lay aside frankness in your remarks and meditations on this subject. Rationalism, if I understand it, is infidelity under a milder name. Christianity is either true or not true. All ingenious theories of explanation are unworthy men of sense and piety. Whoever pays the least attention to the Bible, will see that there can be no half-way point  between faith and skepticism. God revealed himself in the Messiah. Christ was born of a virgin. He performed miracles, and rose from the dead, or he did not; one of the two you must believe. You have chosen the latter creed. Take it! hug it! carry it through the world with you. Test its strength and truth, and see if you can go through life with it." "Many wiser and greater than I have done so," said Harry. "You cannot know what goes on in the bosom of another. Have you ever examined all the arguments in favour of Christianity?" "Have you ever examined all the arguments against it?" Mr. Elton was silent, and Harry felt as if he had the best of the debate. "Come, come," said his father, "you are on too grave subjects. In these matters, I have always left my children to themselves. I don't think the topic a proper one for the breakfast-table. In Frank's course this morning he has his own approbation and mine. He will also have that of the world." [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-091.jpg) \- external link  - Page 090. ] A young boy in rather a country dress here entered respectfully and somewhat awakwardly. He held a newspaper in his hand. "What do you want, sir?" said Lennox. "I wish to ask you," said the boy, apparently embarrassed, on finding himself speaking before so large an assembly, "if the declaration is to be filed in the case of Green versus Thomson?" "A fig for the declaration in the case of Green versus Thomson," said Mr. Lennox. "My dear father," said Mary, remonstratingly. "Do you know what has taken place this morning, sir?" The boy, who had a good, intelligent face, but who appeared very bashful, looked extremely grave, then suddenly smiled, and immediately looked grave again. This curious habit, which had often occasioned the remarks of the family, now set every one laughing. "Yes, sir," with a still deeper blush, which overspread his whole face with crimson, but, at the same time, with a look of pleasure, for he well knew Mr. Lennox's roughness was but the eccentricity of a kind heart; "and I thought maybe you'd like to see the paper?" "What! the declaration in the case of Green versus Thomson?" The boy looked graver than ever, gave a short laugh, and then put on the immovable seriousness of a judge again. "No, sir, the newspaper." "Why so, sir?" "To show you this here." "And what the devil is `this here?' " Indulging again in one of his transitory gleams of mirth, Seth stepped up and handed the paper. "Well, upon my word," said Lennox, "this is something like." " Affair of Honour .---We stop the press to announce that a meeting took place this morning at daybreak between Lieutenant Francis Lennox, son of the distinguished lawyer of this city, and Captain Charles Glendenning, of his majesty's---, at the duelling ground, Hoboken---" "And do you, sir," said Mr. Lennox, suddenly stopping, and putting on a magisterial air, "with such a newspaper in your hand, and the knowledge of such an event in your [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-092.jpg) \- external link  - Page 091. ] pericranium---do you dare to come to me, in the bosom of my family, with the son that is thus saved setting miraculously at my very side, and talk to me about a paltry declaration in the case of Green versus Thomson? " "My dear father, you are so wild. The poor boy is half frightened to death," said Mary. But Seth only suffered to escape him one of his overflowing laughs, and then looked his master seriously in the eyes, with very much the expression, however, as if he intended to laugh again presently. "Come here, sir." The boy obeyed. He was a plain-looking lad of sixteen, badly dressed, without much expression in his face except when he smiled. His complexion was good, his eyes intelligent, and his manners indicative of a high degree of anxiety what to do with his feet and in what part of the world to stow away his hands. "You are a young villain, sir! Go round to Edgecomb and Radley, No. 12 Maiden Lane, immediately, and get yourself measured for a gentleman's suit of clothes, to be charged to my account. Go out and find, moreover, a hat, two pairs of boots, a dozen pairs of stockings, and a dozen ready-made, respectable, dandified, linen shirts, with very high collars. Add a pair of gloves, and, if you like, a cane, and have the bills sent to me. Do you hear, you little scaramouch?" The laugh of poor Seth was now heartily joined in by all present. "And when you have got them, Seth," said Mary, "come to me, I want to speak to you." "Now tramp---march---vanish into thin air." The boy obeyed the spirit, though not the letter of this mandate, and Mr. Lennox went on to read, " Affair of Honour .---We stop the press to announce that a meeting took place this morning at daybreak between Lieutenant Francis Lennox, son of the distinguished lawyer of this city, and Captain Charles Glendenning, of his majesty's---, at the duelling ground, Hoboken. The dispute arose at the theatre, Captain Glendenning having offered a rudeness to a lady in the presence of Lieutenant Lennox, which the latter punished by a blow . The parties repaired almost instantly to the ground, and, after one fire, which, on the part of Captain Glendenning, was discharged in the air, the [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-093.jpg) \- external link  - Page 092. ] matter was terminated amicably by the mediation of the seconds. The most ample apologies were offered by Captain Glendenning, and the gallant gentlemen parted on the best terms, and with mutual protestations of friendship. Captain White, of the British army, acted as the friend of his countryman in this rather peculiar affair, and Mr. Sussex, of this city, for Lieutenant Lennox. Nothing could exceed the coolness and courage manifested on the occasion by both the gentlemen; and a ball, it is said, took effect in the hat of Captain Glendenning, who received the awkward indication of skill with immovable composure. "We must be permitted to remark, however, that, if we have heard the matter correctly represented, it has been reserved for our chivalric townsman to teach to his opponent a valuable lesson , which, we trust, will not be wholly thrown away upon him, or upon the country to which he belongs. Impertinent English travellers may write slanderous books with impunity, but there are insults which can never fail to meet their just reward!! " "Expressive italics! and a note of admiration!" said Lennox. "Ho! ho! ho!---ha! ha! ha! Frank, you'll be a bit of a lion for six weeks to come." "I am very sorry for it," said Mrs. Lennox. We have not attempted to give all the conversation which took place, as, in the general agitation, three or four were nearly always speaking at the same time, and as for Mrs. Elton, she did not stop at all. At length, however, they separated. Some went to bed. The visiters returned home to spread through the town all the particulars of the interesting affair. Emmerson, having heartily shaken every one by the hand, and reiterated his inexpressible joy at the termination of a calamity which had such a threatening commencement, went down stairs into the office to his business duties. Mr. Elton shook his head, in the pursuance of his own grave thoughts. Harry and Frank retired together to talk the matter over, and Mrs. Elton, who had been relating a story to Mrs. Lennox, Mary, and Fanny, of a shipwreck, of which she had read an account some time in her early youth, where the poor sailors were obliged to remain out seven days and nights in an open boat without food, was obliged to break off just as the unfortunate people had discovered a sail in the horizon; but she treated her husband and Fanny to the denouement on her way home. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-094.jpg) \- external link  - Page 093. ] And so the fierce hurricane, so sudden, unexpected, and terrible, subsided into calm sunshine, and the mourned as dead was restored. The awful night became but a thing to be remembered and talked of over the winter fire, and all breathed again in peace. A FEW days subsequent to this affair, Mr. Lennox gave a dinner to a few friends. Although he humbly confessed himself "no Croesus," it may be asserted that the Lydian king, whatever armies he might have raised, or splendid gifts he might have presented, could not have inhabited a more comfortable house, or given a better dinner---at least according to the tastes of modern palates. His light and generous heart, and unambitious character, cared little for the world, save as it ministered to his pleasure, or gratified his love of hospitable pomp and splendour. His home was one of those sunshiny retreats which few are so fortunate as to possess. Blessed, by a large inheritance and the income of his lucrative profession, with affluence without the necessity of economy, he enjoyed the delights of extravagance unaccompanied by any of its usual cares or apprehensions; for, while nothing can be less like happiness than expensive pleasures to a man who suffers the haunting consciousness of living beyond his income, and of revelling, in advance, on the portion of his widow and orphans, to a person of Mr. Lennox's lively disposition there was a hearty delight, long become habitual to him, in the generous profuseness which prudence itself could not censure. His home was therefore the scene of all kinds of agreeable pleasures, and his children were educated fully to appreciate them. A beautiful country-seat on the Hudson, about sixty miles from the city, was the usual summer retreat of his family, when not engaged in excursions to some of the numerous and interesting points of interest in which the neighbourhood of New-York is so singularly rich, and in the winter, music, dancing, the opera, the theatre, balls and dinners, made them see even the glad, bright months of summer roll away without regret. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-095.jpg) \- external link  - Page 094. ] From his youth Mr. Lennox had been favoured by fortune (as he expressed it) with an unbroken course of prosperity, and an almost total exemption from the misfortunes which so generally afflict others. Health smiled upon him and upon his. No death had even interrupted the affectionate happiness of his family. His children were growing up all that his efforts had striven to make them. He was beloved and honoured by his friends, and had no enemies but such as envy and malice, and his independent course on all occasions where duty called him to act, had made him, and at these he could afford to snap his fingers. His life had resembled some of those fabled climates where wind, rain, cold, and clouds never disturb the softness of the air or stain the serenity of the sky. How far such a long career of unshadowed prosperity is favourable to the development of virtue, the formation of superior character, or the knowledge of real happiness, the moralist may determine, but it had certainly not, thus far, apparently diminished the excellence or the cheerfulness of the Lennoxes. All acknowledged the warm virtues of their hearts and the charm of their manners. They were generous without pride, and affable without condescension. There are not here, as in most other countries, a class of poor who live avowedly on the bounty of the opulent, and hold, from the magnificent charity of the rich, what, but for the perhaps unavoidable errors of government and society, they would owe only to their justice. But whenever misfortune did come in contact with any of the Lennoxes, it was sure of unaffected sympathy, and, if possible, effectual relief; and while his family were silently and benevolently accustomed, with the discrimination which marks true charity, to relieve the distresses of the poor, many a helpless client, without money, perhaps, to defend himself against oppression, or to meet the accidental demands of the law, had found in Lennox a bold advocate, a fearless defender, and a generous friend. Many an innocent accused had seen himself saved from punishment by the outspeaking eloquence which asked no pay but its own pleasure in the act, and many a poor debtor, clutched by the hand of some malignant creditor, and consigned to a dungeon in the midst of the gay, enlightened city of New-York, which would have been more in harmony with the dark council-chamber of Venice (for even such was once, and [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-096.jpg) \- external link  - Page 095. ] not long ago, our laws), found not only present ease, but subsequent success in life. Under these bright auspices, the two brothers had grown up as boys, and were about entering into life as men. Frank, as we have seen, was already a distinguished graduate from West Point, and Harry had been admitted to the bar, and become a partner in the lucrative office of his father, with the intention, on the part of the latter, that he should, as speedily as possible, take the whole responsibility of it on himself, with Mr. Emmerson as his assistant, and, if things went well subsequently, as his partner. But Harry's triumph at overstepping, at length, the obscure retreats of boyhood, however mingled with grand visions of the future, with noble resolutions and an innate love of the right, was crossed, as we have seen, with some influences of an opposite nature. He loved virtue and hated vice, but he had no distinct knowledge of the nature and requisites of the one, nor the dangers, illusions, and insidious character of the other. The peaceful and splendid advantages in the midst of which he had passed his life thus far, the succession of pleasures which he had enjoyed, his father's wealth, his own attainments, which were remarkable, his talents equally so, his very virtues, and, perhaps, the not unthought-of advantages of his person, filled him with selfconfidence, and gave his reflections a leaning towards infidelity, caught from the superficial view which youth takes of life and nature, and confirmed by the study of Byron, Gibbon, and similar authors of fascinating genius and profound attainments, who appear at the bar of history as the representatives of irreligion and the bold scorners of the Bible. Thus, his note-books scribbled over with memoranda of Voltaire and Volney, and his memory stored with splendid passages from Cain and Childe Harold (while he never read the lofty, noble, spiritual, and unanswerable arguments on the other side of the question), young Lennox was about to launch forth on that mysterious sea, whose glittering, treacherous bosom has ingulfed so many a "tall ship." Destitute of any belief in the future, of any reverence for, or confidence in God, of any knowledge of his own soul, more than as the vapoury tenant of a perishing form, his hopes, wishes, and plans were all confined within this life's bounds; bounds which, to youth, seem vast and endless, but which, in a few fleet years, contract to a startling span and vanish like a morning dream. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-097.jpg) \- external link  - Page 096. ] Mr. Lennox had educated his children with the utmost care and expense in all the graceful accomplishments, as well as the necessary branches of learning. They were excellent musicians, and sweet glees, sweetly sung, were among the attractions of their frequent soirees. In all the essentials of worldly honour they had been carefully instructed, and perhaps no one could be more open to the noble influences of virtue, more incapable of anything paltry or mean. In short, all things but one had been done for them. Like thousands in all parts of Christendom, their lives had flowed quietly on, in peaceful satisfaction with the things around them, happy and communicating happiness, loving and beloved, contented with the practice of virtue and a horror of vice, living in this world, with it, and for it, without a thought beyond. And thus had fled (to Mrs. Lennox, how short and dreamlike did they appear!) the twentyone bright, unclouded years since the birth of her eldest son. On the evening previous to the dinner to which we have alluded, the family had taken tea, Miss Elton was passing the evening with Mary, and Mr. Lennox was in one of his silent moods, enjoying a cigar by the open window, when Frank, who had several times opened his mouth and shut it again without saying anything, at length delivered what he appeared to have been labouring with. "I have a favour to ask of you all," said he, "and, moreover, I give you notice beforehand that it is full of poise and danger, and fearful to be granted." "I don't think there can be any necessity for such a very formal preface," said his mother. "Don't be too sure!" said Frank, laughing. "I cannot be too sure of that," replied she, "my dear, wicked boy!" "Now let us see," said Frank, "how much ladies really mean of what they say. So you positively promise to grant my request before you know what it is?" "Yes, I do." "And father?" "Yes." "Upon my word I'm afraid to name it." "Why, what is it?" said his father. "You would not ask, I am sure, anything which ought to be refused." "I suppose," said Mary, "you want to go abroad, and father is to give his permission, get you leave of absence, [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-098.jpg) \- external link  - Page 097. ] and allow you a couple of thousand dollars a year, or so, till you see the world and fight some more duels." "Would you grant that?" asked Frank. "I don't know. No---yes," said his father. "But---" said Mrs. Lennox. "I know," said Frank, "the dangers I should have to encounter---shipwreck, fire, water, lightning, plague, pestilence, and famine. I know exactly what you are going to say, my dear mother. Then I should probably die several times during my long absence, or you would all die before my return; and I should be robbed in Spain, and murdered in Syria, corrupted in Paris, and killed in several duels, as Mary says, and all that!" "Nonsense," said Mr. Lennox. "If you wish to go abroad, you can go by the next packet, or as soon as I can arrange with the War Department for your leave of absence. I think it a capital idea." "My dear boy," said his mother, her eyes filling with tears, "two, three, four years, at my time of life! I should never see you again---I have a presentiment." "Of course you have," said Frank, laughing; "of course you wouldn't. Who ever did come back safe from a tour in Europe? The idea is absurd on the face of it, of course!" "Ah, yes, you can laugh! it's a fine thing to be young and thoughtless, to be sure," said Mrs. Lennox. "And how would you go---without any companion, too?" "I suppose you're like Miss Elton, and think I ought to have my mamma with me all my life, to keep me from being run over, from taking cold, &c., &c., &c." "Ha, ha, ha!" said Mr. Lennox. "Well, come! I won't go abroad at present," said Frank, taking his mother's hand, and pressing it tenderly to his lips. "I'll compromise with you for another favour---a very tri[s]ling one, which will be begun and ended in a day. Do you agree to that? Come!" "Yes." "Now, then, let us see this time what success!" "Do, for Heaven's sake, let's know what it is?" said Mary. "Old age makes him garrulous," remarked Miss Elton. "We have a dinner to-morrow." "Well?" "I wish to add two particular friends to the party." [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-099.jpg) \- external link  - Page 098. ] "Why, of course---certainly. What a ridiculous request!" "As if the dinner were not for you!" said Mary. "Pray, what objection do you see to your asking whom you please to my house?" demanded Mr. Lennox. "Who are your friends? John shall go for them immediately." "The first is---Captain White," said Frank, making a face aside to Mary, as of a man who touches a match and stands expecting an explosion. "What! the second of Captain Glendenning?" "Yes, my dear mother." "You're mad, Frank," said his mother, "or else you're jesting!" "Really, sir," said his father, "it seems to me you choose your associates in rather an eccentric manner." "Oh, very well," said Frank. "It would have gratified me very much, that's all." "Well, well," said Mrs. Lennox; "we have already granted it: we cannot retract; though I must say, you often really surprise me, Frank. Captain White is the friend and boon-companion of that Glendenning. Men who frequent profligate society must expect to be thought themselves profligates. Glendenning has insulted you and all of us in the grossest manner; and I must say I do not think the companion of such a person a proper associate either for yourself or your family. Fanny, too, and her mother and father, also, dine with us to-morrow, and---I really think you had better withdraw your request. I should like to know what you will propose next, you unreasonable creature you!" "Why, as to what I could propose next ," said Frank, with a frown upon his brow, softened, however, by the halfsuppressed smile which lurked around his lips, "there is only one thing which I could propose next consistently--- under the circumstances." "And what the devil's that?" demanded his father, somewhat sternly. "Why," said Frank, coolly, "to bring Glendenning himself! " "You're tri[s]ling with your mother." "No; I assure you I never was more serious in my life. That is the request you have granted in advance, and I think, if you'll hear me speak a moment, I'll persuade you--- convince you that I am quite right." [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-100.jpg) \- external link  - Page 099. ] "Well, Frank," said Mrs. Lennox, with obviously serious displeasure, "if you bring Captain Glendenning here to-morrow, I have nothing more to say, but I shall dine in my room." "You do injustice to Glendenning," said Frank, warmly. "I have several times met him since our affair, and he has rendered me all the satisfaction that a gentleman could render or a gentleman require. This offence was an act of delirium, committed in a moment of intoxication, for which he nearly atoned with his life. I can't forget, nor should you, that he magnanimously refrained from killing me, even while the blow I had given him was yet burning on his forehead. Is that nothing? It was done, too, at the moment when I was striving my utmost to kill him. I have always been taught that it is the Christian's duty to forgive and forget. On a nearer acquaintance with him, I find him a noble, capital fellow, and I have reason to know that the stories that fellow Earnest told me of him are gross exaggerations. There is something really delightful, fascinating about him. Free-hearted, generous, brave, totally without malice, full of wit, fun, and intelligence---the most agreeable companion you ever saw. Plays sweetly on the piano, sings an excellent song; and, as our affair is settled, I see no reason, since I like him very much, why I should not show him the hospitalities which a stranger ought to meet with. Do, now, my dear mother, do oblige me." "Well!" said Mr. Lennox, "I'm sure I've no objection. There is some truth in what Frank says. The fact that they fought yesterday is no reason why they should not embrace to-day. Come, wife, let's have him!" "You are as bad as Frank himself," said Mrs. Lennox. "Here comes an Englishman to New-York, goes about day and night seeking quarrels and raising riots---sometimes, for what we know always , in a state of intoxication---a duellist--- in short, a professed rou e . He insults a modest young girl under our protection in a coarse and ungentlemanly way, and, instead of meeting such a character and such conduct as they deserve, and avoiding such an example for our own sons, you propose to bring him into your family, because Frank, whose liking is a mere caprice, finds that he sings a good song and plays on the piano. I should like to see my sons select their associates for their moral and intellectual qualities. For my part, I cannot consent to anything of this sort." [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-101.jpg) \- external link  - Page 100. ] "Keep cool! keep cool, Katy, my dear!" said Mr. Lennox; "be assured Frank will not do anything contrary to your wishes. A dinner, you know, Frank, my boy, in order to be agreeable, must contain no discordant materials. As the Eltons are to be here, it seems to me---and as your mother is so serious in her views of your new friend, and, therefore---heh! my son? let the matter rest. Yet, at the same time, Kate, let me make a remark. As to the offence which caused the meeting between these two madcaps, that has been fairly and honourably settled. That subject ought to be now dropped. As for Glendenning's wildness, many a sober, correct youth turns out a paltry, selfish, sneaking scoundrel in the end, and I believe there's just as much to censure and to despise among irreproachable men, who stand fair before the world, as among the frank and careless fellows who take no pains to conceal their faults and follies. Many a young rip, like this Glendenning, is all the better for his wildness, in his after years. I myself---what are you laughing at, miss? How dare you laugh when I'm talking?" "At the curious illustration of your last proposition, my dear father. You are not going to cite yourself as an example, I hope?" "Yes, I am. I was as hot-headed, wild, and impudent a young rascal as ever breathed. Yet look at me now! Young men will be young men, and we must take care to distinguish between the mere outbreaks of a merry soul like Harry the Fifth and inherent vice. Now I've been told that this Glendenning is a noble fellow, and that his tricks are mere wildness and high spirits. The only way for a man is to go into the world, and take it as it is. He didn't make it, and can't reform it. If people treat him well, good---be civil to them. If a man is rude, call him out, kill him, and you'll not be insulted again." "You make my blood run cold, Henry," said Mrs. Lennox, "to hear, from a father's lips, such wicked principles to his son." "Bah! what do women know of these things? Frank never did anything in his life which does him more honour than going out with that fellow. Men, and women too, love unflinching courage. I have no doubt this circumstance will open to him a brilliant career in life. In the next place, it has made him formidable to the scoundrels by [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-102.jpg) \- external link  - Page 101. ] whom one is surrounded in all ranks and classes of life, and who go on, some slandering and imposing upon you, some bullying you just as far as you'll let them, and no farther. Why, Frank himself, ever since the meeting, has looked, walked, acted, thought, and felt more like a man and a gentleman that I ever saw him before." "But not like a Christian," said Mrs. Lennox. "That means nothing," said Mr. Lennox. "You know what pain you cause me, my dear husband, by expressing yourself in this way at all, and particularly before our children. Oh, Henry, you have a fearful thing to answer for. Mary is without religion, and Frank and Harry turn it into ridicule." "Pooh! pooh! They are not monks, that's all. They're well enough. They believe all they can." "As for Captain Glendenning," continued Mrs. Lennox, gravely, "I detest and abhor the character and the man. I do not believe, with all my desire to oblige Frank, I could receive such a person in my house with ordinary courtesy." "Oh, very well!" said Frank, haughtily. "You'll allow your mother to judge, I hope, what companions are proper for herself and her daughter, if you don't deign to let her choose yours," said Mr. Lennox, a little sharply. Frank had a face which betrayed every emotion of his soul, a large, full eye, generally very sweet in its expression, and a mouth around which played a smile almost invariably when he spoke, but, in the silence which followed the last remark, every trace of his gentleness had disappeared. His brow darkened, the sternness of his countenance was heightened by a streak of red, which shot burning into his cheek, and his eyes fell upon his mother with an expression which she, at least, had never seen in them before. There was something new and different in his demeanour since the late duel. The first hot days of summer scarcely work greater changes in the tender vegetation than had taken place in this boy within the last few weeks through the influence of passion and action. Love, vengeance, danger, pride, had been busy in his nature; and if strength and manly self-dependance had been added, sweetness, modest humility, and the lowly spirit of true wisdom had been proportionably withdrawn. "Come!" said Mrs. Lennox, recovering herself, and [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-103.jpg) \- external link  - Page 102. ] holding out her hand, for she, too, had been touched with a moment of passion (perhaps a peculiarity in the family disposition), "leave the subject, my dear Frank, and don't be ashamed to yield to your mother ." "Oh, certainly!" said Frank, almost rudely pushing back the proffered hand, "if I cannot be gratified in the simple wish to invite a friend to my father's house, I shall not press it. I can tell Captain Glendenning that---that--- indeed, I shall tell him nothing, but let him take it as he likes." "Why, what necessity is there to speak to Captain Glendenning about it at all?" said Mr. Lennox. To this no one replied. "Only this I have learned," continued Frank, after a pause, rising as if about to leave the room; "I have learned what respect to attach to the professions of ladies, and I shall not ask another favour, I can tell you. I did not expect to be treated like a boy all my life." "Stop, sir!" said his father. There was something in Mr. Lennox's voice and frown, to which, despite his careless lightness of character, every one in the family had long been accustomed to yield implicit obedience. His son now, with ill-concealed anger, but without hesitation, remained at his call. "What do you mean by that? In becoming a man, if you are one, have you ceased to be a gentleman and a son? Whatever may be your feelings or opinions, you will be pleased to govern them in my presence, and remember, in this debate, your opponent is your mother ." "Very well, very well!" replied Frank; "that is a point she is not likely to suffer me to overlook, as she proposes, I perceive, to keep me to her apron-strings. I beg to yield the thing. I withdraw my request." "Her apron-strings , sir!" said Mr. Lennox, rising. "Upon my word, your expressions are as elegant as your conduct is sensible. I am surprised at your forgetfulness of the respect you owe her. Even if she were wrong, you should instantly yield; but, upon reflection, it is my opinion she's right; and, therefore, if the wishes of so insignificant a person as your father have any influence with your Royal Highness, you will, perhaps, condescend to dismiss that thunder-cloud from your brow, and deign to remember who and where you are." [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-104.jpg) \- external link  - Page 103. ] A month ago Frank would have burst into tears at such an address from one whom he loved with the deepest sincerity and tenderness. But he had now new views. How can the duellist, who has triumphantly outraged society, humanity, and God, preserve his respect for minor things? How can he, who is taught recklessly to present his bosom to the murderous weapon, without adequate motive or regard for consequences, hesitate to meet and to despise, in the moment of proud passion, the tears of a mother or the frowning reprobation of a father. He only replied, therefore, without at all softening his lofty manner, "I obey you, sir. I perfectly agree with you. I should be the last person in the world to lay myself under obligations to any one. I will write Glendenning a note this moment. I will tell him that circumstances prevent my renewing our acquaintance as I wished, till, at least, I have a house of my own, when---certainly---I presume I shall be at liberty to---to---" "Heydey, sir! hoity-toity, hoity-toity! what's all this?" said his father. "How dare you, you young dog! address your mother or me in such a style as that? Why, I should think you the Great Mogul, or the Sublime Porte, or a pacha with two or three dozen tails at least!" "Sir, this jesting is---" said Frank, with flashing eyes, as if about to say something which might have made matters more serious, when an arm gently stole around his waist and drew him affectionately to the sofa, and a voice completed the daring sentence with, "Is your father's , Frank!" It was Mrs. Lennox, who had affectionately interfered, her eyes full of tears, to prevent the conversation going too far. "I beg---" said he. "My son, my son!" interrupted she, placing her fingers on his brow, and putting away from his flashing eyes the thick, dark hair, "what wild, bad passions have taken possession of you? Is this my sweet, gentle boy, his mother's pride, his father's hope? Is this your new manhood?" Frank raised his hand suddenly to his eyes and hid his face. Enough was visible of it, however, to show that he was touched with softer feelings. "Yes, my son," continued she, "it is. You have left already youth and innocence. Dark, fierce passions and [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-105.jpg) \- external link  - Page 104. ] bloody thoughts have taken possession of my boy; worldworship, heathen pride, and the evil spirit himself, unchecked by one idea of your Bible---your Saviour---your God." "Forgive me, my mother!" said the young man, turning away his face, which he still covered with one hand, while with the other he grasped hers. "I am a fool." "And see to what it leads. You don't know to what it may lead hereafter. I cannot bear to see you enter the state of manhood with such principles as you and Harry possess. It will lead to something dreadful. So young, and already so high and haughty, giving way to passion on every occasion and against everybody; fearless of death yourself, because you don't know what it is, and reckless of shedding the life-blood of others, or of breaking hearts that depend on you for their happiness; without prayer, religion, or any fixed belief in God or a hereafter, and frowning on your own mother with a fierceness which actually made me tremble. And how many times have I carried you in these arms, and kissed your little soft mouth, and watched by you the whole night through, and prayed to God over your sleep, that your future course might be pure and holy, and in the path of right and righteousness. Little did I think, when I used to press those laughing eyes to my lips, that they could ever dart upon me such a look." There was a pause. "Frank, you too are an infidel!" "I do not wish to be, my dear mother." "But are you not?" "I cannot control my opinion. I can only believe what I can believe," said Frank, a little impatiently. "I am young. Perhaps hereafter---but now---I cannot be master of my opinions." "But you can of your actions, and your opinions, I trust, will change more slowly. You know my opinions on duelling. Your death in a duel would break my heart, I solemnly believe, and bring me to a premature grave. Were you so unfortunate and guilty as to kill another , I should find the blow still more intolerable. I am your mother; my health, happiness, and life are interested. I have a right to speak, and a right to be listened to. Hear me, therefore. Bring your new friend Glendenning to dinner to-morrow. I accord the request, and was, perhaps, wrong to refuse it. I grant it unconditionally, and I will [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-106.jpg) \- external link  - Page 105. ] so far overcome, or at least command, my own feelings, as to treat him as you would wish a friend of yours to be treated. But I am going to make a request. You have now established your character beyond cavil as a brave man. Now then, my son, I make you a solemn prayer--- I , your mother: as a test of your affection, a mark of your gratitude, and a recompense to me for all a mothers' pain and a mother's care, give me your word you will never , under any circumstances, fight another duel." "What, even if---" "Even if anything ," said she. "It is, perhaps, a sacrifice I ask; but it is your mother who asks it---I implore. It is, perhaps, her own life which a mother begs of her son, and he hesitates." "My mother," said Frank, greatly affected, but smiling through his tears, "you make me feel like another Coriolanus." "Do not be, then, less human than he." "Well, you have succeeded. I do here, in the most solemn manner---" "Hallo!" said Mr. Lennox, who had stood very quietly regarding this scene, sometimes himself affected, sometimes shaking his head doubtingly, and who had just lighted a new cigar, and was blowing out a long wreath of smoke as he spoke---"Hallo! Stop, my boy. What is all this, Katy, my dear? Don't take advantage of his innoncence and affection for you to extort a promise, the nature of which you do not understand, and which he will possibly hereafter have many reasons to regret, perhaps some to violate. I never knew any good yet come of virtuous resolutions . If a man ain't good without them, he won't be with; and to the sin, whatever it may be, which he commits, they only add perjury, and a double sense of meanness and guilt. How often have I sworn I would not smoke, and yet, here I am, you see! What drawback do you suppose such a resolution would be to him if he received any galling, sudden, scorching insult? By Jove! in such cases, men don't think of resolutions. I don't wish him, or any son of mine, to entangle himself with resolutions, and promises, and oaths, on any subject. Then, as to duelling, I approve it. I wish him to fight. I'll load his pistols for him, and go out with him, rather than he should show the white feather. Society is what it is, and God made it as it is. The [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-107.jpg) \- external link  - Page 106. ] Christian doctrine of forgiveness of enemies is nonsense. A man smites you on one cheek, you are to turn the other. He takes your coat, you are to give him your cloak also. What would society become under such circumstances? A wild Indian breaks into your home and murders your wife; you stand quietly by, when a manly defence might save her, and, when she is finished, you politely show him the way to the cradle of your infant child. Captain Glendenning offers an insult to Miss Elton, and Frank stands aside, with a meek smile, and points the drunken scoundrel to Mary and you." "Oh, my husband, this is not the right interpretation of the word of Christ." "Well, if we can interpret these things differently, good. You interpret them your way---we, ours. You fancy yourself bound to make no distinction between friend and foe, and when you see a servant stealing your diamonds, hand her, if you choose, the key to your plate. We will forgive our enemies also; but, by Jove! we'll teach them to behave themselves first. But, by-the-way, my dear Kate, it seems to me you and Frank are changing ground here. It is Frank who forgives Glendenning, and you refuse pardon!" There was so much truth in this that it occasioned a general laugh, in which the differences in this happy and affectionate family generally ended. "Well, I'll tell you what," said Frank, "I have not been exactly honest with you, and that's one reason, perhaps, why I have been more hurt by mother's refusal than she thinks I ought to have been. To say the truth, I have already asked Glendenning. I have committed myself thus too far to retreat; otherwise, although I do think the fellow very agreeable and clever, I should have never put the mere whim of having him here in comparison with your displeasure or annoyance." "There! that's your father's own son!" said Mrs. Lennox. "Go and do a thing first, and then ask permission." "But Miss Elton," said Mr. Lennox; "don't you think she has some right to be consulted?" "Oh, I am sure, sir," said Miss Elton, who had hitherto been so distressed at the altercation in the family, that she was pleased in almost any way to behold its amicable termination, "I could have no right, no wish to form an opinion." [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-108.jpg) \- external link  - Page 107. ] "There's an angel for you, you young dog!" said his father, who little dreamed how far matters had gone between them. Frank blushed, but Fanny remained undisturbed by the observation. "Of course, I ought not to have invited him without announcing it to Miss Elton and begging her consent, but I was so sure---" "Oh, let us have him," said Mary; "perhaps it will be of service to the poor fellow to see what a family he was about depriving of its pride and ornament." Frank bowed at the compliment. "Well done! Molly!" said her father. "You are more forgiving than more pious folks!" "I must not take too much credit," said Mary, "or I should be dishonest. The truth is, I am dying of curiosity to see this young gentleman. Frank says he's agreeable, clever, and handsome. Mr. Emmerson says he's vulgar, coarse, and ugly. Mr. Earnest told me he was the greatest genius that ever lived, and father thinks his conduct is only the effervescence of such noble qualities as Henry the Fifth's. What people talk so much about, and give such contradictory opinions about, of course becomes an object of interest, and, as I am of the fairer sex, and curiosity is one of our allowed foibles, I move we let the youth come, if it's only to have a good look at him." "I had one look at him," said Mrs. Lennox, with a shudder, "as his face turned on Frank after he had received the blow. His countenance was that of the very evil spirit of darkness and fury himself, and I thought to see Frank struck dead at his feet by the very glance of his eye." "Pooh! pooh!" said Mr. Lennox; "when men are struck, you must not expect them to look amiable. Eyes don't kill quite so easily; at least" (turning to Fanny) "not those of the male gender. Now, there are obs---" "Mine, I presume," said Fanny. "If you think them so dangerous, you had better get out of their way." "You're an impudent little witch," said Lennox, "and for all the trouble you have caused in this family, you must make me some reparation." "What reparation, you horrid being? Do you think you are going to scold me as you do poor Frank?" Mr. Lennox approached her, and she started off to the corner of the room, for she had been subjected to these [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-109.jpg) \- external link  - Page 108. ] reparations before in the company of her audacious, light-hearted host! "You must come to it, Fanny," said he. "The laws of the Medes and Persians were mere weathercocks to my determination. You might just as well yield." "Well, I'll capitulate on honourable terms rather than endure your impertinence," said Fanny, blushing, and looking so provokingly pretty that Frank began almost to think it his duty to interfere. "Take care!" said Lennox, "I'm coming." "Well, then, stop, and I'll capitulate." "How can you be such a child, Henry?" said Mrs. Lennox. "Silence! good mother hear the embassy," quoted Lennox. "Now say, Chatillon, what would France with us?" "Well!" said Fanny, laughing, "I will come and kiss you, and I'm not to suffer such an extortion again, at least for a month." "Agreed!" "Agreed!" She left the corner and fairly kissed him on his cheek, upon which he smacked his lips in such a way that Frank's dark eyes flashed and Mrs. Lennox said, "If I were Fanny, I'd box your ears for you." "But, unfortunately, you are not Fanny, my dear," said Lennox. "You're so ready to order everybody else to be horsewhipped," said Fanny, "what do you think you yourself deserve?" "To hear you, Frank, and Mary sing a glee as a punishment," said Lennox. "Come, we have had no music since Frank's scrape." She sat down at the piano and ran her fingers rapidly over the keys. Frank drew near with Mary, and they commenced a favourite glee, both Mr. and Mrs. Lennox joining, for both sang well. Harry came in, for it was late, while they were singing. Had they attended to him, they would have marked the pale thought and moody sadness of his countenance; but the rest were too absorbed in their delightful occupation to observe anything else, and the young man entered unnoticed, or at least unspoken to, and stood in the embrasure of a deep window, half concealed behind a heavy curtain, with [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-110.jpg) \- external link  - Page 109. ] folded arms and glowing brow, leaning against the wall, gazing at the group as on a picture. "Miss Elton's servant!" said a domestic, opening the door. "Why, what does Miss Elton want of a servant?" said Mrs. Lennox. "Is not Frank here?" "Oh, I thought, perhaps, my dear Mrs. Lennox, I am so troublesome to you; and, besides, it's cruel to take Frank out this time of night." "Really, Miss Elton," said Frank, "you and everybody else seem to think me a very delicate child!" "Certainly!" said she, laughing. "Poor little fellow! He looks as if he ought to have been in bed an hour ago!" Contrary to his resolution, Harry tried to catch her parting glance, but she went off laughing, and without looking at him. The hour for the dinner, which was to introduce Glendenning and his friend, at length arrived, and Mr. and Mrs. Lennox, Frank, Harry, and Mary, repaired to the drawing-room to receive the guests. First came the Eltons, the old gentleman looking rather grave; Mrs. Elton, her face, as usual, radiant with pleasure, talking the whole time from the moment she entered; Fanny, arrayed in all the charm of youthful beauty which exercised such an influence over the two susceptible young men, and which was destined unconsciously to mingle such consequences in the subsequent lives of more than one of the persons present. Then Mary went down stairs, and led in, almost by force, little Seth Copeley, in a perfect flame of blushes, partly called up by the idea of appearing, for the first time in his life, in society, and partly by the lively consciousness of having on a very new suit of uncommonly city-looking clothes. "Come in, Seth, come in," said Mary, whose good heart took a great interest in this friendless boy, and who had arranged, with somewhat more taste than he had been able [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-111.jpg) \- external link  - Page 110. ] to do, various points of his toilet, brushed back his locks from his forehead, and put a neat brooch, a present from herself, into the folds of his stock. "What are you afraid ef? I do believe, if I had not gone down stairs and brought him up, we should not have had the pleasure of his society to-day." "Walk up here, you young Lothario!" said Mr. Lennox, "and let us look at you. What are you twisting your waistcoat button off in that style for? Have you any conscientious objections to buttons?" "No, sir," said Seth, after one of his short laughs. "Very well, then. Take your hands out of your pantaloons pockets; throw back your shoulders; lift up your head; stand strait. Look at me, sir! Can't you stand so, sir?" "He is really a very handsome, sweet little fellow," whispered Mrs. Elton, loud enough for him and every one else to hear her, "and such delightful eyes! I'm sure one of these days those eyes will do their affair, and---" "How do you expect to become a lawyer and a gentleman, sir," continued Mr. Lennox, "if you bury yourself in an office, and do nothing but read and copy? The law is the noblest profession in the world. It offers you a brilliant career, and demands knowledge not only of books, but of men. That's the reason why I have asked you to dine with me to-day. You must begin to accustom yourself to society, to meet men and women without flinching or being flustered. Stop that blushing, sir! How do you think you'll ever be able to perform the high functions of President of the United States---as I presume you will have to do one of these days---if you can't come into a room without obviously wishing you could leave your hands and feet at the bottom of the Red Sea?" "Come here, Seth," said Mrs. Lennox; "you'll learn all these things by-and-by. You shall sit next me, my dear little boy, and I'll take care of you at dinner." The poor fellow went awkwardly where he was bid, glad to escape the boisterous benevolence of his master. As he did so, guests were announced in quick succession. The usual salutations had scarcely passed, when the conversation, by general consent, appeared to fall on the two expected English guests. Various opinions were expressed as to the extraordinary character of Glendenning, [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-112.jpg) \- external link  - Page 111. ] who was warmly defended by Mr. Lennox, Frank, and Mrs. Elton, against the rest of the company. Frank praised him enthusiastically. His father declared against the principle of putting a man in coventry because he had exhibited the follies of youth; and Mrs. Elton was sure he was a noble fellow from his magnanimous conduct on the field, where he had risked his own life by wasting his shot, and, at the same time, saved that of Frank, and where he had made all the reparation possible. Any one, she said, was liable to do wrong, but only the good were ashamed of it afterward; and we ought to recollect that there was more joy in heaven at the recovery of one lost sinner than for the ninety-nine who had never gone astray. She was going on to relate an occurrence which had come under her own observation only two years previous, when she was interrupted by the opening of the door, and the servants announcing Captain White and Captain Glendenning. They were received by Frank with a countenance expressive of the sincerest pleasure, and led by him first to his mother, then to his father, who shook them warmly by the hand. The kind greeting of Mrs. Lennox was rendered much less difficult than she had supposed it would be, by the agreeable surprise she felt at seeing a person so different from what she had expected. The two strangers were presented to all the company, including the Eltons and Fanny. At the sight of the latter the embarrassment and shame of Glendenning were so obvious as to considerably soften the sentiment of indignation which had been generally felt at his entrance. Fanny at first turned pale, but her colour came presently back deeper than before. There was a moment's extremely awkward pause, which Glendenning broke, with equal grace and frankness, by touching boldly and successfully the dangerous chord vibrating in every breast. "I should think myself at this moment even more censurable than I am if I hesitated to express, my dear Mrs. Lennox, my shame and regret at what has happened; and my appearance before you would be a new insult if I did not come most deeply repentant and to seek your pardon!" "Nonsense, my dear fellow!" said Frank. "Don't give yourself the trouble." "You are the first, sir," said Mrs. Lennox, "to touch upon a subject which I should not have alluded to, as it cannot but awaken in a mother's breast emotions far from [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-113.jpg) \- external link  - Page 112. ] agreeable. But your frankness merits equal frankness in return, and I will confess I did not think, ten minutes ago, that any circumstance could make me forgive you. I hope, however, I am too much of a Christian to withhold from true repentance the pardon which we all ourselves require." "Bravo! my dear mother!" said Frank, in high glee at the smooth manner in which affairs were going. "If Miss Elton, also," rejoined Glendenning, "knew how I detest myself for the incident which has distressed her, she too would forgive me." Miss Elton bowed her head without speaking. "I assure you," said White, "my friend has changed more since the little affair with your son than I could have believed possible; and, upon my soul, I haven't the slightest doubt that he will get on hereafter famously." "Say no more!" said Lennox; "you will find me, boys, always as ready to grant pardon, when asked, as to---" "Certainly," said Mrs. Lennox, who saw that her candid husband was running upon breakers. "If the affair have had such a favourable effect upon what, I hope, is but the thoughtlessness of youth, I shall regret it the less." "Since it has made us acquainted with Captain Glendenning and his friend, I don't think we can regret it at all," said Lennox. "My dear father!" cried Frank. Dinner was announced, and the company were soon seated. The manner and appearance of Glendenning, as well as every word he said, gained him the good opinion of all present, who, like Mrs. Lennox, had been prepared to meet a very different sort of person. Instead of a coarse rou e , he was a slender, handsome young man of six-and-twenty, of manners mild and modest, a prepossessing and even beautiful countenance, and betraying, in various ways, embarrassment, ingenuousness, delicacy of feeling, and kindness of heart. Mrs. Lennox felt singularly interested in him, and resolved to inquire into his history. As she sat near White she was enabled to do so, and privately learned from that gentleman all she desired. "Glendenning," said White, "has a constitutional peculiarity. His temper is as quick and his blood as hot as his judgment (although good when it makes itself heard) is slow. With the best heart in the world, and the very best intentions, he has always been in difficulty. He lost [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-114.jpg) \- external link  - Page 113. ] his mother, whom he tenderly loved, at the age of thirteen, and his father immediately married again, by which he brought an accession of two thousand a year to his fortune, a woman of a sharp, peculiarly disagreeable temper and character into his house, and a world of trouble to poor Charley. The step-mother hated him of course. The father, also, of course played into the hands of the lady. Charley inherited from his mother an independence of his own, which, perhaps, made him less patient than he should have been. There are half a dozen step-sisters and step-brothers, who all hate him like the parents, and he hates them as heartily. His hot temper, perhaps, did carry him too far in his relations with them. Considering his own mother's memory wronged by the sudden union, for, in truth, `the funeral baked meats did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables,' he found the feeble affection which his father bore him not enough to protect him from certain annoyances at home, and he was therefore driven into a course of dissipation. He then shunned society, and sought only companions of an improper description, till they bought him a commission, more to get rid of him than anything else, and his papa, after recommending me to keep an eye on him, and see that he did not get himself hanged, or in any other way disgrace his family (I really don't think the old gentleman cares one iota about Charley himself), shipped him off, and I have been his best friend ever since. I assure you, a more affectionate, generous, warm-hearted, noble fellow never breathed. Since the little affair with your son he has apparently devoted some time to sober reflection, and I have no doubt he will become as fine a fellow as heart can wish. In short, I think his interval of thoughtless desperation is over. He has gone through his transition state, and I should judge him to be a reformed man." "You have greatly interested me in him," said Mrs. Lennox. "Do you remain long at New-York?" "Some weeks, I think." "If your friend and yourself can be induced to visit us sometimes, I should like to see more of him." "Oh! he will, I doubt not, be happy; and I must assure you the magnanimity you display in forgiving him will not fail to make a deep and salutary impression on him." "I hope so; he appears to possess a fine mind." "And a very grateful and warm heart, I assure you." [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-115.jpg) \- external link  - Page 114. ] The hope of being able to exert a beneficial influence on such a character inspired Mrs. Lennox with the resolution to make the attempt, and there was something in the face of her proposed pupil which caused her to think the undertaking not an extravagant one. While this conversation was going on, in a low voice, between Mrs. Lennox and Captain White, Mrs. Elton was talking so busily to Glendenning as to preclude the possibility of his attending to anything else, and Mrs. Henderson was stating the very disagreeable impression both the strangers made on her to Mr. Brigham, and her astonishment at finding such improper persons at table with her. "Mr. Lennox is, I , of all persons, should allow," said that lady, carefully lowering her voice, so that Harry, who sat near, could catch nothing of her communications, "a most excellent man. To me he has been the most devoted friend, but it is curious what ideas he has on some subjects, and how his wife yields to him on all occasions." "And should not a wife yield to her husband?" mildly asked Mr. Brigham. "Well! I don't know," said she, fixing her envious black eyes on the persons of whom she spoke, while a shade of sharp discontent passed over her forbidding, yellow countenance. "Mrs. Lennox is an amiable, nice woman, and I ought to be the last person in the world to say anything against her, since she is my husband's only sister, and both I and Mr. Henderson have received nothing but one continued series of hospitalities from them, and they have, with their princely fortune, as you know, been the means of putting my husband into his prosperous business. I am sure they love us with all their hearts, and never lose an opportunity of showing it. One can't help using one's eyes and ears, you know. But I ought to be the last person---" "Your kind heart," said Mr. Brigham, with a gentle irony, "instructs you wisely to be silent respecting the weaknesses of your friends." "Certainly. If there is one thing in this world which I hate more than another, it is backbiting . I'm like a child in that respect. My heart always gets the better of my head. What a lovely girl Fanny has grown?" "Yes." "I think her character has improved as much as her person." [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-116.jpg) \- external link  - Page 115. ] "I always fancied Miss Elton the gentlest of beings." "Yes, she has that look." "The whole family are perfect," said Mrs. Elton to Glendenning. "There isn't a fault in one of them. Two such noble young men were never seen. Mary is an angel out of heaven, and Mr. Lennox the most delightful of men, while my dear Mrs. Lennox---ah!" and tears actually came into her eyes, "if you knew her as I do, Captain Glendenning, you would love her with all the devotion of a son." "It is all very well," said Harry to Elton (who had designedly led his young friend to the subject of religion again), "but duelling is, and ought to be sanctioned by public opinion, and society could not hold together without it." "You will allow, I think," said Elton, "that Christianity forbids it?" "Yes." "That it regards it as a crime? " "Yes." "Then you cannot fight a duel without violating the spirit and precept of Christianity?" "Yes." "Then the question narrows itself to a single one: will you admit the institution of duelling and dismiss Christianity, or will you embrace Christianity and denounce duelling?" "It does!" "And yet you advocate duelling?" "I do." "Then you are willing to see Christianity rejected by mankind?" "A grave question," said Harry, after a pause. "But no man shall make me a hypocrite. Christianity is a useful institution. I do not wish to see it destroyed. But it is not true; it is not divine. Its precepts are beautiful, but not possible. They cannot be applied to practice, nor am I singular in thinking so, however I may be in confessing my thoughts. Other people think the same; but they do not say so. Only a few enthusiasts, or men not fairly brought into the currents of active life, pretend to make the precepts of Christ really the shapers of thought and the rules of action. I would not express these opinions to the world, not even to my own friends generally. But to you, who are not a bigot, I speak freely." [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-117.jpg) \- external link  - Page 116. ] "I honour your frankness," said Mr. Elton, "as much as I regret your opinions. Most men, particularly the ardent and self-confident, if possessed of thinking and cultivated minds, are liable, not only to doubt, but to disbelieve , at some period of their lives. If it had been the intention of Providence that the subject should be placed to the world at large beyond a doubt, then no one could have doubted. It is the most solemn one which can engage the attention of a human being, and, in proportion as life glides away, its solemnity and importance increase. But it requires, to the generality of mankind, attention and study like any other of the various advantages which are placed within the reach of industry. If it pleased you flippantly to deny the truths of astronomy, you might do so, and only study could place you in possession of them. The earth does not seem to us round or in motion. You are not conscious of being whirled through space at the rate of so many thousand miles an hour. To the ignorant you may even successfully deny these facts, and appeal to reason, sight, and common sense with success; only study and examination can make you properly acquainted with the subject, which turns out to be, upon examination, very different from what it appears to mere human sight and mere human reason. So with the still more vast spiritual truths of Christianity. From your love of right, from the clearness of your understanding and the virtues of your heart, I hope, when you have tested by trial the insufficiency of infidelity to bear a human soul even to the verge of eternity; when you have had time fairly to discover the empty errors which now wear in your eyes the aspect of truth, I hope you will reconsider the subject and change your opinion. My object in eliciting from you the present distinct avowal of your complete unbelief is to let you yourself see clearly what your own opinions are . Don't slip through life without being anything; without either belief or unbelief. Irrational animals may do this, but a rational being is formed to acquire opinions by reason, used in study or reflection. Excuse me for sliding into a sermon at dinner; this is not the proper place and you are not in the proper mood. I should be glad to speak with you oftener alone, coolly and with only truth for our object. Now, however, all I wish is to establish one point. You are an infidel; that is, you do not believe the Bible . It is certain, as you say, that Christendom is full of professing Christians who [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-118.jpg) \- external link  - Page 117. ] do not believe more than yourself. You are young: life is before you. You will have time to observe, if God please to prolong your days. All I ask of you is, do observe. Don't avoid or forget the subject." "I appreciate the interest you show in me," said Harry. "But to him who has not yet chosen any religion, it is necessary, if resolved on adopting one, that he should study them all. I should spend my days and nights in comparing Fetichism with Sabeism, the claims of Mohammed, Brahma, and Confucius. My professional studies must not be neglected while engaged in these misty researches, and I fear I should waste my life before I had succeeded in ascertaining what it is, whence it came, and to what it tends." "You are young and happy," said Elton, gravely. "You will not always continue so. There are years when the mortal stands, or seems to stand, in no need of religion. But years pass away. If you will allow, we will resume this subject at some future time." "I fear it will be of no avail; but I can never refuse the advice which comes from a friend." This debate was conducted between the two speakers, and was not, probably, overheard by any one else. Elton was surprised to find the steady determination with which his young companion adhered to opinions so dangerous, while Harry secretly congratulated himself on having always the best of the argument (although, in truth, Mr. Elton had not commenced to argue at all), and regarded the latter as a very worthy, Puritanical gentleman, who believed the nonsense he had been taught from his cradle, and he envied him his self-satisfied freedom from doubt. "What a delightful painting I could make of this circle," said Brigham to Harry, "in this light. Upon my soul, I have a mind to do it, as a sort of continuation to your family history." "You have painted us all so many times before," said Harry, alluding to several productions on the wall, "that I should think you would be nearly tired of us." The pieces to which Harry referred were various paintings and drawings of the children in as many attitudes and costumes. There was Frank, a two-years' old child, with his papa's hat and coat on. Harry, a boy of thirteen, [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-119.jpg) \- external link  - Page 118. ] looking you directly in the face with an expression of sunshiny, careless happiness, which formed a striking contrast to his present countenance. Mary, as a shepherdess of ten, tending a lamb; and Frank, again, still earlier, with a rattle and coral. "I have heard your father speak lately of a tour in Europe," said Brigham, "and Frank is going off to Prairie du Chien;  your sister will be getting married next, and what say you to a small painting, but sufficiently large to preserve portraits, and to produce all the effect of reality, of this company just as it now is." "If it could be done soon," said Harry, thinking of his own plans of travel, "I should like it of all things, and very seriously I engage you to do it. You can take portraits from every person. I'll have even little Seth in." "I'll do it," said Brigham. "I'll set about it immediately. I should scarcely need to alter an attitude. Miss Elton in the foreground, and those two English officers, your father and Emmerson, your mother and Frank. We must talk of this hereafter. Your father especially will make an admirable head." "We'll talk of this more particularly to-morrow," said Harry. "Emmerson's is a singular-looking countenance. He's a clever man, I believe?" asked Brigham. "Oh, very; the apple of my father's eye. His history is interesting." "I think I have heard of a service your father rendered him." "Ten years ago," said Harry, "my father had occasion to visit, several times, one of the prisoners in the old jail. While there he observed a man of three or four-and-thirty, of quiet manners and not unpleasing exterior, shabbily dressed, pale, thin, and evidently unhappy. He was informed that the person was an attorney, who was imprisoned for a small debt, and seemed to suffer in health as well as spirits, particularly from want of good food and bedclothing. The old Roman law which gave to creditors the dead body of their debtor was less barbarous than that of our enlightened land, which then plunged the living into a cheerless dungeon, deprived them of the means to exercise their industry, and yet, while the felon was fed, made no provision to supply them with the necessaries of life." [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-120.jpg) \- external link  - Page 119. ] "Yes, it is really startling to observe," said Brigham, "what abhorrent forms of error sometimes stand in the midst of us, with the daylight shining full upon them, and yet exciting no notice because we are used to them." "Well," said Harry, "my father sought the acquaintance of this person---offered his services---sent him the best of food from his own table---supplied him with books, newspapers, etc., till at length, learning his history, and also that he had been practising law for a year in New-York, or, rather, endeavouring to practise it, without the least chance of obtaining any business, requested to pay his debt, which was only $300, and to take him into his own office as an attorney, to assist him in business. He found him well-informed, keen, and intelligent, a perfectly cool and steady business mind, and a careful, indefatigable student. I believe he often sits up the whole night to study, and he has now got to be such an able lawyer that, although he has not the talent of oratory, he really takes the lead in the business of the office, and is a most invaluable assistance. He is a silent man, very quiet, very modest, very amiable. He never speaks of the circumstances under which he made our acquaintance, but I presume he feels them not the less deeply; and he devotes himself to the business of the office with such indefatigable zeal and fidelity, that we all see in it the evidence of a mind not the less grateful because somewhat reserved and silent." "You spoke of his history. What is it?" "He is the son of an honest farmer, who, although himself poor and uneducated, discovered the intelligence of his son, and sent him to school and then to college, where his severe application acquired for him a respectable standing. He afterward taught Latin and Greek as an usher in a day school while he was studying law; and when admitted to the bar and obliged to abandon this means of support, his cold and silent manners not being of a kind likely to procure him friends and clients, he languished for some time in obscurity and indigence, necessarily running in debt, till at last, although one of the very cleverest men at the bar, he found himself in jail." "Poor fellow!" "Ah! now the scene is changed. My father loves and trusts him like a brother. Everything is committed to his hands. I, so much his junior in age, and so much his [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-121.jpg) \- external link  - Page 120. ] inferior in instruction and in habits of study, am very glad of an opportunity to learn under such an able master. We all love him as a superior being. Everything is Mr. Emmerson with us. If my father is at a loss for an opinion, he goes to Mr. Emmerson. If he thinks of purchasing a house or a horse, he consults Mr. Emmerson. If Frank wants anything, he applies to Mr. Emmerson. If I am at a loss, and my father is not at hand, Emmerson is my man. And I vow, I believe my mother, who esteems him entire perfection, if she were hesitating whether to have mince-pie or plum-pudding for desert, would go down and ask the advice of Mr. Emmerson." "Ha, ha, ha! I suppose his fortune is made, then?" "I believe my father considers it to be, at least, secure. He received at first a salary, which was subsequently raised. When I entered the office as a partner, it was agreed that we should, after the third year, make a new arrangement, putting him upon an equal footing. My father, you know, has scarcely need of his professional income, either for himself or any of his family except me, and is too happy in being able to bring forward so clever a man as Emmerson; we are, in fact, going to arrange the matter this very summer." "He must be a great pleasure to you all." "He is, as my mother often says, `perfection,' and, at the same time, in business I never saw a keener, more watchful, far-seeing eye. In fact, there is something rather remarkable about him." "And the young, country-looking boy, farther down, who is he?" "What, Seth? Ah, poor little Seth! ha, ha, ha! Another of my father's prot eges . A little country fellow from Vermont, well-descended from the Green Mountain Boys, who resisted every attempt, vi et armis , to make a cobbler of him, and declared he would be nothing but a scholar and a great lawyer. He was whipped at the plough, they say, worse than the oxen which drew it, and sent into the barn to thresh corn, only to be much more thoroughly threshed himself, till at last his father kicked him neck and heels out of doors, and told him to go and be a gentleman and be--- closing with a very naughty word. His mother, however, sent after him a small, yearly supply of cash, which he made go a great ways. My father met him by chance [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-122.jpg) \- external link  - Page 121. ] during an excursion into Vermont, and you know his enthusiasm for anything striking and out of the common routine. He ordered the young lad into his room, examined him a little, found he had picked up a good deal of learning in the raw material, and offered him a place as clerk in his office with a pittance sufficient to live on. We've had him now several years. I like him much; so do the rest of us; but Emmerson finds him rather intractable. Nevertheless, my father does his best to bring him out; my father never does anything by halves, you know. It is his happiness to do good---to help along young people in the world---to find merit anywhere---the more unsuspected the place, the better,--- and to call it forth. He fancies he sees in little Seth a certain excellence of nature, and a certain moral and intellectual capacity, which circumstances and time are to ripen into something very remarkable. I don't know how it is. I like him; but Emmerson, whose opinion has great weight, says he's a stupid, obstinate little mule, and that nothing can be made of him worth the trouble we have bestowed on him. This judgment of Emmerson has put poor Seth lately rather under a cloud, and nobody but my father, whose heart shines on all alike, continues to have any high hopes of him. He invites him to his own table as one of his sons, as he says, to form his manners and make a gentleman of him. Poor Seth!" The eyes of both the gentlemen here turned on Seth, who, attired in his elegant suit of new clothes, presented rather a ludicrous figure. He had a long shirt-collar, which, while it appeared in danger of cutting his ears off, at the same time interfered with the ingress of food into his mouth, and the aspiring propensities of which Mary had in vain endeavoured to bring under. He said nothing, and when spoken to, only blushed deeply, and stammered an answer that made him appear all that Emmerson had declared him. He formed a striking contrast to Emmerson himself, who, although his manners were peculiarly quiet and unassuming, was drawn into the general conversation several times, and discovered an extensive information, displaying a mind stored with facts, the result of long study; and the respect with which he was listened to by all the members of the Lennox family communicated itself imperceptibly to the rest of the company. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-123.jpg) \- external link  - Page 122. ] About a week after the foregoing scene, on a morning which seemed to have assumed its brightest looks for the occasion, the bell of the steamboat Chancellor Livingston, advertised to start at eight for Albany, rang the notice to dilatory passengers that the moment of departure was at hand. It wanted but two minutes of the appointed time, the captain had just shouted, "All aboard!" in that vociferous voice peculiar to persons of his profession, and a couple of men had stooped to draw in the plank, when two carriages were seen rapidly approaching, and the already revolving paddles were checked. The party consisted of Mr. and Mrs. Lennox, Mrs. Elton and Fanny, with Frank, Mary, and little Seth, all in high glee, and in a very great hurry. They were speedily shown on board by the polite captain, who waited a moment to see that the luggage followed in safety. Under his superintendence, and to the silent amusement of the crowd of passengers and of various miscellaneous groups upon the bales, barrels, and piles of pine wood on the wharf, three or four stout fellows soon transferred to the deck the large hair trunk and the little leathern one, the three portmanteaus and the five bandboxes, besides an indefinite number of valises, hat-cases, canes, fowling-pieces, fishing-rods, and umbrellas. This effected, the captain breathed again. He once more shouted "All aboard!" and the wheels again commenced their violent vocation, when another carriage was observed thundering down Courtlandt-street, with a directness of purpose sufficiently indicating, on the part of the occupants, a determination to transfer their persons from it to the boat, if possible. The several hundred passengers drew to one side of the decks to watch the denouement of this little drama, which they appeared unfeelingly to regard as a comic performance; while the driver of the approaching vehicle, the horses thereof, the people within, and the desperate and indignant captain, all seemed affected with emotions more or less approaching to the tragic. The latter gentleman, in a tone of voice rather animated than otherwise, ordered the [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-124.jpg) \- external link  - Page 123. ] plank to be hauled in, muttering, at the same time, something which might possibly have resulted from a ruffled temper, and which appeared to have a reference either to his own eyes or those of the rapidly-arriving strangers. Despite these inauspicious circumstances, the said travellers reached the scene, and, without pausing to reply to various propositions respecting " very fine, sweet oranges," and newspapers containing "the last arrivals from Europe," proceeded forthwith to leap on board. Their luggage, happily light in weight and not numerous in articles, was pitched after them, in an unceremonious style, by a man, who first stopped, however, to decipher the inscription, "Captain Glendenning," on the plate of a valise. It is generally understood, by those conversant with the character of the captain (of the steamboat), that if his glances could have killed outright, the said man, at that same instant, would have descended at an uncommonly rapid rate, and probably head first, into the shades below. "All aboard!" " Will you haul in that plank?" shouted the captain, now full three quarters of a minute after his time. "All aboard!" echoed half a dozen voices. The bell gave one more deafening toll, which made many ladies place their hands against their ears and draw up their faces into the prettiest and drollest expressions imaginable, laughing all the time, while those with whom the reader is acquainted were heartily shaking White and Glendenning by the hand. The plank (at length!) was drawn in with a force bordering on ferocity, to the imminent danger of the feet and legs of some forty or fifty individuals. The broad wheels gave plunge after plunge as the huge engine began to heave and pant with its great labour, the cables were cast loose, happily (though miraculously!) without injury to any one's neck or limbs, the surrounding green water grew white and distracted with foam, the shore, with its crowded and admiring audience, receded from the eyes of the throng of smiling travellers, who began to inhale more freely the cool air of the open bay instead of the hot dust of the town, and as the immense boat put fairly off into the river, and turned her prow up the Hudson, the band stationed beneath the broad awning on the upper deck began to play such a soul-stirring air, that everybody looked as bright and happy as if there had not been such a thing as care in the whole world. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-125.jpg) \- external link  - Page 124. ] The meeting of the Lennoxes with their two English friends was altogether unexpected, and so much the more agreeable on that very account. It was nothing but, "My dear Captain Glendenning," and "My dear Mrs. Lennox," and "Who expected to see you?" and "Where in the world did you come from?" "I thought your engagements prevented your leaving," and "Now we've got you, we shall carry you off to Rose Hill!" Glendenning explained to Mr. Lennox, while White explained the same to Mrs. Lennox, how they had been unable to resist the pleasure of taking the trip with them, and how they had successfully pleaded to be let off from their engagement, and how happy and delighted they were, etc., etc., etc., while Mrs. Elton was launching off, to nobody in particular, into a glowing description of Rose Hill and its resources, in which the words boating, shooting, fishing, riding, flowers, moonlight, bread and butter, poetry, and many others, followed each other with such earnest rapidity that her eyes were half full of tears, and glittered through her continual smiles like an April sun-shower. Lennox insisted upon keeping them at least a month, and, when something was intimated of "leave of absence" being expired, and a "very severe lieutenantcolonel," he said he didn't care a fig for all the lieutenantcolonels in Christendom, and they might lay all the blame on his shoulders; and if he could catch the lieutenant-colonel at Rose Hill, he would serve him the same way, and, if they chose, they might tell him he said so! Never was there such a merry party, such superb weather, such bright things said, and such a wonderful growth of familiarity and friendship. One of the most spirited things possible is this way of starting off from New-York up the Hudson. There was more seen of each other's minds and hearts in a day than would have been the case in a year anywhere else. What with the crowd, and the movement, and the noise, and the voices, and the shaking of hands, and the hailing of friends to bid good-by from deck to shore, and the bracing, sweet air, and the beautiful women, and the jokes and the laughter at everybody and everything, and the sharp, first-rate appetite occasioned by all this, and the smell of the very nice breakfast you are going to get presently, and the flying by of the great, red, smoking, dusty, magnificent, brawling, bristling, crowded city, with the black wharves and old meal-stores vanishing in [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-126.jpg) \- external link  - Page 125. ] double-quick time, and the sloops, and ferryboats, and barges, and ships, and the green woods, and shores, and rocks, and sand-beaches, and farm-houses, and villages, and villas, and leaning hills, and broken, perpendicular precipices, all floating behind you like a perfect vision of enchantment, all as fresh and new in the tender morning light as if just finished on the painter's easel, all steeped in radiant colours, and perfumes, and grateful silence---in short, to a person, like most of our present party, healthy and happy, with plenty of money in his pockets and hope in his bosom, entirely free from business and care, such a trip, under such circumstances, is almost enough to make him forget the extremely bad character human life has received from most who have favoured us with their opinions on the subject. The next memorable incident of the day was another deafening peal from a large hand-bell mercilessly rung by an honest negro, his face shining with delight at the noise he made and the important duty he was performing, who announced, in a magisterial voice, "Them gentleman as hasn't paid his passages, will please walk to the captain's office and settle it!"---a piece of rhetoric which brought the gayety of our little party to its highest possible point, made even Fanny, who was inclined to be pensive, give one of her old girlish laughs, and threw Seth into such convulsions of delight that the merriment of his companions was, if possible, enhanced thereby. Then came a black lady, very ingeniously, and, as she probably thought, tastefully dressed, with a variety of ornaments and elegances peculiarly patronised by our sable belles; and after she had quietly and mysteriously selected the ladies by a freemason sort of nod and gesture, and thus caused most of them to vanish before the three or four hundred single gentlemen knew anything of what was going on, it was announced to the lady-less, male remnant of the ravenous assemblage, that the hour of breakfast had arrived, and that, by transferring their persons below, they might partake of the same. If any of them declined the invitation, we can only state, the fact has not come to our knowledge. There are various sights in this world calculated to awaken intense emotion, but few more so than that which burst upon the individuals who brought up the rear of the procession into the cabin, as they beheld the splendidly furnished [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-127.jpg) \- external link  - Page 126. ] saloons, and the long, endless tables smoking with every delicacy, which would provoke the appetite more than it was already provoked, had such process been desirable, or, indeed, possible. The Lennox party had been obligingly placed in possession of one end of the principal table, where, Lennox at the head and leading the attack, such an onset was made upon the enemy as never was seen. The effect of the motion, the excitement, the sharp morning air had been irresistible. A most extraordinay disappearance of the various surrounding edibles took place, the four gentlemen, like gallant knights, hovering around their "ladies fair," and anticipating their wants, and thereby drawing closer the bands of friendship than could have been believed possible. Mrs. Lennox took good care of Seth, who, when Mr. Lennox ironically asked him "why he did not eat something," at a moment when he was just depositing into his mouth a prodigious piece of toast and butter, and half a sausage, came near meeting his death by reason of his sudden laugh and its abrupt termination, which set everybody else laughing again, so that, in fact, it was quite a miracle that everybody got safe through with it all. Once more on deck, the spirits tranquillized, and the scenery growing every instant more beautiful, the crowd of passengers began to yield to those affinities which attract like to like. A large number were, of course, acquaintances. Such as were strangers were duly presented, and the enjoyment of society could scarcely be anywhere greater than thus, under the broad awning of the upper deck of the immense steamboat, and floating through scenes which recalled the valley of Rasselas or the still brighter abodes of the, alas! once innocent and happy parents of mankind. In this circle, the presence of the two young duellists occasioned a considerable sensation. The affair had by this time become universally known, and the part Frank had borne in it rendered him an object of universal admiration and interest. Not only is the unthinking multitude dazzled by every display of prompt and manly courage, but there is in it something fascinating, also, to the soberest and wisest. It seems to redeem even a bad cause, but how much more brilliant is it when manifested to punish aggression and protect women? Even they who were opposed to the custom of duelling, and who would have pronounced it inexcusable under any circumstances, had life-blood once flowed on their [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-128.jpg) \- external link  - Page 127. ] own floors, were silenced by the general approbation bestowed upon Frank. Had a British officer been permitted to leave the United States unpunished after such an act--- to have worn, perhaps, on his own bosom the rose thus snatched from that of an American lady, with an American officer at her side, what would England, what would the whole world have said? There was so much force in this argument that they who had nothing to oppose but the Word of God were but slightly listened to; so difficult is it for pure Christian principle to contend successfully against the passions and illusions of life. On the present occasion it was soon perceptible that Frank was the lion of the day. When it was whispered about who he was, he could not have been insensible to the eyes which were fastened on him (and some of them, as Mr. Mantelini says, " demned handsome ones too!"). He had entitled himself to the applause of his native city. The newspapers had been full of compliments; judges, lawyers, statesmen, and public magistrates shook him heartily by the hand; and among the ladies, a young hero who had just saved his country in some brilliant battle could scarcely have been more openly admired. Mary and Lennox enjoyed all this, and Mrs. Elton, who, from her whole time being occupied in talking, did not think much one way or the other, shared in the triumphs of her favourite young friend. But Mrs. Lennox looked on with regret and apprehension, lest a serious injury might be thus inflicted on her son's character. Glendenning, too, against whom, at first, the general indignation had run high, began to be regarded, not as a libertine who spent "His rich opinion For the name of a night-brawler," but as a mere frolicksome young madcap, who had firmly and magnanimously atoned in his sober senses for a boyish spree. White, too, who, it was understood, had done all in his power to prevent the occurrence at all, was praised for the officer-like firmness with which he had pressed it through to just the point where his thoughtless friend might withdraw in a chivalric way from an affair of which he had become justly ashamed. In the mean while everybody was introduced to everybody, and everybody talked to everybody about all sorts of things, and each individual of our party would have thought [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-129.jpg) \- external link  - Page 128. ] him or her self as happy as possible, if he and she had not felt they were growing happier every moment. We wish we could put down the light and continual conversation which beguiled the swift hours of this delightful day, and also the thoughts which passed through their various minds. Mrs. Lennox, as she led on White to new communications respecting his friend, felt it more than ever her duty to avail herself of his present visit, which seemed a providential opportunity, to awaken in his volatile mind some serious religious impressions. She thought she saw in him an ingenuousness of character which did not contradict his engaging manners and prepossessing countenance. The enterprise of redeeming such a person from infidelity, and the dangers and misery consequent upon it, appeared one justly worthy of a Christian. Facility of disposition, which allowed him to be led away by bad example, and impetuous impulses and passions which he had never yet learned to govern, were obviously his principal faults. As for the scheme of Christianity, its history, and the evidences on which it stands, he was totally and singularly ignorant of them, and she promised herself the pious pleasure of lifting the curtain from those sacred truths, and of displaying to his candid mind, in all its sublime and unutterable glory, the ancient and eternal fabric of Christianity. Glendenning was pleased with the prospect of a week at Rose Hill, and White was too agreeably impressed with his new acquaintances to interpose objections. Miss Elton was glad to have any one to occupy Frank's thoughts and time. She saw that his duel had given him new hopes, although the delicacy of his heart caused him to betray them only in an indirect way. She did, indeed, begin to regard him as no longer a boy, and the admiration and friendship which she really felt for him she was too artless to conceal, and he too inexperienced to understand. He evidently hoped that time might effect a favourable change in her sentiments towards him, and trusted everything to the future, which looked so bright and cloudless. But of the whole party, perhaps none were so completely rapt in enchantment (though of a very different kind) as Mrs. Elton and Seth. The former, who, in the darkest hour, had around her an atmosphere of sunshine, when that orb did really pour his splendours on the spot where she stood, beheld in the earth only a scene of uninterrupted [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-130.jpg) \- external link  - Page 129. ] bliss. All nature and every individual wore in her happy eyes a colour of brightness. To her everything was beautiful, everybody was charming; the ugliest physiognomy was handsome; a cross temper was honest roughness, and a pug-nose spirituel . She never saw a fault in any human being. She gave White and Glendenning such astounding accounts of the excellence of everything and everybody, that they began to fancy themselves stumbled into one of the volumes of the Arabian Nights. As for little Seth, he was, for the first time in his life, going up the Hudson, and arrayed in all the splendours of his new suit. He said nothing except when spoken to, and then generally answered only with a huge blush and an abrupt laugh, which opened and closed with an evanescence quite remarkable even in a world where all is so extremely transitory. Mr. Lennox, who saw how offensive he had become to Emmerson, and who could not understand why, had resolved to take him with the family to spend a month in the country, as much for the gratification of Emmerson as of the boy himself. He noticed him a great deal, made it a point to introduce him to everybody, as if he had been his own son, never failing, on such occasions, to pronounce, in a most flourishing manner, his three names, Seth Jacob Copely, and to add that he possessed talents and attainments which would inevitably one day place him at the head of his profession, if not in the presidential chair. Poor Seth had heard these astounding eulogies so repeatedly that he began to be used to them---for he felt they were full of kindness---and to love more and more the person who showered them on him. All treated him with a gentleness and consideration which sank into a heart not without warmth, although rarely displayed, and into a mind, though slow, both thoughtful and observing. His old, uncomfortable bashfulness had begun to give place to a feeling of greater ease and satisfaction. He saw that, where Mrs. Lennox's mild, sweet face was, he had always a friend to help him out of the embarrassing dilemmas into which he was frequently plunged by the thoughtless good-nature of Mr. Lennox; and as Mary took as much care of him as if he had been her brother (or her grandson), he got along tolerably well. Frank quizzed him, and Glendenning mystified him sometimes, in a mere spirit of fun; but Mary was an excellent champion, and Frank met in her an [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-131.jpg) \- external link  - Page 130. ] ancient and formidable foe. In short, Seth, somehow or other, found himself strangely happy. Of all men on earth, he most disliked and feared Emmerson; now he had escaped from the dark face of that gentleman for a time. He saw his representations had not injured him in the opinion of his benefactors, and, with the facility of youth, regardless of the future, he gave himself up to the pleasing impressions of the moment, watched the easy and elegant manners of the three gentlemen, and delighted to bestow such attentions as he knew how upon the ladies, each one of whom he loved with all the unbounded fervour of boyish gratitude and admiration. Strange and sweet impressions, too, began to descend upon his mind, from the varying and resplendent scenes of nature which were so rapidly flying behind him. He listened, too, with mute wonder to the conversation of the rest, of other shores and other rivers, of the scenes of Europe (that great dim vision of imagination to him), and to the thousand interesting remarks upon life which he heard now for the first time. The scenery, which struck every one else, and brought forth various exclamations of noisy rapture, sank into his soul silently, but not with a less deep effect, and this little, stupid country boy, thus introduced, almost by accident, into a sphere of life so much above his own, began to feel within him the development of new thoughts and the stirrings of new emotions. The beautiful countenance of Mary Lennox (who seemed to consider herself quite a woman and him only a little boy of no account whatever; and if she thought so, of course it must be so, for very far from him was the boldness to have an opinion of his own) had a sort of unaccountable attraction in his eyes. He could have sat gazing on it for hours, and so he did quite uninterrupted, for no one looked at him. If the young girl herself sometimes caught his eyes with her own in these encounters, she only smiled so kindly and good-naturedly, that, as we before observed, somehow or other, this passage up to Rose Hill was the most enchanting, delicious day he had ever known. Fanny Elton, who appeared only recovering from her late indisposition, required no other explanation for a certain reserve which seemed lately to have shed itself over her mind. She presented with Mary the rare spectacle of a young lady decidedly prettier than her friend, yet without believing so herself; while Mary, equal in character, if not [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-132.jpg) \- external link  - Page 131. ] quite so in countenance, knew it well and unfeignedly rejoiced in it. Far, indeed, were both their pure souls above the mean passions of vanity and envy. The bright, breathless noon brought the boat into the Highlands, whose bold, gigantic forms frowned darkly on the winding flood, and printed their sharp angles against the stainless azure sky. This spot, the region of a thousand romantic as well as historical associations, and invested by nature with such a startling beauty, and rendered still more charming by the chaste and tender genius of Irving, never appeared so bright, so still, so enchanting as on the present occasion. The sharp beak of the boat went bursting through the sleeping water, now close upon one shore, now upon the other. Sloops, their sails fully spread to catch every breath of air, stole silently along. The sturgeon leaped and fell heavily back into his watery home, and the eagle floated low over the rocky heights, balancing himself in idle enjoyment upon his immense, motionless wings (who could help wishing he possessed such a glorious power?). At last the bell, which a few hours ago had pealed through the hot and dusty streets of the city, now sent its deafening voice to die away among the echoes of the mountains, and the passengers to be landed at B--- Point, upon whose beautiful and verdant acclivity Rose Hill stood, were obliged to get down a very unsafe sort of ladder, into a still more unsafe-looking small boat, most perilously attached by a rope to the always rapidly advancing steamer, all of which looked like a reasonable chance of favouring the merry party with a ducking. But the descent into their rather ticklish seats was most boldly and successfully made--- boxes, portmanteaus, umbrellas, valises came tumbling in one after the other, and sometimes two at once, and off dashed the boat, in a style which there is not time here to describe at all, only there were various wavings of white pocket-handkerchiefs from the steamer to those in the little boat, and they in the little boat waved back again theirs to those in the steamer, and Miss Elton sat quietly thoughtful in the stern, while Frank wished, with all his heart, she might fall overboard, that he might jump in after her, only he would not have had her wet the sole of her shoe for twenty worlds, lest she might take cold, and---but stop: here we are already ashore. Out go people and portmanteaus (the captain of the Chancellor Livingston made things [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-133.jpg) \- external link  - Page 132. ] fly); the little boat was already far off; the steamer began to puff, and blow, and pant, and thunder at a greater distance; and the first thing Seth and Glendenning knew, they found themselves winding up a most sweet and odoriferous road, shaded with cedar, and oak, and sycamore, and locust, and wild roses, and all sorts of trees and flowers that make the air smell delicious; and then they were all standing on the portico of one of the most perfectly beautiful countryhouses that (at least so thought Seth) ever was or could possibly be seen, or even conceived. It was a sweet place (Rose Hill), but we are not going to describe it. Perhaps there never were any people, altogether, quite so happy as the party now assembled at Rose Hill. There never was such glorious weather, such capital eatables, such delicious butter, and honey, and marmalade, and preserves, and cherry-wine, and ice-cream, and home-made bread, and fruit-pie, and, in short, all sorts of the very nicest things imaginable. White and Glendenning were fairly fascinated; and even Fanny, although she had some reason not to be as gay as she had been in other years, even she could not resist the effect of the bright scenes, hilarious and inspiriting incidents, and very agreeable people around her. As for little Seth, he had got to be quite a different person; as his true character developed itself, he was found, besides being not at all wanting in intelligence, so warm-hearted, grateful, and amiable, that he became a favourite. His stiff awkwardness gave place to more freedom of manner, and the changes going on in his heart began to show themselves on his countenance. But if Seth appeared to have undergone a favourable alteration, in Glendenning there was perceptible a much greater one. He soon captivated his hospitable entertainers, and their obvious partiality for and complete forgiveness of him had a serious effect upon him. Frank and he were really become attached friends. Their prompt and daring courage and impetuosity of disposition were not unlike, only [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-134.jpg) \- external link  - Page 133. ] Frank's had been better regulated by education. Both were possessed of many of the faults as well as the virtues of youth---hot-headed, thoughtless, passionate, and inexperienced, but generous, affectionate, noble, and impressionable. They soon learned to love each other sincerely. Glendenning, sensible of his culpable folly and heartily ashamed of his past life, evinced in various ways his sincere repentance and desire to reform; and it was not in the power of the amiable family to see any one so truly inspired with good resolutions, without conceiving for him both sympathy and friendship. There are periods when all that the earth affords of happiness seems gathered around us, and all its evils and cares disappear, just as some rare days break without a chill, a cloud, or a breath of wind. The brightness and repose of outward nature descend into our hearts. Our capacity for happiness is full. Not only do the trees, sky, rivers, and fields wear an unwonted charm, but the people around us appear invested only with grace and love, and arouse in us all our better feelings, as if they were so many radiant angels. Who has not come suddenly upon some such a happy valley in life's pilgrimage, where he would fain have lingered forever, but that the dusky phantoms of fate beckoned him onward, and the resistless and invisible current of circumstances, flowing with its turbid tide on and on, bears him away to other scenes, leaving only an enchanting recollection of these little holydays of the heart? And who has not felt, at such moments, the mysterious nearness--- the viewless and noiseless presence of supernatural things? who has not observed that these intervals of peace and joy (not the legitimate inheritance of the fallen race which is doomed to eat of the ground in sorrow all the days of its life) come often just before some terrible crisis? The week at Rose Hill was one of those periods of unusual enjoyment, and the only drawback upon all the fun at present was the necessity which called Mr. Lennox back to town early Monday morning, with the promise, however, to call and see them again Friday or Saturday. Music, drives, sketching and riding, gay and instructive conversation, poetry and literature, and, on all sides, the unreserved confidences of the heart. Glendenning wondered he had ever sought happiness in such different circles. They had arrived at Rose Hill on Tuesday, and it was [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-135.jpg) \- external link  - Page 134. ] arranged that they should remain at least one week. The first afternoon and evening were devoted to an examination of the house and grounds. There were an excellent farm, a delightful garden; conservatories, promenades, etc., etc., etc.; a drive along a road following the river, and presenting a series of views remarkable for beauty: and then the family assembled in the drawing-rooms, which opened upon a balcony extending entirely around the house, and which was situated in so commanding a site, that the gorgeous and picturesque Highland river-scenery was spread out beneath and above like a superb panorama. Here the teatable gathered together not only the members of the party, but half a dozen distinguished strangers, either visiters at West Point, distant a short sail on the opposite side, or from some of the neighbouring seats. The expensive and elegant style in which Mr. Lennox lived, the luxurious furniture and very well-kept grounds; the opulence which made itself seen in all the details of the domestic arrangement--- opulence, showing itself, however, rather in matters of comfort and genuine hospitality than display---surprised the two young officers, who had both been impressed with the idea that English comfort was not to be found in quite such perfection out of the sea-girt isle. Little Seth saw in all this only a dream of perfect enchantment. He roamed about the grounds with his mouth open, peered into the garden, sat, half stupified with delight, looking at the magnificent landscape which lay beneath and above him, mingling silently with the persons who made up the evening party, bearing their jokes with immovable good-humour, hearing them talk, wondering at the easy flow of their words, and the bold and sportive way in which they spoke to each other, and in which they did the most serious as the most trifling things, and, in short, enjoying a great many new thoughts and feelings. Mary was his ever-faithful friend. She explained everything to him which he did not understand, told him where to go, and what to do and say, laughed him out of his bad grammar and country phrases, arranged his cravat and collar in a way so becoming that he was quite surprised himself at his genteel appearance, and was not likely to forget her manner of tying the knot in front. When she ordered him up to let her examine him sometimes---when she fixed her eyes on him with a scrutinizing look, gave him various instructions, put [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-136.jpg) \- external link  - Page 135. ] aside the hair from his forehead with her own soft, white hand, and arranged it around his temples, he said nothing, but he thought and felt a great deal. He felt as if he had entered into a new world, and as if a new soul had entered into his body. Several days thus passed away delightfully. It seemed that none of them had ever before been so happy. Every morning saw our merry party early up and abroad upon some expedition of pleasure: a visit to some picturesque part of the shore in Harry's boat, or a drive and walk to the summit of some neighbouring mountain which commanded a celebrated view. From breakfast till dinner, riding, boating shooting sometimes, driving, newspapers, reviews, and calls every day. The whole party dined out or received at home, or made pic-nic parties to interesting spots. In the afternoons and evenings, when the sun, descending into a sea of glory, increased in splendour as the fierceness of his beams abated, and the cool, refreshing night air, full of perfumes, braced the nerves and soothed the spirits, Glendenning thought he had never seen a spot of the earth where he should so like to spend his life, nor people with whom his days would glide more pleasantly away. He had no family or home. His father, his only living relative, had discovered so little consideration for or interest in him that, however a sense of duty might modify his sentiments, he could not look forward to a return to the paternal roof as an event either possible or desirable. Here, at once, all the best qualities of his mind, all the noblest impulses of his heart, were called into being; and, as he became more acquainted with Mary, a dream of happiness rose up in his imagination, which, however immature, gave a great weight to the maternal counsels of Mrs. Lennox, and a new impulse to his schemes of reformation and self-improvement. In short, if Mary had given him the least encouragement, he would have fallen in love in the same off-handed way in which he did everything else. Whatever was the adventure which presented itself to him---a noble or a foolish action, a love-scrape or a duel---in he went headlong at ten minutes' notice. During these fine times Mrs. Lennox by no means neglected her serious plan of turning Glendenning's attention to the subject of religion. The hope of convincing a young officer of such a disposition, and with whom her [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-137.jpg) \- external link  - Page 136. ] acquaintance had originated in such a singular manner, would have been thought, by most persons, rather Quixotic. But her genuine piety did not suffer itself to be discouraged by any ordinary objection, and she was delighted to find her task infinitely easier than she had dared to hope. Glendenning's facile nature was now softened by happiness and the novelty of pure and rational attachments. Mrs. Lennox's sweetness of manner, which only reflected that of her countenance and soul, had a pleasing effect upon him. He was, as we have before observed, so completely ignorant of the nature of our divine religion, and of the evidence by the aid of which it has resisted the stormy shocks and wearing influences of so many centuries, and she was so well acquainted with the subject, and was able so clearly to explain that which she so clearly understood, that she soon succeeded in raising in him both astonishment and curiosity. She artfully availed herself of many an interval to appeal frankly to his good sense and calm reason, and she had the gratification to see that he was sufficiently ingenuous to confess when her facts were new to him and her arguments unanswerable. He listened at first with respect, and afterward with unfeigned attention and increasing interest, laid candidly before her all his ignorance and all his objections, and saw that the ground he stood on was taken by her earnest and pious eloquence and superior knowledge, inch by inch, from beneath his feet. He promised her, at last, that he would make a full study of the subject the first duty of his future life; that if doubts continued in his way, he would apply to her before he yielded to them, and that he would correspond with her after his departure, and let her know the progress of his opinions. There was in this no affectation. He had been very much impressed by new views of what, he saw, he had never understood, or even taken the trouble to examine. His nature was not wanting in the purity requisite in a believer, but only in the stability, strength, and seriousness. But what he would never have sought himself, this best of friends presented to him with disinterested anxiety for his welfare. She began to love him with almost the force of a mother, and her gentle, affectionate, and intelligent character had not failed to awaken in his breast reciprocal sentiments. After one of these long conversations, during a ramble through a neighbouring wood, when she had separated him [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-138.jpg) \- external link  - Page 137. ] from the rest of the company to pursue, without interruption, her plan of awakening his attention to the subject of religion, the whole party returned to the house, where, after a slight repast, Mrs. Lennox reminded them they might expect her husband and Harry by the noon boat. It was therefore proposed to go down to the landing at the proper hour, and receive the new visiters with all the honours of war. Accordingly, at about one o'clock, the whole party repaired to the spot, laughing and talking as friends who have spent a week in the country are very apt to talk, for nothing brings mind and heart closer together than such an interval of uninterrupted intimacy. A few moments after their arrival they discovered a light cloud of ascending smoke and steam peering over the summit of a green hill, then the plunging strokes of the wheels and panting of the engine, and immediately the large and stately vessel, more like a floating palace than a boat, darted from behind a projecting angle of black, broken rock, with the well-known barge cleaving the foamy flood at its side, and containing the three figures of Mr. Lennox, Harry, and Mr. Emmerson. "Hallo! hurrah, boys! how are you? here we are!" shouted Lennox, waving his hat. "Now then, my fine fellows, out with ye. Hand up the valise. That's it; all right! How d'ye do? How de do?" And then the various embraces and shaking hands natural to the occasion. As Lennox and Mrs. Elton did not find it convenient to stop talking, the exclamations of the rest were edged in as well as they could; and as nobody waited for any answers, it was pretty much all the same in the end. Emmerson's face was all smiles and blandness, though his gratulations, like everything else he did, were performed in a quiet way. "But what's the matter with you, Harry?" said his mother; "you don't look well." "Oh yes, perfectly. Never so well and so gay in my life," said Harry, rousing himself from a revery. "Where's Fanny?" demanded Lennox. "Here she is, at least here she was , or I thought she was here." "Didn't she come down?" asked Mary. "No, I don't think she did," said Frank. "I observed she was not with us." Up the steep, fragrant foot-path they wound, and met [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-139.jpg) \- external link  - Page 138. ] Fanny just coming down, looking quiet, but Mrs. Lennox thought it was not altogether a natural tranquillity. She had observed, when she spoke of the arrival of the party by the boat, a certain change in her expression and manner, which revived a thought not altogether a stranger to her mind. Mr. Lennox had brought up with him newspapers, magazines, caricatures, and letters. He was, besides, full of town news, and rattled away faster than ever. He met White and Glendenning with the hearty, hilarious hospitality which belonged to his character, kissed Fanny whenever he could catch her, and seemed in high glee. The dinner hour arrived before they had time to ask and answer all their mutual questions, and Champagne and cigars upon the beautiful flower-wreathed piazza succeeded. The piazza extended entirely around the house, so as to form a most agreeable promenade. It was at this time that Fanny, who had withdrawn herself again from the family when the cold, melancholy manners of Harry, only relieved at times by a forced gayety, oppressed her with a feeling of painful uneasiness, was surprised by the sudden and silent appearance of Emmerson close at her side---so close and unexpected, indeed, that the sigh which happened at the moment to escape her was perceived by him. "Does Miss Elton sigh?" said Emmerson, with more than his usual gentleness. "Did I?" said Fanny, blushing. "I really was not aware." "Miss Elton, I am going to ask your advice." "Advice? mine! Oh, Mr. Emmerson," she replied, laughing, "on what subject could I pretend to advise you? " "And why not me? " said he, smiling blandly. "Oh, because you , of all men, know best how to act on every occasion. I might ask advice from you, but to give it I wish I were worthy." "My dear Miss Elton, do your words really express your sincere sentiments?" [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-140.jpg) \- external link  - Page 139. ] "Why, certainly." "Your good opinion makes me happy. To say the truth, I do not exactly so much propose to seek your advice as to offer you my---my confidence." "If I can serve you by receiving it," replied the young girl, both pleased and flattered by the respectful attention of one so generally esteemed. "Listen to me, then. Mr. Lennox, you know, has long desired to retire in some degree from his profession. He yesterday made me an offer of one half the income of the office, which cannot amount to less than $5000, and may go considerably beyond it." "I congratulate you with all my heart," said Miss Elton. "But I have an objection to receiving this obligation." "What! from Mr. Lennox? What objection can you have? You accept only what you are entitled to. I have frequently heard him say you have been of the greatest service to him. He is rich enough himself, and, in retiring, has certainly the full right to choose his successor." "But this son of his---this Harry." Miss Elton was silent. "I have already told you, Miss Elton, my secret opinion of this young man. He can never himself make a good lawyer or a good man. He is too light and fickle; too--- too---yet, nevertheless, ought I to accept a share of what, it may possibly be considered, should of right fall to him alone?" "If his father found your assistance necessary, it is not likely he could dispense with it." "It is not exactly that. I am under a great embarrassment in communicating to you what I have now to say; but, as your old friend and your father's, you will allow me, won't you, to speak frankly?" "You cannot offend me," said she, although a colour overspread her face as she spoke, "because I know whatever you say will be the truth , and because you have already, with the disinterestedness of real friendship, rescued me from a great danger." "Then, this is it: while the slightest possibility remained of your yielding to what will probably be the serious wish of his family, in receiving the addresses of Mr. Henry Lennox---" "Mr. Emmerson," said Fanny, "let me assure you, there is as little danger of his preferring as of my accepting any such proposition." [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-141.jpg) \- external link  - Page 140. ] "I breathe again," said Emmerson, extending his hand to hers, which she did not refuse. "I should, in fact, be doubly distressed at the possibility of your union with him; first, because he is unworthy of you, as I have already told you, and, secondly, because, my dearest Miss Elton, I have, after much painful resolution to the contrary on my part and a deep sense of my own presumption, determined to throw myself upon your generosity, your good sense, your excellent understanding---to---in short---to ask your advice respecting my own future prospects." "In what way, Mr. Emmerson?" "I am now in possession of an independent income, and I have, moreover, an opportunity, by a fortunate speculation, of turning it into a large fortune." "You really delight me," said Fanny, while such lively pleasure beamed from her face that Emmerson could not doubt either its strength or sincerity. "May I then venture to hope that the sentiments of unalterable regard with which you have inspired me, and which, you say, I have had the happiness to inspire on your side---dare I venture to hope that the clear intelligence of Miss Elton, superior to the illusions of youth or the impulses of any mere girlish passion, may condescend to allow me to reveal to her the earnest and profound esteem which I have myself entertained for her? may I hope to find in her not only advice on temporary occasions, but an adviser to cheer and guide my future steps through life? In offering you my hand, I need scarcely say, my heart has been yours from the moment I first beheld you." Miss Elton fixed her eyes upon her companion, as he closed this speech, with an astonishment and consternation which prevented her uttering a single word in reply. "Consider the advantages a union with me would ensure to you. A friend, soberly and unchangeably attached, who has passed the danger of youth, with me your days will not be clouded with doubt or your feelings harrowed by dissipation. No bloody duels or midnight brawls! but our lives will glide peacefully on, without a doubt to shade or a care to interrupt them. My dear Miss Elton, I have for years looked forward to this moment as the most important---the most delightful of my life. Answer me: will you be mine? Consider the advantages a union with me would secure to us both. Do not hesitate." [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-142.jpg) \- external link  - Page 141. ] "I do not hesitate," replied Miss Elton; but, as she raised her eyes, she beheld Harry close behind Emmerson, his form drawn back in stern surprise, mingled with embarrassment. He had evidently, and by mere accident, overheard the last words of Emmerson and her own. Conscious of the impression he must have derived from them, she became so unusually agitated that Emmerson once more took her hand. Harry had already disappeared. "I do not hesitate," repeated she, "or, if I did, it was only from amazement. Respect and esteem I shall always feel towards you, Mr. Emmerson, but I can never entertain any warmer sentiment." "Let me at least request, Miss Elton," said Emmerson, after a pause, and with a look of deep mortification, "that you will consider my offer a confidential secret ." "Certainly, sir." "Have I your promise?" "You have." "Hallo here! where are these runaways?" said Mr. Lennox's voice. "What, Emmerson, are you making love to Fanny?" "I should hardly presume," said Emmerson, laughing in an easy way, which rather surprised Miss Elton in one she had always considered so artless and sincere. "We're going out in the boat to see St. Anthony's Nose. Bring along the young lady, and take good care of her, mind!" Glad of an opportunity to run away, Fanny went in after her bonnet, and in a few moments the whole party were on their way down the steep, winding path, talking and laughing, Mr. Lennox occasionally rallying Emmerson upon having been detected in making love to Miss Elton, as if the very idea were the most capital joke conceivable. Emmerson received and replied to this badinage with a skilful duplicity, which let Fanny still more into the peculiarities of his character, and awoke in her mind a train of [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-143.jpg) \- external link  - Page 142. ] serious reflections. In the first place, she recollected a thousand instances of kindness and delicate private attention bestowed upon her as long back as she could remember, and which she had always ascribed to the disinterested partiality of a father. She recollected that it was Emmerson who had accidentally interrupted her interview with Harry, when that young gentleman had commenced to make to her the offer of his heart and hand. When she next saw him, it was again Emmerson, who, on the grounds of paternal disinterestedness, had addressed her on the subject of Harry, had warned her against him by repeated hints and innuendoes, as one who, to oblige his parents, might put on a show of attachment, but who had confessed to him his hope that he might be rejected, and his sincere passion for another. In looking back over her whole acquaintance with Emmerson from her present point of view, she could perceive how greatly he had influenced her, and how cautiously and secretly he had always done it. Every dark hint had been breathed in a whisper; every secret innuendo uttered in strict confidence. In short, from various things, she began to suspect that he was sly. The affair looked like an intrigue, however irreconcilable with his irreproachable character. These new thoughts at length produced another, which at once overwhelmed her with pleasure and pain. She had, then, without grounds, rejected and insulted Harry, whom she had sincerely loved till Emmerson had shaken her confidence in him. She had, then, been sincerely and honestly loved by Harry, and she had thrown him away forever. The poor fellow little knew with what a changed heart she walked silently down the hill by his side. The boat in question was a large and beautiful one, built for Harry, who loved solitary excursions among the mountains, as well as such merry parties as the present. It accommodated the whole company, and the two men who aided in managing the sail, or, when necessary, the oars. A fine breeze carried them swiftly forward beneath West Point, and within sight of the famous "Nose," which tradition (or the genius of Irving) has immortalized as that of the saint. A great many bright things were said, as all were in high glee except Fanny, who had sunk into a silent revery, and Emmerson, who, what with the entire failure of his attack on Miss Elton, and his jealous displeasure [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-144.jpg) \- external link  - Page 143. ] at seeing the happiness of little Seth, looked rather yellow and bilious. At length the breeze died entirely away, and the little sail hung idly against the mast. The general merriment, too, was rather checked by the sight of a deep, heavy thunder-cloud, which began to project a ragged, ink-black, island-looking edge over the outline of the green hill above their head and into the transparent azure of the sky. This threatening visiter had been concealed by the mountain till it was just ready to burst upon the breathless scene. The ladies were alarmed, of course, for their bonnets, if not for their lives. Some spoke of a squall, and others of lightning, while the bravest acknowledged that a proper drenching was tolerably inevitable. The oars were put out, and, manned each one by two, made the boat advance with velocity towards the shore, but scarcely so fast as the prodigious mass of pointed vapour above them, which, lowering with the portentous opaqueness of granite, seemed pursuing them with ominous fury. Although the gentlemen were positive as to their security from the lightning, from which the high hills afforded a sufficient protection, yet dreadful squalls often forced their way down the high and narrow ravines. The lowering cloud, however, still delayed to pour down its contents or to launch the terrible bolt, and the boat seemed happily destined to reach the shore before the tempest commenced, when a violent wind swept over the smooth water, and soon lashed it into such waves as a good deal interfered with the skill of Harry, who had taken the helm, and was guiding it directly to the shelter of a steep, overhanging rock, projecting into the deep channel of the river. At this moment a sudden shout sent terror into every bosom. A sloop, with all sail set, suddenly appeared turning the point at a fearful velocity, making so directly for the boat as to render the destruction of all on board apparently certain. The danger was sudden and appalling. The helmsman of the sloop, startled by the fierce command of Harry, appeared stunned into stupid inactivity, and let her come steadily on without in the least altering her course. "Save the ladies!" shouted Harry. "Save me! " cried Emmerson, "save me!" Each gentleman seized one of his fair companions, ready to leap overboard with her, except Emmerson, who, without [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-145.jpg) \- external link  - Page 144. ] thinking of any one but himself, clung to the stout farm-lad next him in such a convulsive way, that he actually pushed Miss Elton into the stern, where her danger was imminent, both of falling overboard and of being crushed to death by the heavy and swiftly-advancing mass. Harry, who had just perceived that, by the power of his own helm, he had cleared the main body of the sloop, but that a piece of heavy timber projecting from her low deck might come in contact with Miss Elton, who was standing in mute terror, leaped forward and bore her back, but at the peril of his own life; for, while he succeeded in rescuing her from certain death, he stumbled himself, and, receiving a severe blow, fell headlong into the river. The voices of the ladies, which thus far actual fright had restrained, now vented their emotions in a general shriek, among which that of Mrs. Lennox and Fanny was not the least loud. The sloop swept fearfully by; the little boat rocked violently in the billows of its wake, and Harry appeared to have sunk beneath forever. "My son! save him! Harry! he's gone!" "Nonsense," said Lennox; "he swims like a duck." A moment of intense anxiety passed, and "There he is!" broke from every lip. But Frank had already plunged into the stream; for, on reappearing, it was perceived that the young man, instead of beating the waves with his athletic arms, lay like a senseless corpse upon the flood, and then sank slowly out of sight. The next moment he was borne into the boat by Frank, but senseless, and his forehead stained with blood from a wound. At this moment the thunder burst from the cloud, the lightning seemed to set earth and heaven in a blaze, and a deluge poured itself down upon the unfortunate pleasure party. "He's dead! he's dead!" cried Mrs. Lennox. "To save my life, which I would have sacrificed a thousand times for him!" cried Fanny, beside herself with grief and horror. Even in that terrible moment, this remark, and the manner in which it was uttered, struck Frank, Emmerson, and Mrs. Lennox, and was afterward remembered. Only love the most passionate and sincere could have inspired it; and the poor young girl, covering her face with her hands, remained in a state impossible to be described. In a few moments they reached the shore, and the body was conveyed into a farmer's house, where, in a very short [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-146.jpg) \- external link  - Page 145. ] time, to the unutterable delight of everybody, it not only came to, under the various appliances usual on such occasions, but presently appeared in a standing position, and arrayed in a suit of Farmer Smith's Sunday-go-to-meeting clothes. In the mean while the carriage had been sent for, and the ladies, with very mixed emotions of grief, joy, horror, and being very wet, had attired themselves in various articles of Mrs. Smith's and Mrs. Smith's daughter's wardrobe, and, by the time the carriage arrived, they were all ready to be put in, and (Harry first) entered accordingly--- some on the box, and forming the most extraordinary-looking party of pleasure that ever was seen; they all reached Rose Hill, went to bed, took warm egg-nog, and tea, punch, etc., etc., etc., and, by the time the storm had passed away and the sunshine had come out again, they had all reassembled in the drawing-rooms in unexceptionable toilets---the gentlemen in a high state of elegance and glee, the ladies looking lovelier than ever; Harry somewhat pale and interesting, and appearing very advantageously behind a large bit of sticking-plaster (which the doctor had applied, with the assurance that no possible bad effect could arise from the accident, at least as far as concerned his bodily health), and Miss Elton in a state of most becoming embarrassment, endeavouring in vain to keep her usual cool composure of manner, through her painful consciousness that she had betrayed a degree of interest for Harry, which, whatever might be her real sentiments, she had had no intentions to communicate confidentially to a whole boatful of people at once. Never did she appear so beautiful, so timid, or with so little definite idea what she should do with herself. The next day was the one fixed for the departure of the guests, and, on this their last evening, the family assembled on the broad piazza very much softened by the accident so nearly fatal to one, if not to all. The idea of danger escaped is an agreeable one, and, while it renders more lively the sense of existence, it excludes from the mind [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-147.jpg) \- external link  - Page 146. ] commonplace thoughts and prepares the heart for the tenderest emotions. The sun went slowly down, as if he hated to leave such a beautiful scene, and the western sky was all bathed in hues of purple and gold. The moon rose broadly and silently up over the hilltops, and every instant the sweet summer night made some delightful change in the soft landscape. The fire-flies flashed and floated in the black shadows of the woods and hillsides, and the softened cry of the frog and katydid was blended from the distant shore with the sturgeons plash, or music from the deck of a passing steamboat, or the barking of some farmyard dog, or the occasional voice of a sailor from the sloops that stole around the point beneath. Never had Glendenning felt before what it was to possess a mind and a soul, what it was to love poetry and music, and that the rational being may enjoy pleasures, tranquil and innocent, and far superior to those vulgar amusements in which he had wasted so much of his youth. A sadness by no means unpleasant, but very different from the noisy mirth which had, till now, animated the party, appeared to have fallen over them. In some bosoms this sadness was not without a definite cause, while in the rest it was but the vague shadow of half-felt presentiments or tender memories. Each one had peculiar thoughts which checked idle mirth. Mrs. Lennox had detected in Miss Elton the secret of her soul, and regarded Frank with sympathy. She was also but partly recovered from the shock of her late alarm, for her maternal heart was absorbed in her children, and she felt if she erred in loving the earth too much, they were the cause: "Where the treasure is, there will the heart be also." She beheld in Glendenning, too, a noble young man, who only wanted advisers to preserve him in a path of virtue and piety, but who, with a most impressionable nature, was about re-entering into the dangerous vortex of life. Frank and Emmerson had both marked the expression of Miss Elton on seeing what she supposed the dead body of Harry, and both formed the same opinion as to its meaning, although this opinion awoke in their separate breasts very different emotions. In Frank, a melancholy, despairing conviction that his attachment was hopeless, while it strengthened his affection for both Miss Elton and his brother: in Emmerson, mean rage against Miss Elton and a malignant envy of his successful rival. The character of [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-148.jpg) \- external link  - Page 147. ] this gentleman, however artfully he placed it before the world, and however carefully he guarded it against all manifestations, could not be examined closely and tested fairly without betraying its selfish meanness and quiet perfidy. He saw Miss Elton had detected him, and he trembled for his profitable place in the family of his benefactor. These thoughts made him wretched, and painted themselves on his pale and silent countenance. No one, however, but Miss Elton knew how to read there the workings of a bad heart, disappointed in a treacherous attempt to undermine and calumniate the son of his patron. By a mutual instinct, she appeared to have discovered him, and he to know that he was exposed. The conversation naturally dwelt long on the accident, which Mr. Lennox attempted to turn into a capital joke, but in which his wife found food for serious reflection. Fanny was silent and subdued, and scarcely ventured to thank Harry for the life he had preserved. When she did so, she found, with a feeling not far from anguish, that to her gentle words and strangely altered demeanour he returned only cold replies. Since the interview in which she had so seriously insulted him, and in which he had sworn never again to resume the subject of his love, he had invariably met her with the same distant but guarded courtesy, but as she scarcely addressed him in a different manner, she could not be surprised or disappointed. The suspicions she had now conceived of Emmerson, and the tender emotion Harry had betrayed in the moment of her danger, had entirely altered her feelings, and she knew not whether gratitude or love most actuated her in the words she addressed to her preserver, and in her manner of uttering them. But the unchanged civility with which they were received, and with which the advances towards reconciliation were thrown back, filled her with an astonishment which certainly she had no right to experience if she had known the delicacy, the pride, and the high character of her lover, and the various impressions of her which had been communicated to him. She perceived now for the first time, with amazement and consternation, that his attachment was really chilled, perhaps destroyed forever, and grief for her loss was mingled with indignation against Emmerson, whom, with the unexamining ardour of a young girl, she concluded to be the cause. It was not, therefore, without a certain [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-149.jpg) \- external link  - Page 148. ] delightful tremour that she heard Mr. Lennox say Harry should not return with him to town, but that he should remain a week at Rose Hill to recover from the effects of the accident and take care of the girls. Harry strenuously resisted, until, overcome by the general voice, he declared he would not consent unless Glendenning and White would also remain two or three days. This they both pronounced seriously impossible, on which Harry, who declared himself perfectly recovered, persevered in his intention to return to the city the next Sunday afternoon. While the rest of the company were laughing and talking over their ice-cream at one end of the piazza, Mrs. Lennox walked to and fro on the other, leaning on Glendenning's arm, and engaged in earnest conversation. "I don't know what it is, my dear Captain Glendenning: I am not generally, I hope, very superstitious, but I feel a painful presentiment on seeing you return to Montreal." "Such a confession gives me pleasure rather than pain," said Glendenning; "for, while it convinces me of your friendship, it does not alarm me for my safety. But what is it you fear?" "You will not be offended?" "Can you ask such a question?" "I fear, then, yourself. I fear lest new scenes and influences hereafter prevent your perseverance in your present mode of self-cultivation and self-government. I fear your compliance, even against your own sense of right, with the customs of the world---your yielding to its passions, temptations, and illusions." "Mrs. Lennox, you do me injustice. I can never forget the time I have spent with you amid this beautiful scene of nature, charmed and refined by such hearts and minds as those of your family. My character has been neglected, but I feel the stirrings of its better qualities. You have awakened in me a sense of religion; at least, of the possibility that it may be true. It is no longer, in my eyes, ridiculous or impossible; and with this sentiment will always remain recollections of my happy visit to Rose Hill. Do you think I can ever forget these mountains, that river, this happy domestic circle, and the hours we have spent together? Shall I ever forget our rides and rambles, the sloops stealing on their course beneath us, and the steamboats staining the woods and sky with smoke? Shall I [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-150.jpg) \- external link  - Page 149. ] ever forget this delicious evening? and, more than all, touched as I am with your magnanimous forgiveness of a mad act, and with the generous attachments I have formed in your family, can I forget that you have returned good for evil, and endeavoured to rescue me from my worst enemy--- myself?" "I hope not; but you are young. A military life is not favourable to the continuance of the impressions you now entertain. If circumstances threw you into another duel, should you have the firmness to resist?" "I think I should." "Not unless supported by unwavering faith in Christianity. Nothing else can sustain you. That alone makes a man calm, lofty, and unselfish. There is no philosopher like the Christian. Neither his principles nor his reward depend upon this fluctuating world. You are not yet a Christian, but you are destined to be one. Read the volumes I have given you. You are, I hope, destined to undergo an important change: I mean, you are to be converted . Do not smile at a term which is not, I am aware, quite free from very commonplace, perhaps ridiculous and vulgar associations. But you must go on, despite those and other influences, to a study of religion. I am older than you. I have studied it. Believe me, no man (I speak not only my own sentiments, but those of some of the greatest men, the most learned, cool, practical, and sensible that have ever lived, such, for instance, as Washington, Newton, Butler, and a host of others), no man can examine all the evidences of Christianity without confessing them to be unanswerable. There is no equivocation; there is no possibility of escape. Hume, Voltaire, and Volney never did examine them candidly. The works of the latter traveller, called his "Ruins," abound at every page with proofs that he had not carefully read the Scriptures, that he did not know their meaning; and as for Voltaire, he somewhere speaks of the ` Pentateuch and the rest of the books of Moses . ' The whole purpose of this life is to place man in possession of truth by means of his own free search, and the doubtful features of the Christian scheme are meant, as Grotius (another great believer) asserts, to try us. He says that the proof given of Christianity is less than it might have been, so that it may be a `touchstone for trying the docility and soundness of a man's mind.' You must read, and you [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-151.jpg) \- external link  - Page 150. ] will then see that Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many, and unto them that look for him shall he appear the second time, without sin unto salvation." "I am, in truth, very ignorant," said Glendenning. "Will you study the subject?" asked Mrs. Lennox. "Will you examine---will you hear what the believers in Christianity, such men as Grotius, have to say in support of their faith?" "I will, I give you my word." "Study it, if it is only to find out evidence of its falsehood." "Indeed, I will." "And if I can be the means of awakening your mind to these truths---if, under Him who disposes of all things, I can be an humble instrument, I shall think Providence has conducted you in mercy under our roof." Glendenning was touched with the interest she showed in him. He had no distinct idea that the religion she so warmly pressed upon his attention was true; but he was grateful for the mother's love she manifested, and the memory of his own mother was the softening and purifying idea of his character. "Shall I trust you?" said Mrs. Lennox. "As I am a gentleman." "I had rather you had said, as you are a Christian." "Perhaps, when I see you again, I shall say so!" Glendenning retired to bed at a late hour, for the night was so deliciously bright and tranquil he could scarcely tear himself away, and the little happy circle, remembering they might, perhaps, never spend another evening together, were but too ready to postpone the hour of separation. The conversation took a confidential and almost a romantic and tender tone, sometimes interrupted by a remark of Mr. Lennox, which set every one laughing, or by a glee, which the young ladies were very fond of joining in with Frank. Harry coldly abstained from taking a part, but listened to [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-152.jpg) \- external link  - Page 151. ] the sweet voice of Fanny as it sometimes trembled on words which might seem to bear a reference to her own position and feelings. Emmerson, whose presence, somehow or other, threw a chill over the group, had withdrawn early to a book, and then to bed. This last evening of Glendenning with the Lennoxes often afterward recurred to his memory. The next evening he was to start at nine by the passing Albany boat. The regret felt by all at the breaking up of their agreeable party was concealed by none, and when they came out upon the walk before the door to pay the parting salutations, Mrs. Elton talking the whole time to each individual in his and her turn, her eyes swimming in tears---Mr. Lennox laughing and joking to hide his softened feelings--- Frank embracing affectionately his departing friend, and even Miss Elton and Mary protesting that they should read no more poetry, have no more music, make no more excursions for a month, Glendenning began to feel that he had formed attachments of a serious nature, and some, or at least one, which, had time and tide allowed, might have become more serious still. Mary had excited in him a certain odd, warm, cold, curious sentiment, which a more philosophical stranger would have identified as an embryo passion. The gay young lady herself---we must do her justice on this extremely delicate point---had not dreamed of any other feelings towards the warm-hearted, generous traveller than a sincere and friendly interest. "There, there comes the boat," said Miss Elton; "I see the sparks over the trees, on that broad part of the river Don't you see?" "Yes, too well," said Glendenning. "It will be here exactly in twenty minutes." "And have all my joys, then, shrunk to this little measure?" "Now, you don't believe what a monstrous tender-hearted being this travelling companion of mine is," said White. "He won't be worth anything for a month." "God bless you, God bless you," broke from every lip, as the general shaking of hands was renewed and renewed again, till everybody's heart was beating double quick time in their bosom. "Write us often, I'll always answer," and Come down again next summer," and "Don't forget to [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-153.jpg) \- external link  - Page 152. ] read Halleck, and Irving, and Bryant," and "We shall see the boat as you come under this point," and "I'll wave a handkerchief to you," and "I'll be on the upper deck, and wave mine," and "We shall drink your health to-morrow precisely at four, and then think of us," and "There's the bell, don't forget us!" These and various other phrases from all present were interrupted by, "We shall be too late, sir," in the quiet voice of the coachman, as the bell of the steamboat rose in impatient, quick peals through the trees from the river below. "Good-by, and God bless you." And then some very hearty shaking of hands again, and White leaped into the carriage with Frank and Lennox. "And now really good-by," said Glendenning, once more shaking each of the ladies by the hand. "Kind, dear Mrs. Elton, I shall never forget you. Miss Elton, you have forgiven me like an angel, and I shall always recollect you as one. Mrs. Lennox, I could call you my mother," and he pressed her hand warmly to his lips. "Miss Lennox, I should be even more unhappy than I am if I didn't think we should one day---" "Come, d---n it," said Lennox, "if you don't want to be left behind, young man---" He sprang into the carriage. "Adieu. God bless you, and happiness be yours; and mind," said Mrs. Lennox---"remember! you have made a promise!" The coachman cracked his whip, and the carriage dashed down the winding road, and was lost among the trees. "There goes as fine a fellow as ever lived," said Mrs. Lennox. "And what does Mary think?" said Mrs. Elton. "He will not carry away a whole heart, poor fellow. Such expressive eyes! such a sweet manner! Do you know, really, my dear Mrs. Lennox---" "Let us go out on the point, where they will see us in the moonlight." The party repaired to the spot indicated by Mrs. Lennox, where, after waiting some ten minutes, they heard once again the loud bell, the voices of the captain and porters below, then the heavy thunder of the revolving wheels, and presently the black mass, glittering in the moonlight, flashing with lights, music bursting from her deck, the figures of [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-154.jpg) \- external link  - Page 153. ] people passing to and fro, and, in the stern, a single form, not recognisable in itself, but easily identified as Glendenning by the handkerchief which was slowly waved towards them, till the moving city disappeared behind a sudden bend among the mountains. Thus they met, and thus they parted. How will they meet again? But as none of the gay folks of Rose Hill was gifted with the faculty of reading the future, the question, which presented itself to more minds than one, remained as yet unanswered. The charm of the Rose Hill circle was broken by the departure of their two gay and pleasant guests. Other thoughts and feelings now began to rise. Harry, who, true lover as he was, despite his very unequivocal rejection, had clung to a hope that the whole was the result of error, and might one day be explained and arranged, imagined all doubt terminated by the discovery he had accidentally made of Miss Elton's partiality for a flirtation with Mr. Emmerson. He had, therefore, in his own decisive way, changed his mind entirely as to her character, and conceived an opinion, in which he did not again intend to waver, that this beautiful girl, with whom he had allowed himself to fall so desperately in love; for whom he had come so near blowing his brains out; from whom he had tamely received an insult as cruel as it was unnecessary---he had come to the conclusion that this lovely and engaging young person was neither more nor less than a heartless coquette. His opinion, however false, was not altogether without apparent foundation. Both Frank and himself had been led to declare their passion, both, it seemed, drawn on by her arts, and both, at the proper point, instantly and unmercifully rejected; and now even Mr. Emmerson, a cold and obviously unsocial man, old enough to be her father, was in his turn ensnared, and was either really honoured with her approbation (for the air and attitude which had struck him appeared to warrant such an idea), or was led on to think so by her [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-155.jpg) \- external link  - Page 154. ] love of conquest. If she had accepted this last one of her adorers, Harry felt, somehow or other, that he should equally despise her heart and her understanding; but if he, too, had been encouraged to form and confide his hopes only to be in his turn rejected, the evidence of Miss Elton's proficiency as a coquette---a proficiency made perfect by so much practice--- would scarcely require addition. In either case, Harry awoke to a sense of his own weakness, and in his bosom the idle anguish of disappointed love gave place to more manly sentiments and resolutions. "Like a dew-drop from the lion's mane," he resolved to shake off the boyish folly, and to meet Miss Elton with exactly the same polite regard as he was accustomed to bestow on other indifferent young ladies: a regard to be tempered, however, with considerable firmness, and a constant recollection of the character and charms of his fair and dangerous enemy. These were the reflections consequent upon his awkward interruption of the t ete-u-tete on the back balcony. Only the quiet indignation and contempt which it raised in his bosom could have enabled him to sustain the pang with which he saw at last dissolved into empty air all his hopes of all his confidence in Fanny Elton. It may be remarked, too, as among the proverbial caprices to which the destiny of lovers is exposed, that his passion seemed to be extinguished at the very moment when, and by the very means by which, her confidence in him was established, and all her doubting tenderness was confirmed with more strength than ever. Frank had read the young girl's heart more correctly; he had seen the look of unutterable horror at the rising of Harry's lifeless body. Even while he sprang to his brother's rescue, so inconceivably rapid are the operations of the spirit, that blanched face, those clasped hands, that fervid expression, crushed, as it were, by the shock of death from a tender, breaking heart, were distinctly observed. From that moment he abandoned all hope, all endeavour; and he felt a double triumph in saving his brother's life, as he saw the value she attached to it. He now longed for the orders to repair to his post, once so dreaded. Seriously alarmed for his peace of mind, he saw that, if he were destined ever to master his unfortunate passion, it must be by tearing himself away from her. Emmerson's wily eye immediately perceived the course things were taking. At first he had yielded himself only to [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-156.jpg) \- external link  - Page 155. ] rage and mean envy, but now he began to think better of his prospect. Without any particular regard for Miss Elton, he had long fixed his eyes upon her large fortune, which the profound vanity he cherished in secret, beneath an exterior of striking modesty, induced him to suppose might be brought within his reach, with proper management. He saw Frank was forever out of his path, and that Harry had fairly turned the tables on his mistress. Among his peculiarities, although concealed from the world, was a disposition to leave nothing unwon for want of striving to obtain it, which he did, however, only with the utmost slyness; for whatever he did was silent and mysterious. It was by the aid, asked in a confidential way, of Harry, on whom he had done his best to inflict a fatal injury, that he had brought about the very arrangement with Mr. Lennox by which he was to possess five thousand dollars a year. His addresses to Miss Elton had been preferred much more prematurely than he had intended, but the intoxicating triumph of his new arrangement had been rendered more difficult of resistance on that unlucky day by three or four extra glasses of Champagne, forced upon him at dinner by his generous patron. He had, however, been sufficiently in possession of his usual diplomatic abilities to from Miss Elton (and he knew she would never break word) an unconditional promise of secrecy. If he not himself obtain the lovely heiress, he was resolved Lennox should not. He disliked, because he envied family. Their services to him were welcome gratitude was not a blessed, but a cursed sensation He was one of those men who hate in proportion are obliged, and who, when it can be safely and done, like to return an injury for a favour. Does believe there are no such characters? May undeceived by experience! But poor Fanny was the most  of all. She loved Harry, she always had loved him  the whole ardour of her soul. Rashly yielding to the secret representations of Emmerson, she had acted under impressions which she could no longer entertain. The moment an interested motive appeared for that gentleman's insinuations, a new light, broke over his whole character, and she saw that Harry was so deeply offended, and so far  from her, would require more boldness an ingenuity  she [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-157.jpg) \- external link  - Page 156. ] sessed to explain her conduct. She soon perceived, also, that he was not only acting on the impulse received from her first interview with him, when, stung with the idea that he was offering his hand in compliance with the wishes of his family, while his heart and his vows were, in fact, another's, she expressed the indignation such conduct naturally inspired. From that time till recently there was in his manner, stern and distant as it was, something which made her conscious he was yet in her power, and something which made her hope she had done him injustice, and that the pure and disinterested Emmerson might find he had been in error. But now Harry's demeanour was changed. A careless indifference, almost levity, succeeded to his grave and obviously feigned composure, and his guarded determination to avoid her. Now he neither sought her society nor withdrew from it. He seemed careless whether chance placed her by his side, or even quite alone with him. His air was that of a gentleman to a young lady with whom he was not very familiarly acquainted, but to whom he extended the courtesies, somewhat stiff and ceremonious, of a host to a stranger guest. There was in it no affectation, no display of forced indifference. It was, she saw, and her heart swelled as she did so, the unmistakeable absence of any sentiments of regard. It was the coldness of indifference, or, rather, of contempt. She saw she had lost him: not only lost him, but his respect. The idea was so painful that she resolved to fix upon some mode of explanation. But how to do this? Her ingenuous and inexperienced mind might naturally form such a resolution, but the difficulty of carrying it into effect became very soon apparent. She thought, at first, of her mother, Mary, or Mrs. Lennox, but gave up the idea instantly; such a confidence involved a disclosure of her opinion of Emmerson, the grounds she had for that opinion, his declaration to her, which she had promised not to reveal, and Harry's also, which she felt equally bound to conceal. Emmerson's charges and insinnations against Harry had also been communicated to her in a strict confidence, which she did not feel herself at liberty to betray. No, whatever was to be done, must be done by herself alone. Frank once rose to her mind. But the impropriety and cruelty of making him a mediator between her and Harry rendered the stop impossible; though such justice did she render him, she felt sure, had he been aware [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-158.jpg) \- external link  - Page 157. ] of her position, he would have faithfully and nobly performed the task. So many and various were the changes which had come over the before perfectly happy party indeed, that the country had almost ceased to be beautiful and the fine weather agreeable. The shore-walks and gardens were abandoned. There were no more rides or long rambles through the woods, or boatings, or pic-nics. Little Seth's bright dream was already over. With Emmerson came the painful sense of a secret enemy, whose true character he could never hope to expose or escape from, and which broke upon the sweet strains of his imagination like a discord. From his lowly position, he had seen fully displayed Emmerson's cold, selfish arrogance and subtle perfidy. Yet he saw that his opinion, if expressed, would only recoil upon himself, as Emmerson had the crafty skill to make what impression he pleased upon his friends and the world. He would not have feared him notwithstanding all this, for Seth had a bold, lion-heart to meet open danger, but he found Emmerson so wily and silent, so full of management and petty tricks, the very pettiness and baseness of which would have made an accusation appear ridiculous, that the poor, artless, indignant boy, with all his honest courage, had learned to feel in his presence the irrepressible fear of a man walking in a garden where he knows there is a snake. At length Monday morning came, and Mr. Lennox, Harry, and Emmerson were to leave. Mr. Lennox had been duly informed by Mrs. Lennox as to certain ideas and discoveries of her own respecting Miss Elton, and he in his turn, although he had expressly promised not to do so (but men will tell their wives!), related to her the conversation he had once had with Emmerson, when that gentleman, to suit his own purpose and break off the match with Frank, had stated his accidental, but certain knowledge of Harry's attachment to Miss Elton. Mrs. Lennox having thus testified to the sentiments of the young lady, and Mr. Lennox of the young gentleman, Euclid could not well have demonstrated a problem more clearly. "I'll tell you what," said Mr. Lennox to his wife, on the morning of the day on which he was to return to town, while, lathered from his throat to the tip of his nose, he was drawing his glittering razor over the strop, occasionally (not stealing, but) taking a look at himself in the glass, which [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-159.jpg) \- external link  - Page 158. ] look appeared in no way to interrupt the satisfaction of those two duplicates of a most capital fellow on meeting each other, "I'll tell you what, Kate, if so is so, Harry shan't stir back to town this week. He's out of sorts that anybody may see. Emmerson, who sees everything, and, I believe, only lives to watch over our interests, has sufficiently established that fact and the cause. What do you think? he caught my young master, the other night, in the street---ha! ha! ha! (damn it, I've cut my chin!)---drunk as a piper." "Harry? You astound me! you distress me." "Drunk as Dick Dashall, singing `Robin Adair'---ha! ha! ha!---and holding on to the Park railing for fear of falling off the ground! Ha! ha! ha!" "And you laugh! What would you say if you were yourself to meet your son in such a disgusting state?" asked Mrs. Lennox, with a look of sincere distress. "Say? Why, slap him on the back, and say, `Go it, my boy! Call in and let us know how you feel in the morning! ' I've no objection to my son's knowing evil once. He'll not do it again. It'll all come right at last." "Henry! how can you speak so lightly?" "The fact is, Harry is in love , and these are the signs of it. Emmerson told me another curious circumstance. But, on reflection, I am convinced there he is mistaken. His fidelity to me makes him over-anxious. But Harry is in love, and so, you say, is Fanny. Now, I'll tell you what: he shall remain here this week." "But if they have quarrelled?" "Pho! nonsense! quarrelled indeed! Put two young pouting lovers a week in a pretty country place, with nothing to do but look into each other's faces, or watch each other go in and come out of the room, and all that sort of thing, eating currant-pie and home-made bread and butter, and a glass of cherry-bounce now and then, and if they don't make up, why---let them separate. But in this I have a serious object." "You a serious object!" said Mrs. Lennox. "I should like to know what it is?" "You musn't be alarmed, now; but Harry, about three days ago, formally requested leave to go abroad for a few years. Emmerson thinks he ought to go; I have no objections; but I don't wish him to go off in a pet with sweet [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-160.jpg) \- external link  - Page 159. ] little Fanny, if they like each other. I have not fully consented, but he requested me to break it to you and get your permission." "It seems destined that we can't have our boys at home." "Of course it does. Our boys are now men, my dear. So we'll leave him here this week, to take care of the girls and you, and steer you up against sloops and through thunder-storms, and afterward it will be time enough to give him an answer, if he wish one." This plan was in due time communicated to Harry by his father, in the Oriental style in which that gentleman was accustomed to make his suggestions to his family. Harry could not offer any farther resistance to the proposition without betraying some stronger motive than he desired to assign, so he only remarked that, although he had rather go down---he had some little things to attend to, etc., etc., etc.---yet he would remain if his father wished. Poor Fanny, not fathoming the motives of those around her, not dreaming of the suspicions of Mrs. Lennox, and far less supposing that Emmerson had ever carried his double-dealing so far as to make such representations of her to Mr. Lennox---ignorant, too, that Harry was meditating a voyage to the opposite side of the globe, and that, perhaps, nay, probably, the few days she was now passing with him would be the last for years, perhaps literally the last---poor Fanny, as she heard the final decision that Harry should spend the week at Rose Hill, felt her young heart bound with delightful emotion, and a confidence that, however impossible she found it to fix upon any definite way of explaining her apparently inexcusable caprices, all would come right before that day week. There did not breathe on the earth a being more modest and pure, or one less likely to contrive and manoeuvre in order to win the affection of any young man; but, while she was pure and modest, her very innocence and ingenuousness prevented her seeing any impropriety in attempting to undeceive Harry under the present peculiar circumstances. In an instant the perfect happiness which had been a stranger to her for the last year returned. The gayety and charm of her past days once more appeared in her manner and countenance. Mrs. Lennox, an observer too affectionate and experienced to suffer any sign to escape her, saw and correctly interpreted this happy change. She had before her a week's [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-161.jpg) \- external link  - Page 160. ] duty, by no means uninteresting to such a mother, of watching the little drama which had commenced about her; particularly as upon its denouement depended, as she thought, not only the question of Harry's proposed absence of several years in Europe, but his future happiness and that of her beloved and lovely young friend. As to Frank, her skilful eye had already seen that the attachment of Miss Elton to him was of a different nature from his to her; and the thoughtful mother, accustomed to consider all things for the best, and to "observingly distil out" "a spirit of good from things evil," found in his youth, his elastic spirits, and his gay and impressionable character, a hope that this early and tender disappointment would not eventually interfere with his happiness, but might, on the contrary, not only keep him in an atmosphere of purity now that he was launching off into the world alone, but might lead him to reflection and self-communing favourable to the development in his mind of religious truth. So commenced the second week in the pretty, charming, but now somewhat less gay and noisy Rose Hill. At length the hour of departure arrived, and as the boat came in sight, they all accompanied Mr. Lennox down to the landing-place, when the Chancellor Livingston came in fine style, and this time stopped at the wharf, puffing out immense volumes of white, hot steam, with a noise which obliged the family thus separating to deliver their affectionate, confidential parting phrases in a tone of voice as if they had been shouting across the river, instead of into each other's ears through the hand, by way of a trumpet. There was considerable shaking of hands, and a slight tumbling in of valises, enlivened by divers hearty smacks between Mrs. Lennox and her husband, Mary and Mr. Lennox, Mrs. Elton and Mr. Lennox (Mr. Lennox usually went the whole! ), and Mr. Lennox and Fanny. The latter generally made somewhat more resistance to the tyrannical extortions in this way of her light and warm-hearted host, yet now, what with the noise, and the running to and fro, and the fury of the steam, and the little agitation of parting, and her strange, deep delight at the presence of one who did not depart, and Mr. Lennox's extremely sudden and determined manner of claiming his unprincipled, but, alas! customary right, and the well-known, ferocious cry of the indomitably punctual captain, " All aboard! " and " Haul in [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-162.jpg) \- external link  - Page 161. ] the plank!  " the poor girl had not only received, but actually bestowed such a hearty smack as made Frank blow his nose in order to hide his wet eyes, and caused even Harry, for a single, unobserved moment, to utter something which would have borne a very respectable resemblance to a sigh, if it could have been heard in the deafening din around. "That's right, Fanny!" said Lennox, through his hand, and quite red in the face from the exertion of speaking so loud. "What's worth doing at all is worth doing well!" "You're a despotic tyrant!" replied she, but he could not hear her words. He stopped a moment to look at her lips, around which played an enchanting smile, and which were working away so comically without producing any sound audible through the general uproar, but the indulgence had wellnigh lost him his passage; for, at the captain's indignant second command, his old friend the "plank" was "hauled in" with an intense promptitude, Emmerson and Seth having barely time to reach the deck with their lives. The boat was already a couple of yards on her way to New-York, when, leaving Fanny in the midst of a sentence, he leaped aboard, to the breathless anxiety of his wife and the undisguised amusement of the passengers, and in two minutes he had shaken hands with about a hundred people, and had seized an influential member of the Legislature by the button, for the purpose of laying down some startling doctrines on the subject of Mr. Van Buren and the United States Bank. Seth---for Emmerson, in a spiteful mood at the idea of being left behind, had expressed an opinion that the boy would be wanted in the office---poor little Seth, with a heart as heavy as lead, and a certain indefinite shrinking from Emmerson, had gone to the stern, as far as he could get, and was gazing back on the receding point on which Rose Hill stood, lessening to a white dot on the green mountain-side, and at last fading away. The boy was not generally thought over-susceptible, but he certainly was enough so to feel the difference between the kind, rosy, sweet, sunshiny face of his young, charming friend and protector, Mary, and the bilious countenance of Mr. Emmerson. If he hadn't loved the whole Lennox family to adoration, and Mary several hundred million times more than the rest, he would have very likely let fly an inkstand or a ruler at Mr. Emmerson's head, and left the man to [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-163.jpg) \- external link  - Page 162. ] enjoy alone, in all his selfish greediness, the advantages of the place. But the genuine kindness of his friends (to say nothing of Mr. Lennox's frequent promises respecting the presidential chair!) and Mary's good-natured, sisterly interest in his welfare---no, he could not help himself. Besides, he hadn't a home to go to, or any other prospect of employment. No, he must bear all Emmerson could inflict in the meanness of power, and the pettiness of spite and jealousy, and, what was more, he must endeavour to bear it patiently. That gentleman had once intimated to him the possibility of his being turned adrift to beggary and disgrace. Who would receive him with the odium of Emmerson's unfriendly opinion? Thus, before he was aware of it, two passions (under however hopeless and ridiculous circumstances) had entered into this obscure and friendless boy's heart--- love and hate! They developed themselves there unobserved, unsuspected by the whole world. He did not strive to check them, but in his ardour and inexperience he abandoned himself fully to both. He felt within him hope, firmness, and determination. Some of the immortal ornaments of his country had risen from an origin as humble as his own. Absurd and undreamed of by others as was his love for Mary, it refreshed and supported his soul; and although Emmerson seemed his evil genius and an insurmountable obstacle in his path, the hatred he conceived for him strengthened and concentrated his intellect and character. Everything changes, and in nothing were there going on changes more striking than in little, stupid, awkward, bashful Seth Copely. When the Chancellor Livingston at length ploughed her way out of sight, and Mrs. Lennox, Mary, Fanny, and Mrs. Elton (who, the reader mustn't suppose, has stopped talking because we have stopped recording her talk), with Frank and Harry, had stood watching her receding image till they fully realized that the beloved husband and father had indeed disappeared for another week, they turned and walked up the hill towards the house. Mrs. Lennox had given Mrs. Elton an intimation of what was going on, and that lady, who seized with avidity on everything that came in her way, instantly pictured the dear, happy lovers as dying to be alone. So, without making any particular mystery of her ideas and intentions, but with sundry mysterious nods and smiles, when she saw Mary [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-164.jpg) \- external link  - Page 163. ] walking with her mother quite in advance, she put her arm within Frank's and drew him (not much resisting) on, so as to leave Fanny behind alone with Harry. The poor girl, who had ardently longed for an occasion to appeal to the good sense and magnanimity of her companion, and regain at least the respect which she saw, with insupportable anguish, she had lost, now found herself favoured with the best of all possible occasions. The party had strolled on a long way ahead, up the winding and deeply shadowed road. But, alas! so far from being able to carry her design into execution, she found her heart beating so quick and so violently as to deprive her of the power to utter anything at all. She was so intimidated by the sense of her awkward position, and by the indifferent, passive air and expression of Harry, that the shrinking of her soul might have been accompanied by a corresponding movement of her person. Harry saw it, and felt it as proceeding from a fear, on her part, lest, "time and place agreeing," he might be tempted to resume his suit. "She may spare herself the anxiety," thought he; "I shall make no more mistakes of that kind." Through the civility with which he offered his arm, therefore, there was something almost of freezing coldness, and she accepted it with an embarrassment and a timid manner as little like love as his own. Thus these two young people, who loved each other so sincerely, were estrayed by the arts of one man. For some moments they walked on at a pace which, to accommodate itself to his rather firm and rapid stride, she was obliged to quicken, and which showed, at least on his side, a sincere desire to regain the company. The silence was awkward for her, but did not seem so for him, for he presently broke it, in the laughing tone of one perfectly at his ease, and said, "How do you like this new universal favourite of ours, Glendenning, Miss Elton? Do you, with the rest of us, think him such a fine, warm-hearted fellow?" "Yes, I do." "He amused me extremely. I like him better than I do White; his mind may be less matured, but his heart is fresher." "Do you think him really reformed?" inquired Miss Elton, timidly. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-165.jpg) \- external link  - Page 164. ] "I think that must depend upon circumstances and upon the sort of society he falls into. He is sincere now; there can't be a doubt of it; but he's facile, I fear, and fickle." "If he were fickle without being sincere," remarked Miss Elton, in the same sweet, low voice, "I should fear much for him; but sincerity is a virtue so rare and so redeeming, that, where it exists, reformation can never be hopeless." "Yes," said Harry, in a light tone, "I don't doubt he'll turn out a fine fellow. We shall miss him as a companion, this country week of ours, at all events. There is our party; shall we join it?" Fanny felt she was thrown back, but she also felt she had deserved it. The air of perfect carelessness, the firm, advancing step, the deliberate change of the conversation at the point where it might have become serious, the absence of all his usual haughty distance of manner, and the haste to join the rest, had in them something which struck her painfully; but she remembered the cause he had to suppose this precisely what she required of him, and his promise never to resume the subject again, and she did not despair of letting him see, in time, the true state of her feelings. She, therefore, left his arm and joined Mary. In the evening the delicious weather once more gathered them together on the balcony to tea. Harry was gay, and chatting more than usual. He was less distant than he had been before for many months to Miss Elton, but it was that sort of courtesy which a gentleman bestows upon a lady, without any effort or any meaning more than meets the eye. Fanny felt it with alarm, almost with anguish, but patiently bore what she had so rashly brought upon herself. The tea was nearly over, and some of the party had already risen from the table, when Mrs. Lennox said, "What is that elegant, very red volume in your pocket, Harry?" "A guide-book!" "A European one?" "Yes." "You'll not want it, my son. We shan't let you go. I can't make up my mind to it. You and Frank both--- `all my little chickens at one fell swoop!' " "Too late, my dear mother; my mind's quite made up. Before I left town, indeed, I had completed all the [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-166.jpg) \- external link  - Page 165. ] necessary arrangements. This day week at farthest I shall be on the `deep blue sea!' " "What, all these decisive arrangements before you had consulted us?" "I did not intend to set out, of course, without your full permission." "Like father like son! You and Frank are famous for doing a thing first, and asking permission afterward." "But, my dear mother, if it is ever to be done, better now than later in life. There's Emmerson, now, ready to take good care of the office till I get back. Besides, the yearning I feel to see Europe has lately grown intolerable." "Europe!" exclaimed Fanny, with a face much paler than she had any idea of, and trying, with obvious difficulty, to speak in a careless manner, and as if her breath did not come and go considerably quicker than would be requisite for such an undertaking. "Yes. He persists in his determination!" "What determination?" inquired Fanny, fixing her eyes on Mrs. Lennox. "He has told you of his plan, of course---has he not? To go off in six days, by the next packet for London." "You are jesting," said Fanny, laughing. "Why he has certainly told you," said Mrs. Elton. Fanny was silent. "I did not think of troubling Miss Elton with affairs in which she must feel so slight an interest." Her artless eyes were lifted to his one moment, but fell beneath his cold, grave expression. "And how long do you propose remaining away, if I may venture to inquire?" asked Mrs. Lennox. "Three, perhaps four years. I mean to attend one or two courses of lectures on the Roman law in Germany, under Savigny, and to spend a winter in Italy, and I can't give less than a year to England, Scotland, Ireland, and Wales; and I must see Egypt, and Jerusalem, and Constantinople when once so near---and---" "Mercy on me! my dear son," cried Mrs. Lennox. "Why, you're laying out work for a lifetime. Can't I persuade you to give it up?" "Oh, pooh! nonsense! The time will soon fly away." "There, there's your father's own son again." "I am dying to see a foreign shore," continued Harry. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-167.jpg) \- external link  - Page 166. ] "Ah, I wish I could go with you," exclaimed Frank. "And I," added Mary. "And what changes may take place here before you get back! and what changes may---nay, must take place in you! " "Not changes for the worse!" "You go a boy, you will come back a man." "I hope so, I'm sure!" replied Harry, with some emphasis. "And what may you find here on your return?" Here Frank, and Mary, and Mrs. Elton, all exclaimed against any gloomy predictions or apprehensions, and united in declaring that every young man ought to travel; that it was a most delightful thing to see London, and Paris, and Rome, and Greece, and Egypt, and all those outlandish places, and that it would doubtless do him a vast deal of good. Fanny said not a word; but Mrs. Lennox perceived she was chilled and shocked, and she began to think it might be the best thing, after all, for the young girl as well as for her son to get him out of the way for a year or two. As for any love of his for Fanny, she concluded, from what she saw, that the attachment was altogether on one side, and her sigh of tender sympathy for Fanny was not unmingled with surprise at the indifference of Harry to so much sweetness, beauty, and affection. "But thus it is," thought she: "the course of true love never did run smooth." The party now all rose, and strolled out upon the lawn with the exception of Harry, who, his mother said, had gone with his maps and books to study out a route . He did not present himself again till a late hour in the evening. When Fanny laid her cheek that night upon her pillow, it was wet with long-suppressed tears. The leaving her uninformed of so important a resolution, while it had been communicated to everybody else, she acknowledged was what she might have expected, but it nevertheless seemed a slight so marked, the evidence of a contempt so cold, that she scarcely knew whether it affected her with more anguish or indignation. "If he really have ceased to love me," thought she, "it is my own fault, and I will bear the penalty." She longed to confide to Mrs. Lennox or Mary the offer of Emmerson, and her rejection of it, but that gentleman was too old a head for her, and the promise given she never [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-168.jpg) \- external link  - Page 167. ] dreamed of breaking, even if Harry should leave his country under the conviction that she had accepted him, or had trifled with him. Time would set it all right. But time, to such a young, tender, impassioned girl, was not the most acceptable medicine for such suffering. At length all her sad thoughts, by the force of habit, merged into one, as she closed the long train of her reflections with an humble prayer to Him who ordains all, that, wherever the object of her affection might go, he might be protected and led the right way; and that both he and she herself might receive either aid to avert calamity, or strength to support it. She had, at least intentionally, done no wrong, and she did not mean to do any. She committed herself and her young sorrows, therefore, to His care who had promised to give rest to the weary, and with a lightened heart, though tears were yet on her lashes, she fell into a sleep, the blessed privilege of the pious and the innocent, disturbed by no ungoverned passion or painful dream. Several more days passed away in the same manner. Harry's spirits seemed high, and everybody remarked how elated he was with the idea of his approaching voyage. Fanny had schooled herself into tranquillity; while Frank, whose sadness equalled her own, took lonely walks, often going out early with a gun, and returning late. Mary went on rallying everybody else into a good humour, and Mrs. Elton had pretty much all the rest of the talk to herself. In fact, the spell of the party was broken. Towards the end of the week there came a letter to Frank and one to Mrs. Lennox from Captain Glendenning. He described his arrival at Montreal. To Frank he gave a humorous description of his journey and arrival. To Mrs. Lennox he wrote in a more serious, and even in an eloquent strain. Both were delighted at this mark of attachment. Frank read his aloud, as it was obviously intended he should do, and it clearly recalled the writer, whose playful descriptions occasioned much laughter. Mrs. Lennox folded her letter carefully and put it away. She found its confidential and serious tone too sacred for the hour and scene. With each day the distance between the hearts of Fanny and Harry had increased. He had now conceived such a seriously unfavourable opinion of her, that he often showed it unconsciously. It is by a thousand minute and nameless details that our sentiments towards each other manifest themselves. His manly and noble character could receive [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-169.jpg) \- external link  - Page 168. ] from an artful coquette but one impression. Her dismissal of himself and Frank, and the scene with Emmerson, were constantly before him, and the passion which had raged in his heart was calmed, if not destroyed. He jested with her sometimes as if he had never seen her before the present week. He exhibited not the slightest disinclination to be alone with her, or to be interrupted when alone. He complimented her freely and flippantly when others did. In short, she began to feel not only indignant at herself for longer thinking of him, but to be convinced that their relations were in good earnest broken off completely and permanently. Had she herself given him no reason to believe she did not love him, his present demeanour would have long ago cooled, and, perhaps, terminated her attachment to him; but when she reached this point, the recollection of the scornful words she had uttered, and of the attitude in which he had seen her with Emmerson, took from her all strength and resolution, and overwhelmed her with fluctuations of hope and grief, of love and pride. Friday came, and with it Mr. Lennox. At dinner they sat longer than usual, to hear the city news and chat of the past and future. "So Harry is really off?" said Mrs. Lennox. "He's his own master. I have no objection." "Give me but three or four years," said Harry, "to see the world, and study what can be better studied in Europe than here, and I'll come back and turn man of business the rest of my life." "It is but fair," said his father, to whom Mrs. Lennox had already communicated the result of her observations. "Go, my boy, when you please. I will prepare letters of introduction, and will procure such others as I think necessary. You will have a letter of credit on Rothschild. Your introductions will place you in the first society. Mr. B--- has pressed upon me a letter to the Duke of G---, and another to the Earl of W---; not ordinary letters, but such as will throw open to you the most interesting, at least the highest circles of English society. There you may spend what you like, for, without attempting display, I wish you to live like a gentleman, and to have every facility for acquainting yourself with the world. For Paris, Vienna, Berlin, Florence, Rome, and Naples, you will be amply provided with introductions. Enjoy yourself, my son; but [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-170.jpg) \- external link  - Page 169. ] you know that, without some serious, intellectual, daily occupation, no enjoyment can last long. I expect you to be back in three years, with your mind and manners much improved. Don't forget us. Take good care of yourself. Write often. Perfect yourself in the German and French. Remember, we send you off with implicit confidence in your good sense and discretion, that your letters will be a great consolation, and your return the most joyful era the future has in store for us. Let me hear your opinions on the political state of the various countries you pass through, and sketches of whatever interests you. Don't lose your temper when cheated. Take things as they go, cheerfully and quietly. Don't think yourself obliged to quarrel with a man because you discover him to be a scoundrel, or to swear eternal friendship to all who please you at first sight. You go to learn, not to teach. Of all things, come back a good American, a sensible, modest fellow, and without a mustache! " The eyes of more than one person were a little moist as Mr. Lennox proceeded, but, as usual, his close set the whole party laughing. They were a little startled, however, by his next words, which were, "And now, sir, all I have to add is, that, once resolved on going, you can't be off too soon. The next packet sails on Wednesday. I recommend you to go to town by this afternoon's boat. Do all you have to do coolly, and we'll be down to-morrow and see you off." "But, my dear, dear Harry," cried Mrs. Lennox, "you'll want a thousand things. I had no idea you really would go so soon too. I cannot believe it." "Oh no, I shall want nothing but a single portmanteau. All my things are ready. I can renew my wardrobe in London better than here." "But if you're going in to-day's boat, you'd better be moving, sir," said his father; "she'll be here in less than an hour." There was something so extremely sudden and unexpected in this whole arrangement, that more than one countenance was pale. "My beloved son!" and "My dear brother!" and "You are a devilish lucky fellow, Harry!" and "I wish I were going with you!" and "Don't go off till we come down!" and various other expressions from various lips [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-171.jpg) \- external link  - Page 170. ] announced the interest all took in the proceeding. Harry withdrew to his room, and hastily, and with a somewhat trembling hand, packed up the necessary things. By the time he had finished the whole family were assembled on the lawn, with hats and bonnets, to accompany him down to the landing-place, already the scene of so many sad and merry partings and meetings. In the whole course of the preceding conversation Harry had never once looked at Fanny nor she at him. She behaved admirably. A slight pallor might have been perceptible to a close observer, but there were, luckily, around her no such impudent and detestable personages. All who suspected anything of her state of mind were delicately careful not to pay her the least attention. They strolled down the well-remembered hill in no very regular order, laughing and talking about the ridiculous absurdity of a man's starting up so suddenly after dinner to go to Jerusalem. Mary said it reminded her of a man who was asked "How soon he could be ready to set off for China," and who replied, "As soon as I can get my hat! " Mary and Fanny were walking together. The former had not been initiated into the real state of affairs between Harry and Fanny, her acuteness being diverted by the fixed idea she had of an attachment that was, or was to be, between Frank and Fanny. All of a sudden she called back Harry, who happened to be the nearest. Fanny had trodden on a sharp stone and hurt her foot. "Come here, Harry, will you?" "What for?" inquired Harry. "Well, you're a gallant knight, to be sure! Here's a lady actually wounded on the occasion of your departure, and when I call you to assist her, you hang back and say `what for?' " "Wounded! Miss Elton!" exclaimed Harry. "Oh, don't fall into any mistake," said Mary, laughing; "it's only her foot, not her heart. But she has really hurt herself, and would have gone back if I had not called you to lend your arm." "Indeed, it's nothing. I had better go back! It will be over in a moment." "Admirable logic," said Mary; "if it will be over in a moment, why go back? Recollect, you may not see Mr. Harry again these five years, if ever. So, your arm, sir." [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-172.jpg) \- external link  - Page 171. ] "Certainly," said Harry. Miss Elton hesitated a moment. "Mary!" cried her father; "where's Mary?" "Here, sir!" And she ran off. "Really, Miss Elton," said Harry, politely, "you seem to be quite lame." "Oh yes---oh no---don't let me detain you, Mr. Lennox, I beg; you will be too late." "I have twenty minutes," replied Harry, looking at his watch. "If you insist upon going on, I beg you to spare your foot. I really hope the injury is not serious." "Let us, at least, try," said she, "not to miss your boat." But the steep descent of the hill had carried the rest of the party long ago out of sight, through the divers bends of the road, much more rapidly than Fanny could follow, do all she could. "An artifice," thought Harry, but as he looked down in her face, over which a slight expression of pain was mingled with one of emotion, he felt he did her injustice. His error was made more certain by the appearance of a spot of blood upon the white, thin shoe that clothed the slenderest, most graceful foot in the world. "I had no idea of being called upon to walk so suddenly," said she, "or I should not have ventured out in these slippers. I think a piece of glass has cut me." "You must return, indeed you must," said Harry, alarmed and ashamed of his suspicions. "Oh no," replied Fanny, also alarmed, not at the hurt, but at the idea of returning alone with him in her present state of mind; "pray let us hasten on." They did so; but a long walk and a lonely one was before them, and she was obliged to lean much more heavily than she had ever done before upon his arm. "I shall be uneasy about your foot," said Harry; "I wish this had not happened. I am almost inclined to go back!" "What can it be but a trifling wound?" said Fanny. "You might lose your boat here, and your passage to London, by such a delay. You've a delightful voyage before you." "Yes, I anticipate four or five years of unalloyed happiness." A pause. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-173.jpg) \- external link  - Page 172. ] "You will find many changes on your return." "I presume so, of course. Five years can scarcely fail to bring some; but I always look on the bright side of things. These changes are as likely to be pleasing as sad ones." Another pause. "Yes," said Harry, "it must indeed be a singular sensation to return to one's country after an absence of some years." "Do you really go as far as Syria?" "Yes, I mean to see Jerusalem, and Egypt too. Pray use my arm, Miss Elton." "Such a journey must require much time." "I hope my father will prolong my leave of absence. I think, perhaps, in five years, I shall be back." "Perhaps---never!" said Fanny, with a voice which was not intended to tremble in the least. "Perhaps is a word which covers a large space of contingencies, Miss Elton." "Mr. Lennox," said Fanny, "you will not misconstrue me if I say I regret the rudeness with which I once addressed you." "It is entirely forgiven," said Harry, coldly. As he spoke, he felt that the light, loved arm trembled in his. He was affected, but he remembered Emmerson. There was another pause, and the idea that he ought to be too sensible to yield to the artifices of a coquette rose in his mind. He looked once more on Miss Elton's face, and her eyes were raised to his. They were full of tears, and their expression thrilled him to the soul. "Fanny," said he, "will you answer me one question?" "What question?" "What passed between you and Mr. Emmerson?" "I cannot tell you." "Why did you address to me the language for which you have just expressed regret?" "I cannot explain." There was another pause. Fanny had scarcely time to collect herself and repress her tears, for they suddenly came full in sight of the whole party on the landing-place, and the steamboat lying off the wharf, with the barge cutting her way towards them, a sheet of green and sunny foam half hiding her swiftly-advancing bows. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-174.jpg) \- external link  - Page 173. ] "Good-by!" "God bless you!" "We shall be down to-morrow." "Take care of yourself." Ere these and other similar expressions were uttered, Harry was half way from the land to the steamboat. Various handkerchiefs were waved to him, which he answered by wafting back again a kiss with his hand. But one kiss, wafted from such a distance, so indefinitely divided among so many people, did not produce the effect that sort of thing sometimes does when differently managed. As the eyes of all (we were positively going to say survivers) on the landing-place were fairly full of tears (even Frank's and Mr. Lennox's), the few trifling drops which happened to steal noiselessly from Fanny's averted eyes were not brought into any prominent notice. And now Harry felt as if he were, indeed, launched upon the world, already a free, independent man. He looked around with a sort of inexpressible tenderness, mingled with bewildering delight, from hill to hill, and from shore to shore, each point of which was so familiar, so admired, and so dear. He was gazing on them for the last time for many years, perhaps he should never see them again. At all events, in the ordinary course of things, some changes would occur about him and within him before he should again behold those soft and solemn mountain-shapes, which seemed silently crowding around him, and looking down to say farewell, ere he left his home and his native land to go abroad into the mighty, brilliant, vast, dangerous world. As for Fanny Elton, he was now yet more indignant at her, and he despised himself for the momentary weakness she had caused him to betray. Thank Heaven! I am tearing myself at last from---an artful coquette! When Harry reached the city, he went directly home, and when he got home, the first room he entered was the office. There sat poor little Seth, among half a dozen other clerks, copying away for dear life's sake, with a very sad face. After such kind and familiar salutations as Harry [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-175.jpg) \- external link  - Page 174. ] delighted to bestow on those beneath him, or in any way in his power, he went into the next room and shut the door. "How are you, Emmerson?" "How d'ye do?" said Emmerson, taking his hand with both his, and giving him a warm, bland welcome. "I want you to do me a favour." "What is it?" "I am going to unbosom myself to you, as the young ladies say, frankly and freely. I never yet knew any good cause of concealment." "You are quite right!" said Emmerson, with a clear smile; "there's nothing I detest more than duplicity or double-dealing. But what is it?" "I am going to London in the packet of Wednesday next, on a tour of three, four, perhaps five years. The office is sufficiently taken care of by you, and my advantage in having at command a substitute so kind and able ought not to be thrown away. I shall leave all my interests in your hands, sure to find everything, on my return, ready for me to set firmly and steadily forth again in my professional career. But for your ability and fidelity I could not do this." "Well, you rate me too highly; but to the point." "One reason why I go is, of course, the natural desire of a young man to see the world." "Well: and the other?" "Listen to me. You are the best, the nearest friend, not only of myself, but of my father's family. I need not blush to make you a little confidence." "Go on; you know I would do anything to oblige you." "You will be surprised to hear, perhaps, that I have not only been long a very---serious---admirer of Miss Elton, but that I have had the insane stupidity several times to suppose she saw, approved, and so forth, and so forth, and so forth. You understand?" "Why, not clearly," said Emmerson. "In short, then, I offered myself to her; she rejected me: not simply rejected---she---all but---in fact, she rejected me. Now I can immediately get the better of this sort of thing, and I am resolved to leave---to pull up stakes, as they say, and quit till I get my disappointment under control. Since my last visit to Rose Hill, I have been struck with a particularly absurd idea that this young lady has been labouring under some strange mistake." [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-176.jpg) \- external link  - Page 175. ] Emmerson raised his hand as if carelessly to his eyes and forehead, so as to conceal, however, the change he felt was taking place in his countenance. "But for one circumstance, I should give in and place myself at her feet again." "And that circumstance?" "I stumbled upon you and her the other day on the balcony, and it-struck me you were speaking and standing in the character of a lover. Is it so?" "Your question is rather sudden," said Emmerson, again rubbing his brow and eyes with his hands, and turning pallid with an embarrassment disagreeable to see. "Understand me," said Harry. "I have no right to demand your confidence, but as my going abroad depends upon your reply, I hope you will let me know. Are you a lover of Miss Elton?" Emmerson turned away his face, and busied himself a moment arranging some papers on the table. "If Miss Elton have rejected you, I shall postpone my departure, under the conviction that she loves me. If you have any, the slightest reason to imagine she means to receive your addresses---nay, if she even wavered or seemed to waver, she is either your wife or she is the most accomplished coquette that ever breathed, and I'm off till my heart is as free as air." "My young friend!" said Emmerson, in a pale whisper, "she more than wavered. If she mean to accept me or not, I am not fully prepared to say; that she hesitated , I assure you, and the impression left on my mind is of a nature which will not prevent my trying again. This I will say, however, but in sacred confidence. You must give me your word never to reveal it." "I do." "Then this I will say: I had some idea you were attached to her, and I am not capable of such a base act as endeavouring to supplant you. I, therefore, particularly asked her whether any attachment of hers to you ought to prevent my continuing my addresses. She replied, ` No; he is as far from offering, as I should be from accepting him if he were to offer!  ' " "Miss Elton said that to you?" "I swear it!" said Emmerson again, in a whisper. "Enough. Your statement I cannot doubt in the least. You even mean more than you say!" [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-177.jpg) \- external link  - Page 176. ] No answer, but a very significant look. "Good! give me your hand! I am infinitely obliged to you for your friendly frankness. I see it has given you pain to wound me thus, but no matter. I wish you joy. If you win her, she will bring you happiness unutterable, for I shall believe she married you from affection; if she jilt you, why you may have the consolation of knowing you are not the first, nor the second!" "But I must lay you once more under a solemn injunction of secrecy," said Emmerson. "I would not, even if she be all you fear, injure the character of the young lady. You must promise me what I have said shall never go beyond us two, and also that you will never say you saw me--- you know---on the balcony with her. If I am to be jilted, of course I wish to conceal my folly." "I promise solemnly." Harry went out, humming an opera tune. "What I say is quite true," thought Emmerson. "She did waver, and I do mean to pursue it farther, and she did make use of the remark to me as I stated. Besides, a voyage to Europe is the best thing this young gentleman can undertake. Frank in Prairie du Chien , Master Harry in Jerusalem---the old fellow will follow after him, doubtless, before a year. I can manage that. And then, if Miss Elton won't marry me, I don't think I shall be obliged to go to Europe to recover from the disappointment, although $ 100,000 settled on herself is a comfortable affair. But, as matters are going, I don't think I need despair of finding some suitable alliance. I think my boat sails tolerably well!" As Fanny left Rose Hill with the family next day, her heart beat high with the hope of---she scarcely knew what Harry's last words had been more than kind---they were confidential and tender. She felt that his good opinion had been partly regained, and she looked forward, if not to the postponement of his voyage, at least to such a parting as would not leave her in such a painful state of mind as she [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-178.jpg) \- external link  - Page 177. ] had suffered the last two days. She saw the refusal to answer his two questions had surprised him; but she depended upon his perceiving (without being told) that she was under some necessity in not doing so. She was thus the gayest of the whole party, and Mrs. Lennox, who talked it over with her husband, quite agreed with him in the conclusion that to attempt to understand lovers and their ways was a hopeless task. They reached town, at length, on a bright evening, and preferred to walk home, looking (particularly Fanny) to see Harry each moment coming to meet them. But Harry was not to be seen, either on their way home or when they arrived there. At length he made his appearance, greeted with more than his accustomed warmth each individual of the family he was about to be so soon separated from, including in his heartiest welcome Mrs. Elton. To Miss Elton he bowed stiffly, without offering his hand or meeting her inquiring look. Thus, in one moment, all the poor girl's aerial hopes vanished into nothing. Fanny spent part of the evening there, but the same coldness was persevered in, till she felt that if she had appeared cruel and capricious, he was much more so. Complaining of a headache, by no means a feigned one, she withdrew early with her mother and father, who had hastened to meet them, and sought the longed-for solitude and darkness of her own pillow: imploring aid from Him who always gives to those who ask, she schooled herself to resignation and peace. The next day she did not go at all to Mr. Lennox's, and Tuesday also passed without her yielding to the solicitation of her mother to pay them a visit. In the evening Frank and Mary came round, to say that they were all going to accompany the packet-ship out to sea as far as Sandy Hook in the steamboat, and to see Harry fairly off. As strong objections as the poor girl could or dared to make against this trial, she did urge, but without success. She positively must go. She had never seen a packet-ship at sea, or the sea itself at all; she had never seen the Hook; and Harry would be so disappointed if the whole of the Rose Hill party did not honour his embarcation; and various other irresistible reasons were so persevered in by Mary, that she was obliged to acquiesce, though she felt she was destined to undergo a terrible ordeal. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-179.jpg) \- external link  - Page 178. ] On the last evening that Harry was to spend at home, Mrs. Lennox took an occasion to seek him, when he was alone in his room, arranging his things preparatory to his embarcation. The tender and thoughtful mother had resolved to address him upon two points with the frankness which is the privilege of maternal affection. She hoped to find the heart of her son, whose keen susceptibilities and noble qualities she well knew, so softened by the idea of separation, as to give to the confidential communion she desired a sacred character of truth and love. Instead of being busied with his preparations, she found him, evidently not anticipating such an interruption, sitting motionless, his head leaning on his hand, and lost in thought. On the table, and the object, apparently, of his reveries, for his eyes rested full upon it, lay a lock of hair, which, from its rich auburn hue, might easily be recognised as Miss Elton's. He started as she entered, and, snatching up the silent, but, doubtless, eloquent souvenir, thrust it into his waistcoat pocket. "Harry," said she, seating herself by his side, and fixing her gentle eyes full upon him, "that is Miss Elton's hair." He coloured, but she continued. "It offers me an appropriate opening for a question I have to ask you before you leave us for so many long years--- perhaps forever." "What question?" asked Harry, recovering, not without an effort, from his confusion. "You know, my son, I would ask none from idle curiosity, and I am equally sure you will not withhold your confidence from me, now that we are going to part." "There is not a question on earth, my dearest mother, that you can ask, which I will not answer you as truly as if I were on my dying bed." "Thank you! I knew, I was sure you would." "Now, what is your question?" "Fanny Elton, Harry, is, of all beings out of my family, the one I most admire, for whom I have the sincerest affection. Her happiness is as dear to me, almost, as yours. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-180.jpg) \- external link  - Page 179. ] I have sometimes thought you, too, were as much interested in it as I. The lock of hair you have endeavoured to conceal confirms my opinion. The first question I have to ask you is, do you love Fanny Elton?" "No, mother," said Harry, firmly, almost sternly. "But have you ever loved her?" "Years ago, I had a boyish passion for her, and procured from her, without much persuasion, this ringlet." He took it out and handed it to her. "You can see by the brighter colour that she was younger when she gave it than she is now." "Tell me all, my son!" "That is all, mother. As we both grew older, we both grew wiser---ha! ha! ha! I have not seen this before for a year, I do assure you. I was going to say I had almost forgotten I had it, when it turned up accidentally among my old things. I was thinking of my folly when you came in. Take it: you may hand it to her, with my compliments, if you like. It'll do for somebody else perhaps." "What do you mean? Have you changed, or is it the change in her? Is it a lover's quarrel, or pique, or jealousy, or what?" "Upon my soul, I am on the best of terms with her. But the change is in both of us. I do not admire her character, upon a close study of it, quite as much as I expected, and the fact is, she---she---" "She what?" He was going to disclose what he had learned from Emmerson, but that gentleman had exacted from him a distinct promise of secrecy, so he stopped and said nothing. Mrs. Lennox also ceased her inquiries. She had no authority, of course, from Miss Elton to make any. She was not disposed to reveal her own suspicions of Miss Elton's attachment for him without the certainty of effecting a union; and though she perceived a bitterness in his manner which did not argue perfect indifference, yet his denial of any affection for her was so positive that she feared pressing her mediation any farther, lest the cause of Miss Elton might suffer. She knew, if there were any real affection, absence would rather strengthen than weaken it. She, therefore, concluded to pursue the subject no farther. "Well, then, leave her. If it is so, you will have one tie the less to call you back to your native land." [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-181.jpg) \- external link  - Page 180. ] "But there are ties enough without her, my dear mother," said Harry. "I have now another and much more serious remark to make," resumed Mrs. Lennox. "You are going off beyond my care, out of my sight, for years, to be exposed to all the dangers as well as the temptations and errors of life. You have everything to make you happy but one thing , and, that one thing wanting, all the rest, sooner or later, must prove vain. Like your father, Mary, and Frank, you are without religion. Answer me frankly and like a man, are you not?" "I am; since you ask me so seriously, I must tell you the truth. I am without the least approach to religious belief; nor do I find I am more likely to sin without it than with it. Be assured, I shall love virtue and walk in the path of honour as long as I live." "I thank you for your frankness, Harry. I myself once doubted, and I know how plausible doubt can be. I see, also, in others, like your father for instance, that a man may possess every noble quality of mind and heart, and yet be an infidel. I don't start from you; I ain't afraid of you. You are my son. I admire, sympathize with, and love you still." The tears rolled down her cheek as she spoke, and she took his hand and pressed it fervently to her lips. "But I have to request from you," she continued, "the same toleration---the same respect I extend. Do not despise or shrink from me because I believe; for I am older than you, and have thought of the subject more. I will not now offer you any argument . We will suppose Christianity false, the most absurd, impossible series of fables that folly ever heaped together or credulity ever received. But, true or not true, I have to request that, during your absence, and at as early a moment as possible, you will acquaint yourself with the subject thoroughly. Do not reject it without understanding it. That is not the part of a well-informed, sensible man. As Christianity is the religion of modern civilization, you should comprehend it, if not as religion, as a remarkable system of philosophy. If the history of its divine origin be not true, you can scarcely mingle on equal terms with gentlemen and scholars without, at least, knowing its history as an earthly influence; yet you do not know anything of it. Can you tell me on what grounds other sensible men believe it?" [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-182.jpg) \- external link  - Page 181. ] "No! I confess that it is to me the most unfathomable of mysteries." "Are you exactly aware what are the prophecies? " "No, I am not." "Have you ever read the Bible through?" "No, not continuously." "Have you ever read any commentator on it?" "No. You cross-examine, mother, like a lawyer," he replied, laughing, but at the same time blushing. "Now, then, I am going to make you a parting request. First, you will not come back till you are well informed upon the scheme, and the internal and external evidence of Christianity. I do not ask you to study it for the sake of believing in it, but that you may seek only to explain what it is that falls like a spell upon the intellects of so many other people, and makes them cling to it, notwithstanding its absurdities, through life and through death. That you should believe I do not ask; but I ask you to ascertain what it is that makes other men believe. Will you do this?" "At least, I will try; indeed, I have always been intending to study the theory, the philosophy of Christianity, and to investigate the mystery of its influence on mankind. I will come back well acquainted with the Bible; I will examine it as I would a law question \---coldly, firmly, without passion, without respect. But I give you notice," he added, laughing, "I shall tell you, without concealment, the result of my inquiry. I shall spend some time in Germany, where these questions are dissected with merciless precision. But if, after three years, I still find (as of course I shall) that the myths of antiquity, and the ignorance of an age without a press, had combined to palm upon the credulity of mankind a religion now in its wane, I fear you will be yourself shaken in your faith, and that I shall be the instrument of depriving you of what you value as the greatest consolation." "My son," said Mrs. Lennox, "I know you are candid, generous, and pure. Sealed as your eyes now are, when a beam of light reaches them you will acknowledge it. When the physician heals you, you will believe on him. No man, with your sincerity of nature, your clearness of understanding, and your moral courage and devotion of soul, can ascertain what makes others believe without believing himself. I know you will keep your promise, and, keeping it, I know [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-183.jpg) \- external link  - Page 182. ] you will come back to me a Christian. You will learn what I mean by telling you `seek ye out of the Book of the Lord and read,' and you will find the `fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom."' He shook his head and smiled. "Well, I am satisfied," said she, "that you will neither break your faith with me, nor continue blind to your relation with Him who died to save you." The term "died to save you" grated on Harry's ear as the cant of a class. The idea of a God "dying" to save the creatures of his own creation, held out but little prospect of a realization of his mother's pious wishes. He answered, however, only, "I have promised to study the subject conscientiously, and I will." "I have brought you several works," continued she, "which you must also promise to read, and which will grow more interesting to you as your mind becomes sufficiently enlightened and enlarged to comprehend them. They are all small editions, to take up as little room as possible. The `Bible,' a `Prayer Book,' `Butler's Analogy,' and `Paley's Evidences.' You will read them?" "Why, if you wish it, yes." "I do wish it, and receive your promise seriously and solemnly. If you have no desire for the labour, do it in memory of me." "I will, you have my word of honour." "Now, then, good-night! your obedience deserves a reward, and will receive one, I am sure." She embraced him affectionately, and saying, "This is the last time I shall bid you good-night, Harry, for many a year," left him with her eyes full of tears. "My poor, dear, kind mother," thought he, when he found himself alone, and looking upon the, to him, somewhat formidable pile of books which he had promised to read. "Who can oppose such amiable and tender weakness? who can refuse to gratify such affectionate whims? A nice, studious time she intends I shall have of it; but no matter, I will keep my word." And for the last time for a long period, he sought the repose of sleep beneath his father's roof and in his native land. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-184.jpg) \- external link  - Page 183. ] The morning broke still and bright, just the very sort of weather one would like to go to sea in. The softest possible zephyr toyed with the tree-tops, and there was scarcely a cloud in the whole heaven as large as a pocket-handkerchief. The Eltons were to breakfast with Mr. Lennox at eight, and the passengers to go out in the Montreal were requested, by an advertisement in the newspapers, to be on board the steamboat De Witt Clinton, Whitehall wharf, precisely at ten o'clock A.M. The breakfast was attempted to be made very lively by Harry and his father, but Mrs. Lennox and Mary were both plainly affected, and Mrs. Elton did not think it even necessary to wipe away with her handkerchief the tears which came trembling, one after another, down her cheeks, till she was at last obliged to stop eating altogether, in order to blow her nose. Fanny did not weep; she even smiled, and sometimes ventured a timid remark to Harry on the delightful weather; but she was so pale with strong, suppressed emotion, and so ten thousand times more lovely and touching than ever she had been before, that Harry, after one stolen look at her, when their eyes did not meet, for hers were drooped in silent and most sad revery upon the floor, formed an inward vow not to look at her again, unless he were contented to make a regular fool of himself by countermanding his passage, and remaining at home to be duped and laughed at a third time by one who certainly, at this present moment, looked like anything on earth but a coquette. Nevertheless, he had scarcely formed the vow, when he found his disobedient eyes fixed once more on that charming figure, now so still and passive, on that beautiful, once bright face, now more like death than life, and yet where, unless art were fair as nature, firm and modest pride held government over a breaking heart, and kept all silent and resigned. "The carriage is ready," said the servant. "It is half past nine." "I cannot, cannot believe it," said Mrs. Lennox, folding [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-185.jpg) \- external link  - Page 184. ] Harry to her bosom, "that I am losing my beloved son, perhaps forever." "Oh, pooh! nonsense!" said Mr. Lennox; "think of him when he comes back, with a pair of mustaches as big as your arm curled up under his nose, a Turkish turban on his head, and a strange, foreign accent in his English---hey! Katy!" " I shall bid you good-by here ," said Mary; "I ain't going to have any tragedy scenes on board the boat for the amusement of strangers." "Ah! this is only a rehearsal!" said Mrs. Elton; "you'll do it in earnest when the time really arrives," and down came another shower of tears on her cheeks. "Upon my word!" said Lennox, "it is a ticklish sort of thing, this bidding good-by, isn't it? I do feel somehow as if I were going to execution! But only think how much worse it must be to be really hanged." "Please, sir!" said the attentive servant. "Ah! very true. This is no time to be too late. This is no `Chancellor Livingston' affair! Come along, come along." "My dear mother," said Harry, offering his arm. Fanny's was already closely thrust into Mr. Lennox's. Down they went to the carriages, crowded in anyhow, and laughing through their tears. "Come along, Harry, come along." "Ah, no; I shall walk!" said Harry. Fanny felt, oh who can describe how deeply, all these little manifestations of complete indifference. "Walk! Well, you'll be too late, I'm sure you will," said his father; "and a sensible set we shall look like, to be sure, driving down in such a crowd as this, and leaving the only one who is really going---behind." "That's Harry, all the world over," said Mary. "You know he was going to send us all out of town to celebrate his birthday except himself, and he was going to stay at home and work!" Harry now shook heartily the clerks by the hand (didn't they envy him, too?), and the servants, also, now came up to bid young master good-by, and poor black Simon looking as if his heart would break, and the foolish old fat cook blubbering away till everybody else began to cry again, too, though they could scarcely do so for laughing, and off went [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-186.jpg) \- external link  - Page 185. ] the carriage, thundering away, and off walked Harry just as fast, and they all got there just in the very nick of time. "Two minutes more," said Lennox, "and we should have had our young mad-cap with us at least another month." "I wish with all my heart," said Mrs. Lennox, "it were so." "Why not go back at once then?" proposed Mary, laughing. And now poor Fanny's true agony commenced. There was everybody on board the boat; many ladies and gentlemen with whom she was well acquainted, and Emmerson among the rest. There they all were, laughing, talking, and jesting, and Harry shaking every human being by the hand, and speaking so warmly, and smiling so gracefully at all but herself; and she, of course, received her share of jests, at which she was obliged to laugh, and of attentions which she must return, and all the while the steamboat was pushing her way rapidly towards the tall, noble-looking ship, which, with sails gradually rising to the air, and her prow already turned seaward, was beginning to move, her anchor being already weighed. During this little interval, Harry was, of course, surrounded (perhaps eaten up would be a more appropriate expression) by his affectionate relatives, and some twenty or thirty personal friends who happened to be on board. On Fanny he never turned his eyes; but she could not help looking often and with a swelling heart on his noble, manly form, and really very handsome countenance, as he seemed enjoying himself just as if he were not leaving the warmest heart in the world to pine and break in silence behind him--- just, in fact, as if he were not conscious there was such a person as she on earth. And now they have reached the packet, and all hands are assisted on board, and there is a cold collation, and some excellent wine, and the company all stand round the long table and drink each other's health, and happy voyage, and pleasant weather, and short passage, and safe and speedy return, and, before the now half-bewildered Fanny quite expected it, the bell rang, and all were ordered off the ship, and there were various groups formed of families and friends embracing (long, deep, oft-repeated embraces they were, too)---and Harry stood, tall and quiet, and took, by [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-187.jpg) \- external link  - Page 186. ] turns, mother and father in his arms and to his heart. Perhaps there was a moisture in his lashes while he received and returned those last sweet tokens of love; then Mary, who (no one dreamed she would have done so) fairly burst into tears; then Frank, who smiled a bright, clear smile, and said, "Did you ever see such a set of simpletons, Harry?" and yet, as he embraced his brother, came glittering out of his own eyes also something which, if they were not tears, he dashed away exactly as if they had been. The truth is, a vast deal of business was done this memorable morning, as Sam Weller would say, "in the water-cart line," by various people. Fanny was the only one whom Harry had not bade farewell to. She thought he was not going to at all, and she wished he might not; and when he approached her, at length, with a cold and formal bow, she would have given worlds if he could have totally overlooked her. Somehow or other, she was the very last one to leave the ship, for she had stood trembling, and thrilling, and holding on to her tears, till she really scarcely knew how to get away, or where she was to go. "Harry," said she, not altogether suppressing a sob, "good-by! God bless you!" "Good-by, Miss Elton!" was his cold reply; "should we never meet again, you have my best wishes. Here, steward, take that portmanteau below, will you?" Fanny was handed down into the steamboat, she scarcely knew by whom. She stood there a moment among the crowd, looking up to the beautiful, lofty ship, whose broad, snowy sails were now nearly all unfurled to the wind, which began to freshen. The songs of the sailors rose together with the trampling sound of their many feet as they hastened across the deck; the vessel began to glide more rapidly on, while the steamer turned her prow in the contrary direction; and numbers of people looked down on them from the quarter-deck, of whom she could not distinguish any individual. Then some one shouted, " Three cheers! " They were given with enthusiasm, and then returned from the ship. " Again! " And again the same process was gone through with. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-188.jpg) \- external link  - Page 187. ] " Once more! " And once more three hearty huzzas were given and reciprocated. Already the vessel was distant many hundred yards, commencing her long, perilous way across the ocean. Fanny felt nothing could enable her longer to restrain her feelings. She groped her way down into the cabin, too blinded by tears to see; and throwing herself upon a sofa, where she was fortunately quite alone, covered her face with her handkerchief and wept in silence. Poor Fanny! It is not every beautiful, proud, high-spirited girl who knows what an unpleasant thing it is to be rejected. Fanny's paleness and indisposition passed off as a fit of sea-sickness, in which she had the sympathy of all, particularly of Emmerson. By the time they reached town again, all but herself were, or seemed, quite recovered from the sadness of mere leave-taking; and when she remembered the perfect indifference with which Harry had pronounced his last farewell, she too began to be supported by pride, shame, and indignation, and made a tolerably successful attempt to regain her spirits. This was more easy in consequence of the manner of Emmerson towards her. He approached and conversed with her some time, with a gentleness which it seemed could only proceed from an excellent heart and a sincere character. There was something about him so unassuming, so ingenuous and persuasive, that, while he spoke with her, and when she heard his frank and confidential conversation with the Lennoxes, she could not believe he had ever been guilty of duplicity or meanness, and she blushed at her ungenerous suspicions. Harry's cold "good-by" confirmed her in the conviction that she was not and had never been beloved by him; and that was exactly what Emmerson had told her. She had, then, perhaps, done Mr. Emmerson wrong. The idea gave to her manner towards him a gentleness equal to his, and in proportion as her own hopes died away, his were reawakened. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-189.jpg) \- external link  - Page 188. ] But she longed for the privacy of her own apartment, to give vent to her anguish in unseen and unrestrained tears. The sight of the beautiful city, which now no longer contained the object of her affection, the thought that he would no more for years, and perhaps never again, behold the surrounding shores, or mingle with the thousands among whom her life was to pass, cast a gloom over all things and over her own soul; but she was pious as well as tender, and she had been taught to calm the violence of every feeling and passion by humble appeals to Heaven. And so time passed on, and things seemed once more to fall into their usual channel. For a few weeks, however, the high spirits of the Lennox family were rather dashed. Fanny's heart was continually full almost to overflowing, and her eyes were wet with tears, which she was ashamed or afraid to shed; for, while reason taught her to be indifferent, feeling and memory often overcame her strength. The grief of Mrs. Lennox, also, was too obvious not to be contagious, and the yet undisturbed high spirits of Mr. Lennox only contrasted more strangely with the sadness of the rest. Frank, by his noble, delicate demeanour, humbled as well as affected her. He plainly showed how well he saw he was not loved, and never could be; yet in him appeared no anger, pique, or coolness. His attentions were continued and his friendship increased, but with a consideration for her which awoke the sincerest gratitude. That he was unhappy was evident; but it was the unhappiness of a manly and patient mind, which is far from yielding to the oppressive weakness. He neither attempted to excite her compassion, to awaken her jealousy, nor to pique her vanity by resentful coolness or affected indifference. In this respect he offered a graceful contrast to his brother, not unremarked by Miss Elton; but she did not understand the difference between the two cases. Sometimes she almost imagined that now Harry's want even of esteem for her had been so clearly and so cruelly displayed, she might return some rays of encouragement to the faithful attachment of Frank, whose unhappiness she could not bear to see, and might in time bring herself to alleviate. But she had been educated upon the strictest moral and religious principles, and knew how to distinguish between the impulses of amiable weakness and the dictates of duty; and the image of Harry, careless, [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-190.jpg) \- external link  - Page 189. ] forgetful, contemptuous as he was, reigned too strongly in her heart to permit her to think of ever receiving the addresses of another. After some weeks, during which none of the family had spirits for another trip to Rose Hill, it was proposed by Mr. Lennox that they should go again. Various pros and cons were discussed, and the tendency of the party was decidedly towards remaining in town. Frank was now momentarily expecting orders to repair to his post, from which his leave of absence had been, at the request of his father, prolonged to an almost unhoped-for period. Under all the circumstances, no one cared for another country excursion. To inhabit even that delightful house, when thus deserted by so many who had made it the happiest spot in the world, to wander alone by the winding beach, and through the solemn, silent wood, where the voices of Frank, Glendenning, White, and Harry had been so often heard, did not seem an attractive idea. But Mr. Lennox was anxious not to have them spend the sultry month of August in town, and he himself enjoyed the weekly holyday passed with them, away from the dust and noise of the city, the bustle of crowded courts, or the confinement of a close office. "May we take Seth with us, father?" inquired Mary. "No, my dear," replied Mr. Lennox, without hesitation; "I don't believe he can be spared. His last trip has not done him any good, but has, on the contrary, rather spoiled him. Besides, the effect is unfavourable upon the other clerks, of selecting one for a pet: it makes him insolent, and them jealous." "Insolent, father? what, poor little Seth? Why, I never saw such a timid, obliging, manageable boy in my life." "Mr. Emmerson will tell you a different story." "Mr. Emmerson?" "He says he can't get along with him at all since his last trip; and I think you'll allow that he who can't live with Emmerson , can't live with any one." "It's very strange," said Mrs. Lennox; "but, if Mr. Emmerson says so, there must be truth in it." It was decided, therefore, that they should go without Seth. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-191.jpg) \- external link  - Page 190. ] In the afternoon of the day on which this conversation occurred, Mr. Lennox, with Mary and Miss Elton on either arm, and Frank with Mrs. Elton, were coming in from a walk, when, as they entered the house, their attention was arrested by the sound of voices in the office. "It is true." "It is not true." "Do you mean to say I am telling a falsehood?" said the gentle voice of Emmerson. "I mean to say you first gave it me to copy, and that you then desired me not to copy it till you should correct it." The door of the office now opened and discovered the whole party, with Mr. Lennox at the head, but unobserved, apparently, by either of the disputants. "I do not say you tell a wilful untruth, my young friend," said Emmerson, gently, although the expression which came over his dark and now pallid countenance betrayed considerable emotion, "but I deny your statement. You are habitually negligent. You have forgotten, and propose this as an excuse. I wish your faults ended there." "It is false!" said Seth; "I am not negligent. I appeal to every clerk in the office. I do my best; I neglect nothing, and I am incapable of an untruth. I remember most distinctly your countermanding your order to copy the bill, that you might correct it; and, moreover, I believe, sir, you know what I say to be the truth." "What is all this?" said Mr. Lennox, coming forward. "Oh, nothing. One of the daily occurrences of the office when you are absent," said Emmerson, with mild indifference. " What is it you charge so boldly upon Mr. Emmerson?" inquired Mr. Lennox, gravely. Seth was silent. "Will you be good enough to favour me with an answer?" reiterated Mr. Lennox, yet more mildly. Seth turned very red, then very pale---commenced to speak, but had, for the moment, either not the presence of mind or the bodily strength to do so. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-192.jpg) \- external link  - Page 191. ] "Will you explain, Mr. Emmerson, if you please?" "I really should be sorry to do so," said Emmerson, smiling. "I believe the boy speaks in a passion, and will deny to-morrow what he has dared to insinuate to-day." "But what does he insinuate?" "I gave him a bill in chancery to copy---it should have been done a week ago, and if not filed to-day, will be too late. I should have reminded him of it, but he is so susceptible and irritable when I speak to him of anything, that I abstained from doing so, supposing he had copied it, perhaps, when I was not in the room. To-day I ask him for it; he replies I requested him not to copy it---a thing on the face of it---at least---a mistake." "And you added , Master Seth," remarked Mr. Lennox, "that Mr. Emmerson had not only countermanded this order to you in this way, but knew he had done so---that is, was not only making a mistake, but preferring against you deliberately a false accusation." Seth turned still paler, but did not reply. "I should never have mentioned this," said Emmerson, "for I do not wish to injure the boy; but this is what I mean  when I say I cannot get along easily with him." "Seth," said Mr. Lennox. "Sir," said Seth, suddenly lifting his pale face, but meeting the stern glance of his benefactor with one, if not as stern, at least not less firm. "Ask Mr. Emmerson's pardon, and confess you have uttered an unworthy falsehood, this moment." Fire darted into the cheeks of Seth and flashed from his eyes as he turned them upon Emmerson with a haughty indignation, totally unlike anything ever seen in him before. He answered in a low voice, "Never!" "You persist in your charge, then?" "It is true," said Seth. "You mean to say that Mr. Emmerson asked you to defer copying the bill till he had corrected it, and now, while denying it, is conscious of having done so?" "I do, sir!" "Seth! do you know what you say? Do you mean to charge Mr. Emmerson with dishonour---with duplicity?" "Before man and God!" replied Seth, firmly. "Look!" said Emmerson, showing the bill to Mr. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-193.jpg) \- external link  - Page 192. ] Lennox. "It is drawn by yourself: is it likely I should propose to correct it?" "How do you explain this fact, sir?" demanded Mr. Lennox, still suppressing beneath the calmest exterior an obviously rising storm of indignation. "I cannot explain it---I can't explain anything connected with Mr. Emmerson, but I have asserted the truth. I repeat it, and Mr. Emmerson knows it ." "Oh, if you believe me capable of laying a snare for you!" said Emmerson, with a smile. "I would not have voluntarily advanced such a charge," said Seth, his face extremely pale, but his voice steady and his eye unshrinking; "but since the point is raised, I scorn to conceal my opinion. I do believe Mr. Emmerson capable of any act of selfish meanness or malignant slander, of any art to provoke, and any lie to ruin me." The boy stood erect, with a deep emotion, which appeared to have given tallness to his stature as well as grace and dignity to his gestures; his brow and cheeks grew absolutely swarthy with indignation, and his eyes flashed with the fire of a noble soul fully aroused. There was a moment a dead silence. Mr. Lennox, thunderstruck, appeared for an instant to hesitate what course to pursue, while Emmerson was so speechless with surprise and rage, that impartial observers would have certainly supposed him the culprit of the two. His cheek was yellow with emotion, his dark eyes were sunken and bent beneath Seth's keen glance, and the paper shook with an audible noise in his trembling hand. He looked, in short, more like a fiend than a man. But everybody found, in these marks of agitation, only the shame and natural anger which any irreproachable person might feel on being publicly charged with a dishonourable act, and, after a single glance of sympathy at him, Mr. Lennox stepped up to Seth and took him by the shoulder. "Listen to me, sir," said he, with a serious tranquillity, which boded no good. "You are a little, homeless, friendless boy, with a temper too rebellious and brutal to hope for employment elsewhere, or I would this instant turn you out of my house. If you were my son, I would horsewhip you within an inch of your life; as it is, believing you to be insane with rage, and not responsible for what you say, if you go down upon your knees and ask that gentleman's pardon for the atrocious insult you have offered him, and if he grant it---" [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-194.jpg) \- external link  - Page 193. ] "Oh! I pardon him unasked," said Emmerson. "Pray let us drop the subject. I am far from wishing to destroy the prospects of the poor little fellow." "I may, for the present," continued Mr. Lennox, "abstain from turning you out of the house, at least until I can get you some other mode of support. But obey me at once, or I shall teach you on the spot how a character so deceitful and worthless must be dealt with." "If I am so worthless," said Seth, respectfully, but firmly. "Silence, sir!" said Mr. Lennox, too much accustomed to implicit obedience from his own grown-up sons to hear without amazement these bold words. "One breath more, and you shall learn I can punish as well as reprove." "Punish!" echoed Seth. "My dear father!" murmured Mary. "I have not been used to suffer such a threat in my boyhood," said Seth, "and I don't know why---" "Pray go on," said Lennox. "You are the only man living to whom I would not go on; but punishment, if you mean chastisement, I did not permit when a child, and I would not permit now, even if I merited it!" "Leave the room! leave the house! never cross my threshold again!" cried Lennox. "My dear husband," said Mrs. Lennox. "I obey you, sir," said Seth, and, passing through the group of ladies at the door quite firm, but his face very white, he walked with a proud step down the street. As he turned the corner, however, he remembered he had no place to go to---no home---not a cent of money---no resources but what he held from Mr. Lennox, who even paid his board in a house in which he had now no right to remain. He remembered, too, the kind friends he might now never see again, Mrs. Lennox, and Miss Elton, and Mrs. Elton, and, most of all, Mary, and what they must now think of him, and how clearly all Emmerson's hints and calumnies would now appear well founded, and what a cruel advantage his hated foe would take to slander him, now that he had really committed such a shocking outrage. "No matter," he murmured, "I will saw wood, dig, sweep the streets, or starve, but I won't have anything more to do with Emmerson. If there were anything of the man in him, I'd make him eat his words. But one [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-195.jpg) \- external link  - Page 194. ] might as well threaten and insult a woman! He `pardons me unasked!' He pardons me! Ah, the scoundrel!" Thus yielding to the ungovernable passions of inexperienced youth, and despising, as youth so often does, the dictates of prudence and propriety, the boy had not only insulted the person whom he imagined his enemy, but also Mr. Lennox and his whole family. As this last recollection forced itself upon him, the tears, which the thought of his destitute state could not make him indulge in, began to overcome his power of resistance, and turning down a side street where no one happened to be walking, he wept and sobbed as if his heart would break . But, luckily, the hearts of fine, honest, bold fellows like him don't break quite so easily. The next morning the ladies, particularly Fanny, who, somehow or other, spent nearly her whole time there, importuned Mr. Lennox to recall his sentence of banishment against poor Seth; but that gentleman afforded no encouragement to their petitions. "He can never again come into my office. The young scoundrel! I am indignant as well as amazed at the change which has taken place in him, or, rather, at my discovery of his real character. Who ever saw such a modest, bashful, blushing little fellow three months ago? He could not find courage to speak, and now, yesterday, when he had a point to carry, I never saw more nerve, determination, and strength of character: burning cheek, flashing eye, and words flowing from his lips that sounded more like Junius or Sheridan than a little, impertinent, country ploughboy." "But these," said Mrs. Lennox, "are indications of talent, which, you know, you always predicted he would one day reveal from under his unpromising exterior." "Talent? yes, but talent accompanied by a want of principle, which promises no very brilliant close to his career. I really hate the boy, not so much for what he has himself [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-196.jpg) \- external link  - Page 195. ] done, as for one or two doubts which he half caused in me of the strict integrity of Emmerson's representations. But I see Emmerson was, as he always is, perfectly, strictly honest and right. He said the boy was bold, insolent, unprincipled, and would make mischief in the family; and you see he has done his best to verify the prediction." "But Mr. Emmerson never spoke to us in this way of Seth," said Mary. "No, of course not! He did not wish to interfere with the boy; but, as the superintendent of my business, it was his duty to state to me exactly his opinion of all the subordinate agents of the office." "Upon my word!" said Mary, "I don't believe Seth has had the least intention to do wrong in this circumstance." "What! do you imagine Emmerson really countermanded his order to copy the bill, that he might first correct it?" "Why, Seth looked to me like a person who meant to tell the truth at all hazards, simply because it was the truth." "But Emmerson denies this. Besides, the bill is mine. Mr. Emmerson never corrects my draughts." "He might have mistaken; he might have forgotten. It is certainly very strange, but---" "You pay Mr. Emmerson's memory a poor compliment." "And, my dear father, this poor little Seth! what could possess him, but his unflinching honesty, to throw himself into such a dilemma? He knows he is entirely dependant on you; he knows the confidence you have in Emmerson. If he had, from negligence, omitted to copy the bill, he might have better acknowledged it at once, than told a lie which must bring him thus openly in conflict with his superior and master; or even had he been inclined to a falsehood, why add the grave charge against Emmerson that he knew the truth of his excuse?" "Mary," said Mr. Lennox, after a pause, "you seem to take a great interest in this boy, but I beg you will conduct his defence with a little more forbearance towards others. You have almost inferred, not only that Seth is innocent, but that Mr. Emmerson is guilty. Of course, you are not aware of what your words might be made to infer, but hereafter I beg you will be more careful. What Mr. Emmerson says is not only honest , but true . He is not only the purest, most frank, and disinterested of men, but he is the most [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-197.jpg) \- external link  - Page 196. ] acute judge of character, and the best informed upon every subject on which he ventures to speak. I trust not only his integrity, but his memory. He never forgets. The precision and coolness of his mind are actually astonishing. It is to him I look as the guardian of Harry and the inheritor of half my business, whenever I may choose to retire myself from the toils of the office. A breath against his character, and I am sure he would withdraw himself from me forever. You will oblige me by never mentioning Seth's name again, either to him or to me. But here he comes." "Good-morning!" said Emmerson, with a smile and manner of such quiet self-possession that, while he spoke, every one present acknowledged the truth of Mr. Lennox's representation of him, and gave up Seth as a good-for-nothing, indomitable, quarrelsome little rascal. Even Mary, for the moment, ceased to justify him in her thoughts. Fanny alone began to see a little into the peculiar character of Emmerson. "We are discussing the merits and demerits of that young scamp Seth," said Mr. Lennox, "and I am doing justice to your superior discrimination of character." "Oh," replied Emmerson, modestly, "my opportunities were better. I was with him more, and he was less on his guard with me. But I am sorry you were so severe with him." "His conduct was certainly very extraordinary," said Mrs. Lennox, "and seems, indeed, inexplicable." "Why, the fact is, the poor little fellow has a morbid, diseased imagination!" said Emmerson, as if speaking upon a subject in no way interesting to him. "I have always found him so suspicious and susceptible, that I was neither surprised nor displeased at the explosion of yesterday. He is always fancying people are trying to injure him---a most unfortunate disposition. Do you know that this little gentleman is ambitious, too?" he continued, as if relating an excellent joke. (Emmerson rarely joked, unless the subject had, as in the present case, some bearing upon himself.) "Ha! ha! ha! he has ideas and plans of all sorts. Do you know he expects to be a very great man one of these days? Ha! ha! ha!" "Well," said Mary, quietly, "it depends only on himself. Many a great man has risen from the plough." "He's much more likely to come to the gallows, I fear," [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-198.jpg) \- external link  - Page 197. ] said Emmerson, in a whisper. "I dont speak all I could of this wicked little fellow. He is a bad, worthless, dangerous person." They were going to ask what he meant by this insinuation, when a servant entered with a letter for Frank, and Emmerson took his leave. "At last!" said Frank. "By your leave, ladies and gentlemen! So! I am to start for my post in three days." This news threw the family into a commotion, although it was no more than they had long expected. Perhaps, strange as it may appear, no one was pleased at it except Fanny and Frank himself. He had no sooner been convinced that her love was bestowed on his brother, than he conscientiously resolved to master his own passion without the least diminution of his esteem for her qualities or interest in her happiness. While daily exposed to her presence, he found this a difficult task, and he prepared, therefore, to leave her with a tender satisfaction, shared by her, because she knew that, when absent, he would speedily succeed in diverting his thoughts by new scenes and adventures. But the sweet, pretty girl unconsciously added to his passion by her desire to show towards him the utmost warmth of a friendship which only stopped short at love. The preparations for sending Frank off, however, did not prevent Mrs. Lennox from following her wish and that of the rest of the family, fully sanctioned by Mr. Lennox, in seeking out Seth, with the purpose of offering him such aid as he might require. With considerable difficulty, they succeeded in tracing him to the office of a lawyer, where he had procured some copying at a price sufficient to provide him with a sustenance. Mrs. Lennox enclosed a note to him for twenty dollars, begging to hear from him whenever he might require similar assistance. Her husband would allow her to say no more, either in the way of encouragement or advice, as he said it would look like an intimation against Emmerson. The next day was the last of Frank's stay, and at dinner the family sat longer than usual, and the young officer received much excellent advice from everybody present. Mrs. Lennox was going on to beg he wouldn't smoke so much, would wear flannel next his skin, etc., etc., etc., when two notes came in, one for Frank and one for Mrs. Lennox. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-199.jpg) \- external link  - Page 198. ] The latter was from Seth. The twenty dollar bank-note was enclosed, with the following words: -  To Mrs. Lennox " Madam , "I haven't done anything wrong that I know of; but while I labour under the imputation I will not accept assistance, except it is offered because they think me incapable of a dishonourable action. I seize this occasion to apologize for my rudeness to Mr. Lennox, once my noble friend and benefactor; you and all your family have my thanks and best wishes. I respectfully thank you for your interest in me; but don't fear, I shall get along somehow, and don't intend to knock under yet. "Your respectfully obedient, Humble, and grateful servant, " Seth J. Copely ." "There's a young, haughty, ungrateful dog for you," said Lennox. "Now, I like that! " said Mary; "that's noble---that's the way a man ought to act. Seth is as innocent as Emmerson himself." "Mary!" said Lennox, with a frown of displeasure. "Where's Frank?" said Mrs. Lennox. He was gone. "He also had a letter," remarked Mary. "Did you see him read it?" "No, I paid him no attention." "Did you observe Mr. Frank?" inquired Mr. Lennox of the servant. "Yes, sir. He opened the letter, read it, rose, and immediately went down stairs." "Is he gone out?" "He took his hat, sir, and went out." "Did he seem surprised or alarmed on reading this letter?" inquired Mrs. Lennox, anxiously. "He looked, ma'am," answered the servant, "very much as he usually does, and got right up and went out." "I hope," exclaimed Mrs. Lennox, rising suddenly, "he has received no bad news." "I hope," cried Mr. Lennox, good-naturedly, imitating her manner, "I hope he has not jumped out of the window!" "But," said Mrs. Lennox, half laughing and half alarmed, "should anything have happened!" [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-200.jpg) \- external link  - Page 199. ] "Pooh, pooh, Katy! what a superfine Spartan mother you would have made! I fancy your presenting Frank his shield, and telling him ` with it or upon it!' " "Mother would say," interrupted Mary, laughing, " ` with it or without it! but, at all events , do you mind and come home!' " We must now request the reader to go back to Glendenning. When he reached Montreal, he began to feel the stirrings of different thoughts. Two or three recollections came coldly in among his warm reveries of Rose Hill, and the higher aspirations which his residence there had awakened. In the first place, he had not been very particular in his society in that town, and, truth to say, although his wildness and love of frolic had not prevented his forming intimate relations with the most worthy among his brotherofficers, he had also admitted to a perfect familiarity one or two whose principles and character were not by any means what they should be. Among these was a Lieutenant Breckenbridge, who had been his companion in various nameless orgies, and whose reputation did not stand high, Glendenning determined to gently and imperceptibly disentangle himself from this intimacy, in obedience to his laudable resolution of reform. It was a delicate, perhaps a difficult thing to do, for Breckenbridge was hot-headed, daring, quick to suspect a slight, and prompt in his resentment. But, as Glendenning knew him to be licentious, unprincipled, and a habitual sneerer at everything pure and holy, he determined to avoid future contact with him. There was another circumstance, much more grave, which checked the pleasure of his virtuous dreams as he entered the town of Montreal. It was the terms on which he stood with his commanding officer, Lieutenant-colonel Nicholson. This gentleman was the second son of Lord Middleton, and a specimen of the sort of man into which a bad-hearted, spoiled child may be transformed. Full of the idea of his high family, great expectations, and personal rank and [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-201.jpg) \- external link  - Page 200. ] appearance (for he was a very handsome man of fifty), his character was cold, pompous, and arrogant. While his understanding was small, his opinion of it was immense, and nothing could exceed his vanity, unless, perhaps, the vindictiveness with which he revenged any offence that wounded it. A coward in secret, his cowardice was overmastered by his self-importance; but while even in his overbearing manners he studied his own safety, he was indifferent to the danger of others. A toad-eater where his fears or his interests required, he was a relentless tyrant to those beneath him. Although invested by his rank, connexions, and wealth, with a certain consideration in the eyes of the world (for how few are not worshippers of these things?), his real character was cruel and despicable. His stature was tall and commanding, and an erect and military air added to the impression of a countenance which announced not only the habit, but the determination of command. In birth and education he was a gentleman, but fashion, unfortunately, considers compatible with that character qualities which are in themselves not desirable. His own passions were his only law, the world his only thought, and himself his only god. His manner was usually cold and haughty, but when among persons he considered his equals, it became free and agreeable, and he possessed the power, in the society of his immediate associates, of veiling his darker peculiarities beneath an appearance of military frankness, and a certain air of bonhomie which enabled him to make plenty of friends when he desired to do so. If nature had bestowed upon him any good quality, it was, perhaps, a spirit of hospitality, of which the marked magnificence was visible in the splendour of his balls, the elegant taste which presided at his dinners, and the hearty welcome with which, at his own table and in his own house, he received all whom he had deemed worthy the honour of an invitation. But even this originated in his love of ostentation and the vulgar ambition of self-display; for, while giving a ball, for the perfect brilliancy of which no expense was spared, he would stint a deserving servant even of his just dues, and turn with the coldest indifference from the most touching case of homely distress. To these sharp, but not uncommon features, let it be added, that Colonel Nicholson's supreme delight was to thwart everybody, to make all around him [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-202.jpg) \- external link  - Page 201. ] uncomfortable, to wound the feelings of his wife, and friends, and servants, to touch sore points, to entangle everything, to distress and insult everybody, and to keep people at a distance, and the reader has as much of his portrait as is necessary to the development of our story. Yet, such are men, such is the world, and such is public opinion, it was not easy for any, except those immediately in contact with him in a subordinate station, to say whether Lieutenant-colonel Nicholson was an extremely good or a very bad man. There is no despicable quality which may not be called by a graceful name, and there is no despicable man, either, who may not find a clique to praise and whitewash him. The choice few among whom this great personage thought it not beneath him to unbend, meanly flattered by his selection, and deriving various advantages from the intimacy, feeling all the little good of his character, and, of course, not brought in contact with any of his bad points, sturdily defended him against the just indignation of those who had smarted beneath his arrogant insults, and seen the malignity of his heart and the smallness of his mind. From these the world at large learned that his despotism was a mere necessary habit of command, his vain hospitality was generous kindness, his cunning sagacity, his cowardice prudence, and his stinginess wise economy. Thus, by dwelling upon and exaggerating his better peculiarities, by denying or explaining away the worse ones, he was made out by them to be a meritorious person; and the world, who heard him execrated by one set and adulated by another, decided, when they took the trouble of deciding at all, that he was probably a severe disciplinarian, and therefore an excellent commander, and that the accusations against him arose from the unbending haughtiness of his disposition, which, although it made him unpopular, was but the repelling cover of a magnanimous heart. As he had executed his sometimes unpleasant duties with unscrupulous fidelity and impartiality, too noble and careless to consider consequences, or to descend to arts of conciliation, he must be a superior officer and a worthy man. Thus, in this strange world, the purest person is often weighed down by misfortune and blackened by calumny, while a scoundrel in the perpetration of unprincipled actions, not only often escapes free from public reprobation, but receives the public applause, particularly if Providence have placed him in an exalted position. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-203.jpg) \- external link  - Page 202. ] But, though the world at large would not take the trouble to decide respecting Lieutenant-colonel Nicholson, the officers who served under him had too often felt his ungenerous arrogance and paltry insults not to hate him with all their hearts. His complete power to worry those under his command was practised without restraint from mercy or generosity. They had long smarted under a thousand vague and unnameable pieces of oppression, each one of which, to a gentleman, is more galling than broader insults. If there are few who know how to obey, there are still fewer who do not betray the innate depravity of human nature when called upon to command. In the history of absolute sovereigns, and particularly of the Roman emperors, the human character is sculptured in colossal forms, and we there see man intrusted with power. Rome is fallen through the infinite mercy of Providence, and the world is cut up into small states; but the human heart, only narrowed in its sphere, remains essentially the same, when religious influences have not rescued it from itself; and how many an inglorious Roman emperor is there on the deck of a ship, at the head of a regiment, in a schoolroom or a workship, who, if he dared, or if he could, would place his statue in the temple of God. Of all the officers of the --- regiment, Glendenning had been the least likely to bear with patience the irritating slights of his commander, and on his first entrance into the army, our young madcap had not been many months under his treatment, when, stung by one of those insults which Colonel Nicholson knew so well how to inflict without compromising himself, he resolved, with characteristic impetuosity, to make him answer it in the field. He had possessed sufficient prudence, however, to cause a mutual friend to sound his enemy in an informal way, as to whether, in case of a cartel, he would accept it, waving his rank, or whether he would proceed, as, under the circumstances, he possessed the right to do, to bring the officer sending such a challenge to court-martial. The worst feelings were awakened in the breast of Colonel Nicholson at this intimation, which had been made in so indirect and confidential a way as to render any notice of it impossible. Wounded vanity, therefore, at finding his mighty dignity thus set at naught by a subordinate officer, and a thirst for revenge, prompted him to reply, "Let him only try me!" with a wish to have the intimation supposed an affirmative. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-204.jpg) \- external link  - Page 203. ] Not thinking this answer could be intended to have the double meaning of an ancient oracle, Glendenning directed a friend, accordingly, to invite him to a meeting, but, by an accident, discovered, just in time to save himself, that it was Colonel Nicholson's determination to decline the meeting and bring upon the challenger the severest consequences of a military prosecution. Glendenning was known to be a dead shot; and there were not wanting persons who gave this fact weight in accounting for the course of the commanding officer. The affair was, however, arrested just in time, but not without an important change in the feelings of both the gentlemen towards each other. In addition to the opinion entertained by Glendenning of his commander as a cold-hearted, malignant person, he now felt that he was a coward; while Colonel Nicholson had, with an inexpressible but concealed rage, beheld in Glendenning an open and insolent rebel against his authority, who barely hid beneath the necessary mask of official prudence the fact, that he despised his pretensions, suspected his courage, and read his character aright. Perhaps the most vindictive feeling that can be aroused in the breast of such a man is that with which he perceives his claims to importance ridiculed by an inferior. All else that he had availed him nothing, "so long as he saw Mordecai the Jew sitting at the king's gate." There are, or, at least, at the time of which we are writing, there were , no barracks for officers in Montreal. It was customary for two or three to take a house together. For some time White and Glendenning had lived in this way, but latterly Glendenning had found rooms in the house of a young portrait painter, who, with his wife and child, occupied only the lower part of the building. The life of an officer in a garrison town is not varied by many pleasures. Both at the parades and the daily messtable dinner, he had the not very agreeable certainty of meeting Lieutenant-colonel Nicholson, and of being [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-205.jpg) \- external link  - Page 204. ] subjected to the offensive superciliousness of that high and mighty personage. The evenings were enlivened by a certain routine of society, and sometimes by a rout, in giving which species of entertainment, the reader has been informed, it was Colonel Nicholson's peculiar ambition to excel. Till now, Glendenning, unaccustomed to read, study, or reflect, without any particular respect for himself or purpose in life, had been driven by ennui , and the example of his chosen companions, into billiard-rooms and whist-clubs, where he spent a large portion both of his time and money. But since his return he had adopted different habits; he was more reserved among his old comrades, and much less seen abroad than formerly. He attended, with punctilious care, to his professional duties, and came under the hand of Colonel Nicholson several times, with a tranquil and even gentle forbearance which astonished, while it did not at all conciliate, that gentleman. Various invitations to take part in certain old larks were courteously but firmly declined. Breckenbridge at first rallied him, but, after having made several ineffectual attempts to bring him into his old ways, coolly ceased his endeavours, and for some time they scarcely met, except in a general way. Breckenbridge felt as if he were cut , a process to which his style of life had not rendered him entirely a stranger, but which became the subject of serious reflection when experienced from Glendenning. The latter, however, pursued his way quietly, laid out a course of reading, which he followed assiduously, and continued in earnest to look into the evidences of Christianity, in which he even began to feel a singular interest. He had been but imperfectly educated, and now, for the first time in his life, he began to study and to think. He read the "Analogy of Religion," by Butler, a book in everybody's hands, but which he had never heard of but through the recommendation of one who, he felt, was perhaps his truest friend on earth---Mrs. Lennox. This remarkable piece of reasoning deeply riveted his attention, and overwhelmed his light and trivial mind with astonishment. He thus gathered a conviction that, notwithstanding the silent and inactive indifference with which many intelligent, cultivated, and fashionable people choose to regard the subject, the scheme of Christianity may be true. The thought was new, vast, and sublime. He felt its quickening power penetrate his mind, throw a new aspect over life and nature, and [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-206.jpg) \- external link  - Page 205. ] startle him to the deepest recesses of his soul. He meditated on it continually. He studied with severest perseverance. He doubted, he feared, he rejoiced and trembled. Then some old instinct, ludicrous association, or unlucky word would rise in his heart or his recollection, and all the sublime but half-formed vision would melt away. Still, however, he studied, and many a day and many a night he spent---himself greatly surprised at the power which had led him to such an occupation---reading the Bible and works illustrative of it. The more he read, the more he was struck---the more he was convinced. But when he closed the volume and went to a drill or parade, or when he came under the eye of Colonel Nicholson, and felt the blood in his veins moving quicker at the cold tone of his voice, or the decisive, magisterial wave of his hand, he wondered at his folly in yielding credit to nursery fables. At this interesting epoch of his life, a kind Providence seems to have in some degree separated him from White, by leading him to a lodging with Mr. Southard and his family, the young painter before mentioned. White was a gentleman in more than one sense, but he was one of those gentlemen whose opinions are most perfectly decided against the claims of any religion to divine origin. Southard and his family, on the contrary, were devout and cheerful believers, and perhaps the sweet little group gathered at his table, could the artist have painted it, would have been the most graceful and pleasing of all his subjects. He was one of those pure and simple beings whom nature sometimes forms and religion perfects on the earth, an humble, contented, and not altogether unsuccessful imitator of his divine master. He was poor, without being either dazzled with riches or ashamed of poverty, lowly in rank, and yet lowlier in spirit. Even his talent in his profession was not above mediocrity, but he knew it and smiled at it, and was contented with what his Creator had given him. He had the enthusiasm without the jealous susceptibilities of an artist. He was almost unknown, and scarcely desired to become less so. His modest wants were supplied by his industry, and in a heart tenderly alive to the charm of nature, the sweetness of truth, and the beauty and meaning of all things, he had a source of constant and extreme enjoyment. In compensation for the want of professional talent, and of the distinctions and luxuries which it produces, [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-207.jpg) \- external link  - Page 206. ] besides a warm, true heart, an upright character, and a sensible mind, he had been blessed with a lovely wife, in whom he found at once the most useful and delightful companion and the tenderest, most affectionate friend. A single child was the fruit of their union, a little girl three years old. Careless of the stern toil and gorgeous spectacles and sorrows of the world, he lived---rare fate---happy in himself--- doubly happy in his wife; and all the happiness he desired seemed trebled to him---beyond his hopes and merits--- while he watched the growth and improvement of the little Catharine. For these people Glendenning had long conceived a warm regard. There was something in the picture of their humble and contented happiness, so rich with so little, in their pure and sincere characters, which had touched his soul. Now particularly, that he was beginning to experience a change of opinion on the most important of subjects, he found a new charm in their society, and he spoke to them frequently on the great topics which were engaging his attention. Nothing but such a happy home of his own could have been so soothing and delightful to his feelings as this circle, where he every day became more and more familiarly welcomed, and more and more regarded as a valuable acquisition and a necessary part of the circle. These companions, in some measure, filled the chasm which had been left by his separation from the Lennoxes, and they were interested in the same subject, and continued with him the same course of reasoning. Here he began to feel at home---a sweet word, the meaning of which he had never known before. Thus passed away several weeks in elevating studies and deeply interesting conversations, until he said one day to his hosts, "Almost you persuade me to become a Christian!" He had already received one affectionate maternal letter from Mrs. Lennox, full of minutiae respecting the family, and closing with an earnest and impressive hope that he would continue his study of the religion of Jesus, assuring him that "it was good tidings to the meek, and a light shining in a dark place; that it revealed the method of reconciliation for iniquity, and presented the oil of joy for mourning, and the garments of praise for the spirit of heaviness." He smiled at this characteristic language, which so vividly recalled his affectionate friend, but the smile was not [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-208.jpg) \- external link  - Page 207. ] one of ridicule. He even thought he began to comprehend the meaning of those phrases, as he had already done of the sweet word home . They conveyed ideas and feelings which had never before found entrance into his mind or heart. "Poor fellow!" said Mrs. Southard, one evening, as he went out to go to bed, after a long and ingenuous debate on the theme, in which he now found singular interest---"Poor fellow! the scales are balanced." "Yes," said Southard, "a hair will turn them." One morning, as Glendenning was returning from a drill, he met an officer with whom he had long been well acquainted. He had come to Montreal from Quebec on some business, and this was their first meeting. "Hallo! Clinton!" said Glendenning, as he approached. "How are you?" The young man walked directly on, without turning to the right or left, and as stiffly as if he had been going through a drill. Glendenning thought it was a boyish jest, and stopped, expecting to see him presently turn and burst into a laugh, to exchange their accustomed salutations. But he passed, and continued on his way with the same rigid and rather quickened pace, till he disappeared round a corner. Glendenning rubbed his eyes, astonished and also bewildered. Could he have been mistaken in the man? Impossible! And yet the total unconsciousness of his presence shown by the stranger, whoever he was, implied that he had been. He laughed at the incident, and thought no more about it, concluding that the friend he had supposed himself addressing was probably, in reality, at Quebec. The next day invitations for a grand f ete were issued to all the officers by an old military friend who had served in India, and was now spending a few months at Montreal. Glendenning himself was not among the guests invited. He thought it very odd---but, of course, a mistake. He soon lost all recollection of it in his absorbing studies. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-209.jpg) \- external link  - Page 208. ] A day or two afterward he was met in the street by Breckenbridge, who, as the reader has been already told, had in former times been long one of his companions. He felt that his example had been most pernicious to him. Breckenbridge was warm-hearted, handsome, and witty, a dare-devil, thoughtless, good-for-nothing fellow, whom one could not be much with without liking till the discovery was made that a naturally good heart had been so completely depraved by debauchery and gambling, that every spark of real honour was extinguished in it, and that he was likely to retain even the exterior qualities of an amiable, amusing companion, only as long as he found any interest in assuming them. By slow but sure degress, he was degenerating into buffoonery, and his libertinism had been latterly deepened by ruinous extravagance. The more he indulged in sensual enjoyments, the more unappeasable became his appetite, and the less fastidious his taste, till at length his best friends asked for him but the questionable praise of being a bon enfant . He was not malignant, but he was violently passionate, and the bold recklessness of his temper made him one dangerous to offend. Glendenning had not been able to effect his awkward task of withdrawing from this intimacy without awakening the suspicion of the object of his distrust, but, whether he did so or not, he was quite resolved to be seen no more than was actually necessary with a man whose habits he had already learned to abhor, and for whose character he felt anything but esteem. He found it, however, rather difficult to disentangle himself from an acquaintance with no other cause than a conviction that it was morally derogatory to him, as he desired to avoid a quarrel with the associate thus abandoned. He was no hypocrite, yet he did not exactly wish to say to one whose friendship he had encouraged, you are unworthy of me as a companion, either directly or indirectly, and Breckenbridge, who had at last caught an idea of the truth, felt a malicious delight in pressing himself importunately upon his reformed friend whenever they accidentally met in public. "How d'ye do, Glendenning? how are you?" said Breckenbridge, holding out his hand. Glendenning politely, rather gravely, returned the salutation. "What the devil is the matter with you?" said Breckenbridge. "With me? Nothing!" [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-210.jpg) \- external link  - Page 209. ] "You're so d---d grave and stiff, I don't know you." "Let me introduce you, then," said White, laughing, as he joined them: "This is my reformed friend Glendenning--- the virtuous and scientific companion whom we used to know." White had, not maliciously, but unfortunately, struck on the very chord. He himself had felt vexed at the stupid gravity of his friend, but thought of noticing it by nothing more than a jest. "So!" said Breckenbridge, "you are a d---d fine chap for a small party! What's come over you? I don't understand it. We used to be `hale fellows well met.' Now, I swear! you act as if you wanted to cut me." "Pooh! nonsense," said White, who now perceived, by the expression of Breckenbridge's face, that he was in earnest; "let us go in here, and you shall have a game of billiards." "Certainly," said Breckenbridge. Then turning to Glendenning: "You won't come, I suppose?" "Oh yes, I will," said Glendenning, with his habitual facility of character. "Will? that's something like. Do you know there's a report going round that you're going to resign and turn parson?" "Will you play, White?" said Glendenning. "No; I've a nasty rheumatism in my shoulder; I can't hold a cue." " I'll play," said Breckenbridge. This was exactly what Glendenning did not want. He was obliged to yield, however, though with reluctance; and the worst of it was, his reluctance was clearly detected by his antagonist. Several other officers came in. Glendenning, who had scarcely been in a billiard-room since his arrival, now embarrassed and vexed, nodded to them slightly, and received as slight a return. "I'm glad to have a crack with you," said Breckenbridge. "You used to be a hand worthy of me; but now, I suspect, you're practising other games." Glendenning went on playing, without making any reply to that and various other exclamations on the part of Breckenbridge, in which the words "sanctified face" and "too good to be worth much" appeared directed ironically against [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-211.jpg) \- external link  - Page 210. ] him. A year before, he would have been in a row with less provocation, but now he had other ideas, and had really made progress, though but a slight one, in the manly art of self-government. While the game was thus going on, a gentleman whom Glendenning had seen at Mr. Lennox's, in New-York, came in, having recently arrived. The acquaintance was renewed warmly on both sides. "I have a letter for you," said this person, "from your friend Mrs. Lennox. I was going to your lodgings, when some one who had accidentally seen you directed me here." He handed the letter, and, excusing himself, went out, when Glendenning, with an apology, opened and commenced reading. He had not proceeded more than a few lines, when he felt a sharp blow upon his shoulder from Breckenbridge's cue, and a "Now, then, old fellow! D---n your letters! Push ahead, will you?" "I tell you what, Mr. Breckenbridge," said Glendenning, haughtily, "I wish you to understand that I don't allow any man to take such a liberty as that with me, and you less than another." "What do you mean by that?" said Breckeabridge, with a darkening brow. "What I say, sir." "Indeed? me less than another? you mean that as an insult." Glendenning's eye fell flashing on him, and he was about to reply, "He might consider it so if he chose," when he checked himself. "No, Mr. Breckenbridge, I do not wish to insult you." "Then please to explain why you allow me to take such a liberty with you less than another." "I have no explanation to make." "Then you have an insult to retract, and you shall eat your words at this table." "I am not in the habit of speaking without a cause," said Glendenning, quietly, "neither am I in the habit of retracting without one." "Explain, then, explain. If you are grown so touchy as not to allow any one the ordinary familiarity of a friend, I have nothing to say. But why me less than another? " [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-212.jpg) \- external link  - Page 211. ] "Oh! if you drive me to an explanation," said Glendenning, his hot blood mounting higher and higher, "I will give it you, certainly, but I did not desire to give it, at least not in public." "Let us hear it, at all events," said Breckenbridge, with a laugh which infuriated his opponent. "You less than another," said Glendenning, calmly and haughtily, "because, from your manners, character, and occupations, I consider you less desirable as a friend, Mr. Breckenbridge, and I avail myself of this occasion, moreover, to say that our acquaintance must, hereafter, be upon a less familiar footing." "Well, Captain Glendenning," said Breckenbridge, quietly, and without showing the expected indignation at this insult, "I tell you what! I may not be what I ought to be--- few of us are---yet I trust I can be reproached only with rashness which has injured myself. Your character and actions do not admit of such a defence." "Sir!" said Glendenning. "I suppose you heard my observation; if not, I'll repeat it," said Breckenbridge, without any symptom of anger or loss of composure. "Your remark is not worthy even of you," said Glendenning; "if I have insulted you, take the course of a gentleman; I am ready to meet you as if you were one, but an unmeaning calumny can be as little creditable to you as injurious to me." "Meet you," said Breckenbridge, "meet you! ha! ha! ha!" The laugh was echoed by several gentlemen and officers among the by-standers. "What do you mean by that?" said Glendenning, with an air rather of astonishment than anger. "Ah! ha!" said Breckenbridge. "Now, then, it's my turn. Every dog has his day! I mean, sir, precisely what I say." There was another laugh, and Glendenning saw, with an emotion difficult to be described, that the feeling of the room was against him. "You shall retract your atrocious insinuation on the spot," cried he. "Ah! bah!" repeated Breckenbridge, laughing; "I'm not in the habit of speaking without a cause, neither am I in the habit of retracting without one." [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-213.jpg) \- external link  - Page 212. ] "I will give you cause, then," said Glendenning. "You can't do it!" replied Breckenbridge, firmly. "Captain Glendenning, the high and the haughty, let me tell you a secret: there isn't an officer in Montreal that would meet you." "You're a fool!" cried Glendenning. "Come, come away!" said a Captain Drake, taking Breckenbridge by the arm. In a moment the room was empty. Glendenning, astounded, stood alone with White. "Well, that's cool!" said White. "I don't quite understand it." "Will you take a message?" cried Glendenning. "Certainly," replied White, rolling the balls against each other on the table. "Then let us be acting immediately." As they left the house, Glendenning came upon the officer who had yesterday so singularly passed him in the street. "Clinton!" cried he, bewildered; "it was you, then?" The young man gently turned aside, and continued his way without offering the least sign of recognition. Glendenning uttered an exclamation of bewildered astonishment. In the evening White took a message to Breckenbridge, but did not return to give any account of its reception. Glendenning did not sleep that night, neither did he resume his studies. His old passions were fully aroused, and he resorted to his old habits of deadening them---a bottle of Madeira and a box of cigars. Hour after hour he paced the floor, "like a proud steed reined, champing his iron bit." The mystery in which he was involved was perfectly inexplicable; so that, during long intervals of reflection, shame and rage were almost lost in curiosity and wonder. His past life had been rash and thoughtless; that he knew and regretted. But that had been sufficiently known before, and not visited with consequences like these. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-214.jpg) \- external link  - Page 213. ] Yet now that new and more rational plans had opened upon him for the first time, with boiling veins and a heart appalled, he saw himself scornfully, and, it seemed, generally insulted and despised. What act of his had produced this, or by what means the unanimity of public action had been brought about, he racked his imagination and memory in vain to conceive. He reviewed his past life, as far as possible, in every minute detail; his words---his very thoughts. He saw with humiliation the course of a trivial, reckless, till now worthless young man, employed in no respectable purpose or occupation---governed by unworthy impulses and passions---guilty of wild and unwarrantable actions. But nothing that he could fix his eyes on accounted, in the remotest degree, for the present state of affairs. He was cut  . His fellow-officers had openly refused to associate with him, and a blackguard, whom he himself considered beneath him as a companion, had, with the unconcealed approbation, and to the unconcealed amusement of a roomful of his brother soldiers, jeeringly and tauntingly declined noticing his insult, and, apparently, receiving his message; for White, who had taken it in the early part of the evening, had not even returned to inform him of the result. White himself seemed to have abandoned him. What pestilential slander had attached itself to his name? Was he charged with robbery or murder? What crime had he committed more than is committed (alas! that it should be so! but it is) by other young men, who, notwithstanding, keep their places in society, are courted and caressed, are presented by fathers and mothers to their modest and innocent young daughters, and hailed by their companions with pride and delight? None. He had done nothing. Could the odium against him have any relation with the affair of Frank Lennox? His reason rejected the possibility. True, he had there insulted a lady; but surely that had been amply expiated; and, since the lady herself and her friends forgave him, it could hardly be conceived that strangers should take up the matter at this late date, and even if they had taken it up, it could never have produced such startling effects. Was it that he had "almost become a Christian?" He knew that many gentlemen, worldly men and military officers, distinguished statesmen, and the leading men of modern Christian society, smiled at the visionary idea of [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-215.jpg) \- external link  - Page 214. ] adopting Christian precepts in active life; and that able and conscientious conductors of that free press which cannot fail greatly to modify public opinion, did not hesitate to state in their columns that Christian precepts had been found incompatible with the operations of practical life. But was he to be made a pariah for examining into them? Was the Bible, as in the time of Nero, become a mark of scorn and dishonour? and the Christian---was he, then, an outcast? No; it was absurd. All his attempts at explaining the causes of his present galling position were lost in wild and improbable conjectures. The clock struck eleven, twelve, one, two, and no White--- three, four, and day broke, first overflowing the star-paved shore of heaven with a stream of pale light, which deepened into radiant floods and gorgeous, fiery shapes, so that he paused in his disturbed walk of agony, to look into those abysses of insupportable, ineffable glory, and as the sun lifted itself calmly and slowly above the horizon, he forgot a moment his own private griefs in thinking how much nature exceeds imagination, and in remembering scenes of his visit to Rose Hill, where he had often been thus abroad early on some excursions of pleasure in the cool, oderous morning air. But the clock struck five, and he started at the recollection of Breckenbridge, Clinton, and White. At the recurrence of their images, nature, morality, and the sense of God, the new-born faith in the religion of Jesus, thoughts of duty, the idea that this state on earth is one of trial and probation, and all the associations of Rose Hill, and the Lennoxes, and those delicious evenings, and those pure and spiritual conversations, passed from his mind, to give place to unbridled passion and visions of bloody revenge. It was, he knew not how near morning, when his reflections were interrupted by a knock at the door, and Southard entered in morning-gown and slippers. "I beg your pardon," said Southard, "but I've come up to see what's the matter with you. We've heard you pacing all night backward and forward, and often speaking aloud." "I hope I haven't disturbed you?" "Only with the apprehension that you are either uneasy or ill." "I'm both," said Glendenning, "vexed and grieved, as well as ill." "What is it? Can we do anything for you?" [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-216.jpg) \- external link  - Page 215. ] "No, no, my dear fellow, no. You cannot aid me---cannot, at least yet, even share my troubles." "Then I must ask no more," said Southard; "but, without knowing them, I can advise you not to yield too much to merely temporary cares and sorrows. They pass away. Leave them to Him who sends them." "It's easier to advise those things than to do them, my friend," said Glendenning. "Of course it is; but it is nevertheless possible to do them." "No, no; it is not possible." "Yes, it is. All is possible with the aid of God." "And if you had lost your wife last night," said Glendenning, "perhaps you would feel how insufficient mere precepts, either of morality or religion, are to meet the blighting cares of life." "I should suffer, doubtless," replied Southard. "I should shrink, and mourn, and weep; but he who believes and trusts in the one true and everlasting God, and comprehends with faith the perfect system of consolation offered by the Christian religion, although he cannot avoid the storms and wrecks of life, yet he has a star to guide him and a pilot to steer him. Believe me, there is neither wisdom, philosophy, nor religion in worrying one's self about things that can't be helped. Do your best, and let things go. Satisfy your conscience and sleep in peace. Read your Bible, and you will find support. `Which of ye, by taking thought for himself, can add one cubit unto his stature?' " Glendenning was at first disposed to think it intrusive and rather ridiculous, a man's coming into his room to preach religion at daybreak in morning-gown and slippers. But the words of Southard, and the answering echoes which thrilled in his own heart and his own reason, did once more make him pause, and called up again a feeble sense of his new-born hope and faith. "Trust in God," continued Southard. "Man neither made himself, nor can take care of himself without his Creator. He placed you in the world; He will receive you going out of it; and if you will let him, he will guide, support, and console you during your progress through it." Glendenning shook his head. "Come to me, ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will give you rest." "I wish I had your unwavering faith," said Glendenning, [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-217.jpg) \- external link  - Page 216. ] "and sometimes I have; but it is fluctuating and feeble. The first storm whirls it away." "It will be given you if you truly and sincerely ask it; that is all you want to be a happy man. Once convinced, you walk the earth like a god, careless of its inconveniences, its cold or its heat, its joy or its sorrow, its glory or its shame, and only waiting your summons to go back to a celestial abode, where moths do not corrupt and thieves no more break in and steal. But come! I will have done preaching, and leave you to better thoughts. You've been awake all night, too. You must sleep, or you'll cut a poor figure at the ball to-night." "Ball!" said Glendenning. "What ball?" "Why, the ball---Colonel Nicholson's ball." "Does Colonel Nicholson give a ball? and to-night?" said Glendenning, a flush of painful emotion overspreading his face. "You don't mean to say you're ignorant of it?" said Southard, with some surprise. "Why all the town are talking about it." "I was ignorant of it," said Glendenning. "But how is it that you \---where is your invitation? All the officers are to be there. Have you not received your invitation?" "Has any one come for me?" "Not to my knowledge." A ray of light shot into Glendenning's mind. "It is very extraordinary," said Southard. "It is quite certain there must be some mistake." But perceiving Glendenning, was not attending to him, and appeared lost in thought, he bade him good-morning and left him. "So!" said Glendenning, " that's my man. He has done it by some infernal slander; but let him beware. If I can catch him --- him , of all men! But stop, be cool; I have only to wait. The Horse Guards? I defy them. A court martial? I invite---I court one. My commission? I'll resign it. Let me be cool and patient! I shall know all in a day or two. No more questions! no more challenges yet! Some one must be at the bottom of it, and who but he! If I can trace it to him---I throw away all considerations of self. I care not for rank, power, laws, nor consequences. Does he think again to shelter himself behind paltry questions of etiquette and articles of war?" [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-218.jpg) \- external link  - Page 217. ] He went out and bathed, came home and dressed as usual, breakfasted, and still no White. His heart was oppressed with passion and his mind bewildered in mystery; but he kept himself composed with the words, "Wait, be cool! The hour will come!" Shunning the society or even the eye of every human being, he spent the whole day alone in the environs of this magnificently situated town, wandering, now along the shores of the broad and noble stream, now climbing some of the heights, from which he beguiled the intervals of keener reflection by the dazzling and exquisite views which broke upon him of the island, town, and river, and now penetrating into the green, untrodden solitudes of a forest, soothing himself with the sweet sights and sounds of that nature which God has directly given as a significant reflection of the human soul, as an eternal type and a deep lesson to those who study and read aright; but to others, a book of pretty pictures for the amusement of children. He took some refreshment in the course of the day at a tavern, and when the evening was sufficiently advanced to permit his walking home unrecognised by such of his acquaintances as might be abroad in the streets, he returned to town. No change had taken place in his mind. He had sought neither in the advice of any wiser friend, nor in the perusal of the Bible or any religious book, nor directly from his Creator in humble prayer, light for his guidance or strength for his support. On his way home he found himself suddenly before the elegant house of Colonel Nicholson. It was blazing with lights, and within and around it were all the tokens of a brilliant f ete . Figures passing and repassing before the windows, carriages dashing up, giving out their gay and richly-dressed company, and hurrying away, the heads of dancers, the sound of music, etc. The stigma his commanding officer had cast upon him by omitting to invite him seemed to burn like a brand of shame on his forehead for all the world to see. The surrounding darkness seemed scarcely black enough to hide it. He stood a moment with folded arms and a pale countenance to gaze and brood. It was not only an intentional insult---meant as such, received as such---but it was, in sober truth, an injury which [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-219.jpg) \- external link  - Page 218. ] the reputation of a young officer could scarcely survive. It was an undisguised declaration of enmity on the part of Colonel Nicholson; a public proclamation of his contempt and of Glendenning's shame, of his opinion that Glendenning was not a proper associate for gentlemen. And, moreover, he knew that Nicholson's mean and cowardly soul, however vindictive and merciless, would not have ventured upon so bold and open a measure, unless protected from the consequences, from the reproach of public opinion, and the indignant resentment of his victim, by circumstances of a very marked and extraordinary nature. Nicholson was a man who launched the deadly blow only from a place of safety  . With these fierce and burning thoughts, the young man stood some time in the shadow, meditating on the best mode of action, and "feeding fat" his thoughts of vengeance. Once he approached a few steps, resolved to stalk into the gay and crowded rooms, all dusty, sweat-stained, and ghastly as he was, reckless of the screams of affrighted women and the frowns of furious beaux, and to take by the throat the malignant villain who had cast this black shell upon him; but he withheld himself from what a moment's reflection told him would be only an act of unmanly desperation, perhaps most gladly hailed by his enemy, and most triumphantly used as a means of completing his ruin. The very intensity of his passion taught him prudence; his very agitation made him calm and wary. "Ah!" uttered he, as he turned away, sick and suffocated with his unaccustomed effort to restrain violent emotion, one of the highest and most necessary arts of a moral being, and one possessed only by the truly great and good---"Ah! if the dog would but fight! if I could but plant him, face to face, before me!" Poor Mrs. Lennox! where was her mild and gentle image, her holy words? where the new ideas she had awakened, the promise she had extorted, the angel voices she had called up in his bosom, the light of heaven she had shed over his path? Gone, lost! as hope, love, reason, truth, common humanity, respect for God, and the moral sense, and all that is pure and high, and spiritual and unworldly, must ever be lost in the heart that gives itself to the brutal, bloody, depraving duel, when, "groping at noonday," the infidel turns from heaven and voluntarily embraces earth and hell! [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-220.jpg) \- external link  - Page 219. ] At last he reached his home. A violent ring of the bell brought Southard himself to the door. "You frighten us," said he; "we did not know what had happened." "How so?" "By ringing so hard." "I was not aware of it," said he, coming in, and putting down his hat. "Has White been here?" "No." "Nor sent?" "No." He sunk into a chair with folded arms, in dark and moody silence. He looked like a demon thus breaking in from the lower world, gnawed by fierce thoughts of murder and hate, upon a scene full of very different influences. Mrs. Southard had been engaged in their neat, humble drawing-room washing and dressing her little girl for bed. The carpet was strewed with flowers, mutilated dogs, sadly misused nine-pins, and the fragments of a broken tin carriage, which, now thrown aside and neglected, showed that the child had finished another innocent and happy day. Bright, clean, as fresh as a morning rose-bud, her lips and cheeks not at all unlike one, and her large eyes of tender blue as full of light and soul as they could be, she sat on her mother's knee, her silken hair only half covered by the small, snowy cap, but peeping out here and there in soft, rebellious curls, half auburn, half gold. Southard, who had been reading Milton, had laid down the volume, and was looking at the group with the delight of an artist mingled with the tenderness of a father, and watching to see its effects upon their friend. Glendenning had a sould for such a picture, and was arrested by it. It struck strangely on his thoughts. He was one of those who feel the singular refreshment [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-221.jpg) \- external link  - Page 220. ] of being with children, and with this one he had long formed a tender intimacy. "There," said Southard, "is the most beautiful object in creation---a child just fresh from the hands of God." "The most beautiful," said Mrs. Southard, "at least in the eyes of a father. But Kate has a remarkable face." "She has, indeed," said Glendenning. "Do you know," said the mother, charmed to find that he appeared enlivened by the sight, "do you know she can sing, and dance, and play horse, and run like a robin-redbreast, and repeat twenty pieces of poetry? Come, Katy, tell Captain Glendenning about ` Reason, and Folly, and Beauty, they say  '---come---` Went on a party of pleasure one day  .' " "No, no," said Kate, with a side-long, blushing look at Glendenning. "Naughty girl," said the mother. "Come!" But Katy only put her finger to her lip, and turned bashfully towards her friend a fat little snowy shoulder, so beautiful that the desire to touch and kiss it drove even Nicholson out of his mind. "And do you believe how the little toad is learning to talk?" resumed Mrs. Southard. "I can't do a thing that she does not imitate. I told her to-day she must not have something which she wanted, and she replied, `She could not possibly do without it! ' and this afternoon she wanted to go out, saying `I had no notion how extremely delightful  it was.' " "Mothers are the same all over the world," said Southard, apologetically. "And what have you been doing to-day, my little dear?" asked Glendenning, taking her on his knee, for a moment forgetting his troubles, and looking with delight at her beauty, thus set off beyond the power of jewels, or the toilet of Pope's Belinda, by the little nightgown and snowy cap. "I watered my ikle wose-bush ." said the child. "Your ikle wose-bush! Ah! did you ever hear the story of the silver trout?" "No." "Once there was a little silver trout, and her mamma [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-222.jpg) \- external link  - Page 221. ] told her she might go off and swim about, but she mustn't eat anything she should see, without first asking her. So the little trout went off, and at length came to a nice little worm, and, being very hungry, you know, she forgot what her mamma had told her, ate up the worm, and, oh dreadful, don't you think there was a hook, like a naughty pin, in it, and a string to it, and a naughty boy had hold of the string, and he drew the poor little trout out of the water and killed him, and had him fried for supper." "Tell more!" said the child, fixing her blue eyes on him with a kind of hushed and beautiful awe. "That's deep tragedy to her," remarked her father, smiling at her profoundly serious countenance. "Once there was a little girl," continued Glendenning, "who was very naughty, and wouldn't mind her mamma." A shadow came over Kate's face. "And then her mamma died, and she had no home, and then she had no dinner, and no coat, and no hat, and no nice little shoes, and, don't you think, she had to stand by the roadside alone in the cold winter, and to beg for some bread, and the first man she asked said, `No, go away, naughty, naughty little girl;' and then---" But the quivering lip, and the two great tears forcing themselves from the blue eyes of his little listener, and rolling down her cheeks, warned the narrator not to deal too largely in the pathetic. "Oh!" said the mamma, delighted, and herself rather touched by the idea of the little girl on the roadside without any mamma, "she's very tender-hearted, my little Kate." "And, I vow, I believe Julia's eyes were wet too!" said Southard, laughing. "Come, now, to bed!" said Mrs. Southard; "but first say `Twinkle, twinkle, little star,' for Captain Glendenning." "No," said the child. "Yes." "No, no, mamma, not to him ." "Then tell him about, `Oh, ladies, beware of the gay young knight, For he loves and he rides away!' " [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-223.jpg) \- external link  - Page 222. ] "Oh, no! mamma, not to him ." "And why not to him? " "Because he's a coward," replied the child, with her b oken accent. "A what? " said Glendenning. "Colonel Nicholson says so, you know," said the child. "A what, my dear little girl?" asked Glendenning, gently, the expression of repose and pleasure which had gradually come into his face, however, entirely disappearing. "Oh hush, Katy, naughty girl," said Mrs. Southard, exchanging a look of such meaning with her husband, and giving such other evidences of alarm, that Glendenning needed no farther explanation to convince him the child had overheard and was repeating some real conversation. He seized her gently by the hand, and said, "Do you mean a coward , my dear?" "Yes! yes! a coward!" said she, delighted to be understood. "For Heaven's sake!" exclaimed Southard. "Dear Captain Glendenning!" interrupted Mrs. Southard. "I understand---I partly know," said Glendenning; "but you will, of course, explain this to me, Southard?" "Certainly I will. It's a stupid and a painful thing. But I intended to reveal to you what I heard this afternoon, and the child has, perhaps, broached the subject opportunely." "It's the greatest nonsense in the world, Captain Glendenning," said Mrs. Southard, rising with the child. "Don't be angry or rash! It will pass over, if you are prudent and patient. Good-night! good-night! I shall not be able to leave Katy for at least half an hour. I always sit by her till she falls asleep." "Now, then," said Glendenning, when they were alone, "if you are my friend, tell me frankly, fully, all the calumny that has been hatched against me by that man." "The circumstance to me," said Southard, "would not, could not wear such a serious aspect as I confess others find in it. I hope you will treat it with the contempt it merits." [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-224.jpg) \- external link  - Page 223. ] "Let me hear it first." "You had an affair of honour in New-York this summer with Mr. Lennox?" "I had." "A lieutenant of the United States army?" "Yes." "You were insulted in the theatre, and received a blow?" "I did." "You went out with him, and settled the matter amicably?" "I did." "Dined with the young man, and spent a week at his country seat?" "I did. All this I did; and now your story. The rest, the rest!" "You have it. It is this that I have told you. Colonel Nicholson has, informally, unofficially, revived the affair, and expressed an unfavourable opinion of it. He does not seem a friend of yours, and, in his way, has chosen to view the matter as an evidence of your---now be calm---" "Go on!" said Glendenning. "You have his words. My little Kate heard an officer, who is sitting for his head to me, tell my wife---" "I'm a coward?" "These were the words, as reported to us, of Colonel Nicholson, who declares that he has some intention of ordering an official investigation. He has, 'tis useless to deny it, for the moment seriously injured your reputation." Glendenning made no reply, but paced thoughtfully backward and forward, with a tranquillity which surprised his informant. At length he said, "Thank you for explaining this to me. I see it all." "And, I trust, treat it with contempt." "Not exactly with contempt, but nothing can be done with it. I can't undo the past; I can't fight the duel over again. If my brother officers have the stupidity to be led away by the opinion of a person they despise as much as they do this Colonel Nicholson, let them. I will resign my commission, and meet Colonel [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-225.jpg) \- external link  - Page 224. ] Nicholson himself. Should he refuse to meet me, I'll horsewhip him, if he were twenty Colonel Nicholsons." "Tut! tut! tut!" cried Southard: " horsewhip your lieutenant-colonel? " There was a ring at the door, and the servant announced Captain White, who immediately entered with his usual undisturbed and indifferent manner. He was one of those natures which nothing lashes into phrensy. Deep emotion only stilled him, and gave him more perfect mastery over his reason and passions. "How are you, Southard? How are you, ma'am?" said he to Mrs. Southard, as she entered hastily and affrighted, for the voice of Glendenning had reached her while watching her child to sleep. "How are you, Glendenning?" "Where have you been?" inquired Glendenning. "Why did you not return to me? Why are you not at the ball?" "I have been looking into matters a little, and, as for my absence from the ball, if you mean Colonel Nicholson's ball, I have not been invited. I wish you'd give me a cup of tea, Mrs. Southard, will you?" "We are just going to have some," said she, as she rang. "Oh, what is all this to end in?" There was a pause, which no one seemed inclined to break. "You take it coolly, Captain White," at length said Glendenning. "Coolly! why not?" "You are just in time with your coolness now," said Southard; "Captain Glendenning is likely to have use for it." "It is at his service, and therefore I sought him. A little sugar, if you please! your tea has positively the flavour of Caravan, Mrs. Southard." "It is but common tea," said the lady. "Then, perhaps, I am thirsty. What a day we've had. Rome and Naples have few more delightful." "If it would but last the year through," said Mrs. Southard, who perceived he desired to change the conversation. "It wouldn't be so pleasant." answered White. "I remember once spending a winter at Rome, and I [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-226.jpg) \- external link  - Page 225. ] positively surfeited on the beauty of the climate. No wind, no cloud; a sky of the most transparent clearness and exquisite hues; week after week, month after month, nothing but that everlasting bright heaven and still air. I got monstrously sick of it, to be sure, and was as glad to see a dull day as I am here to see a fine one." "What a climate for art, for architecture, statues, temples, columns, and triumphal arches!" said Southard. "Yes, famous place! interesting things! good buildings! and devilish nice people they must have been!" "Unchristian, bloody, and barbarous, though!" "But immensely clever," said White, finishing his second cup. "Now, then, Glendenning, a word to you." His friend silently rose and followed him into his room, where the servant had placed lights. END OF VOL. I. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf099v1&image=099-227.jpg) \- external link  - Blank Page. ] [
