 Lord Byron, would probably have supplied many images to be loved, and descriptions to be remembered. The incidents arise out of the short-lived Catholic insurrection of the Northern counties, in the reign of Elizabeth, which was supposed to be connected with the project of marrying the Queen of Scots to the Duke of Norfolk; and terminated in the ruin of the Earls of Northumberland and Westmoreland, by whom it was chiefly abetted. Among the victims of this rash enterprise was Richard Norton of Rylestone, who comes to the array with a splendid banner, at the head of eight tall sons, but against the will and advice of a ninth, who, though he refused to join the host, yet follows unarmed in its rear, out of anxiety for the fate of his family; and, when the father and his gallant progeny are made prisoners, and led to execution at York, recovers the fatal banner, and is slain by a party of the Queen's horse near Bolton Priory, in which place he had been ordered to deposit it by the dying voice of his father. The stately halls and pleasant bowers of Rylestone are then wasted, and fall into desolation; while the heroic daughter, and only survivor of the house, is sheltered among its faithful retainers, and wanders about for many years in its neighbourhood, accompanied by a beautiful white doe, which had formerly been a pet in the family; and continues, long after the death of this sad survivor, to repair every Sunday to the churchyard of Bolton Priory, and there to feed and wander among the graves, to the wonder and delight of the rustic congregation that came there to worship. This, we think, is a pretty subject for a ballad; and, in the author's better day, might have made a lyrical one of considerable interest. Let us see, however, how he deals with it, since he has bethought him of publishing in quarto. The First Canto merely contains the description of the Doe coming into the churchyard on Sunday, and of the congregation wondering at her. She is described as being as white as a lily---or the moon---or a ship in the sunshine; and this is the style in which Mr. Wordsworth marvels and moralises about her through ten quarto pages. "What harmonious, pensive changes, Wait upon her as she ranges Round and through this Pile of State, Overthrown and desolate!" "The presence of this wand'ring Doe Fills many a damp obscure recess With lustre of a saintly show; And, re-appearing, she no less To the open day gives blessedness." The mothers point out this pretty creature to their children; and tell them in sweet nursery phrases--- "Now you have seen the famous Doe! From Rylestone she hath found her way Over the hills this Sabbath-day; Her work, whate'er it be, is done, And she will depart when we are gone." The poet knows why she comes there, and thinks the people may know it too: But some of them think she is a new incarnation of some of the illustrious dead that lie buried around them; and one, who it seems is an Oxford scholar, conjectures that she may be the fairy who instructed Lord Clifford in astrology! an ingenious fancy, which the poet thus gently reproveth--- "Ah, pensive scholar! think not so! But look again at the radiant doe!" And then closes the Canto with this natural and luminous apostrophe to his harp. "But, harp! thy murmurs may not cease,--- Thou hast breeze-like visitings; For a Spirit with angel-wings Hath touch'd thee, and a Spirit's hand: A voice is with us---a command To chant, in strains of heavenly glory , A tale of tears, a mortal story!" The Second Canto is more full of business; and affords us more insight into the author's manner of conducting a story. The opening, however, which goes back to the bright and original conception of the harp, is not quite so intelligible as might have been desired. "The Harp in lowliness obey'd: And first we sang of the green-wood shade; And a solitary Maid! Beginning, where the song must end , With her, and with her sylvan Friend; The friend who stood before her sight, Her only unextinguish d light,--- Her last companion in a dearth Of love, upon a hopeless earth." This solitary maid, we are then told, had wrought, at the request of her father, "an unblessed work"--- "A Banner---one that did fulfil Too perfectly his headstrong will: For on this Banner had her hand Embroider'd (such was the command) The Sacred Cross; and figur'd there The five dear wounds our Lord did bear." The song then proceeds to describe the rising of Northumberland and Westmoreland, in the following lofty and spirited strains:--- "Two earls fast leagu'd in discontent, Who gave their wishes open vent; And boldly urg'd a general plea, The rites of ancient piety To be by force of arms renew'd; Glad prospect for the multitude! And that same Banner, on whose breast The blameless Lady had exprest, Memorials chosen to give life, And sunshine to a dangerous strife; This Banner," &c. The poet, however, puts out all his strength in the dehortation which he makes Francis Norton address to his father, when the preparations are completed, and the household is ready to take the field. \---"Francis Norton said, 'O Father! rise not in this fray--- The hairs are white upon your head; Dear Father, hear me when I say It is for you too late a day! Bethink you of your own good name; A just and gracious queen have we, A pure religion, and the claim Of peace on our humanity. 'Tis meet that I endure your scorn,--- I am your son, your eldest born; The Banner touch not, stay your hand,--- This multitude of men disband, And live at home in blissful ease.'" The warlike father makes no answer to this exquisite address, but turns in silent scorn to the banner, "And his wet eyes are glorified;" and forthwith he marches out, at the head of his sons and retainers. Francis is very sad when thus left alone in the mansion ---and still worse when he sees his sister sitting under a tree near the door. However, though "he cannot choose but shrink and sigh," he goes up to her and says, "'Gone are they,---they have their desire; And I with thee one hour will stay, To give thee comfort if I may.' He paused, her silence to partake, And long it was before he spake: Then, all at once, his thoughts turn'd round, And fervent words a passage found. 'Gone are they, bravely, though misled, With a dear Father at their head! The Sons obey a natural lord; The Father had given solemn word To noble Percy,---and a force Still stronger bends him to his course. This said, our tears to-day may fall As at an innocent funeral. In deep and awful channel runs This sympathy of Sire and Sons; Untried our Brothers were belov'd, And now their faithfulness is prov'd; For faithful we must call them, bearing That soul of conscientious daring.'" After a great deal more, as touching and sensible, he applies himself more directly to the unhappy case of his hearer---whom he thus judiciously comforts and flatters: "Hope nothing, if I thus may speak To thee a woman, and thence weak;
