 [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174fcov2.jpg) \- external link  - Front Cover. ] [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174spin2.jpg) \- external link  - Spine. ] [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174edgf2.jpg) \- external link  - Front Edge. ] [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174bcov2.jpg) \- external link  - Back Cover. ] [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174edgb2.jpg) \- external link  - Bottom Edge. ] [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174-050.jpg) \- external link  - Blank Page. ] [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174-051.jpg) \- external link  - Blank Page. ] [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174-052.jpg) \- external link  - Title page. ] THE SILVER BOTTLE; OR, THE ADVENTURES OF `LITTLE MARLBORO" IN SEARCH OF HIS FATHER . AUTHOR OF `MARK MANLY,' `FRANK RIVERS,' `THE BEAUTIFUL CIGAR VENDER,'  &c. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174-053.jpg) \- external link  - Blank Page. ] [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174-054.jpg) \- external link  - Page 003. ] -  London July 8th, 184---. -  To The readers of the First Part of `The Silver Bottle I DEPARTED from Boston in the Acadia Steamship the Monday following the close of the First Series of my narration, and arrived here in safety three days ago. I have already stated that by the generosity of my kind foster-mother, Dame Darwell, I was amply provided with means to prosecute my search. According to my promise the reader shall now hear of my progress in a series of letters which I shall transmit to them in recompense for their indulgence in following me thus far in my narrative [1] . Having, as has been seen, exhausted all my resources of information in the United States, there remained no alternative but to cross the Atlantic. My readers will probably remember on what proofs I hoped to find some trace of my parentage; but I will here recapitulate them:---First: was the Silver Nursery Bottle which was discovered lying with me in the bed of the `Court Chamber, ' with its crest of an eagle treading upon a serpent, and beneath the crest a cypher---the single letter `M.' Second: This crest was also upon the harness and carriage and the initial was upon the brass plate of a trunk behind the carriage! These facts of coincidence showed that the bottle must have belonged to the persons in the carriage, and consequently that both the bottle and myself had been left in the Court Chamber by these strangers. Third: I have traced the carriage to the carriage maker's in Philadelphia and there obtained the original drawing of the crest; and I had discovered at the hotel that the purchaser of the carriage had entered his name as `F. R. Marlborough;' (a singular coincidence with my own!) for as these were the initials on the back of the letter upon which the device of the crest had been drawn by the stranger for the coach-painter, there was no question of the identity of one with the other. Fourth: The discovery of the old English trunk was a circumstance that I deemed an important item in my array of discoveries; as it, without doubt, confirmed my long conceived opinion that I should yet have to look to England for my parents. Fifth: The name of the maker of the Silver Bottle on which I placed great hopes. It was `Beufort & Co. Lon---.' [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174-055.jpg) \- external link  - Page 004. ] `Sixth: The crest, if belonging to an English family, could without doubt be found at the Herald office, and by this means the family which claimed it might be discovered. These were the slight grounds upon which I based my hopes of discovering my parents, and which have led me to cross the Atlantic in search of them. I am now in London! My hopes are buoyant. I feel I shall yet succeed! At least I am determined never to cease my efforts to find those to whom I owe my birth. I have been two days in London. But the fatigue and excitement of my journey and of reaching the field of my labors has kept me confined to my room until this morning. I have been engaged all the forenoon in making my plans. The Herald office cannot be visited on business until next Wednesday and it is now Friday. I should first wish to visit that, but I cannot wait so long an interval. I have, therefore, sent a servant for a directory from one of the libraries to examine it for the name of `Beufort & Co.,' the makers of the Silver Bottle. The servant has just returned! 4 P. M. I have examined the directory for this year and those for seven years back without finding the firm. I find several of the name of Beufort both alone and with partners, but none of the firm of `Beufort & Co.' I have despatched a messenger for a bound catalogue of the trade published, as I learn, by the company of Silver Smith's of the city of London, and extending back in volumes for more than a century. I have sent for the volume or twenty-five years ago. The man has just returned from `The Silver Smith's Arms,' informing me that books are not suffered to leave the library, but that I can call and refer to them. I shall at once proceed to the Hall for this purpose. 8 P. M. I left the house guided by the messenger, for London is a labyrinth to me, and reached the Silver Smith's Hall after half an hour's walk. I was guided up a broad flight of steps into a vestibule, where sat an old man who acted as door-keeper. On informing him of my wishes he asked me if I had a ticket of admission. I replied in the negative. `You cannot be admitted without a ticket of permission, sir,' he said. `Of whom am I to obtain this?' `Of the President of the Company.' While I was undecided what to do, a gentleman, advanced in years, came up the stairs and was about to enter, when observing my perplexity, for he had overheard what had passed, he said to me politely, `You are a stranger I peceive, sir!' `Yes, sir. An American.' `You may enter, sir, with me. Can I be of service to you?' `My business in coming here,' I answered, `was to examine the volume of The Silver Smith's Company for about twenty-four or five years ago!' `You will find them arrayed on yonder shelf, sir. Whose name can you wish to search for, of a date so long back?' `That of `Beufort & Co.' `That is my own firm?' he said, looking at me fixedly. `Your own firm!' I repeated with gratified surprise. Yes, sir. I am the Senior partner of that House!' [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174-056.jpg) \- external link  - Page 005. ] `I could not find it on the directory for the last seven years!' `No, sir. It is twelve years since I withdrew my name from the firm; it is now `Walley & Beufort,' my son and son-in-law! I should have said I was instead of am the Senior parter!' I was so greatly agitated for a few moments after this singular and seemingly providential discovery, that I could not speak. I trembled and had to place my hand against a column for support He observed my emotion and said with alarm, `What! are you becoming ill, sir?' `No---no, sir! It is all over. It was only my surprise at meeting you so singularly for whom I was seeking---whom I crossed the Atlantic almost purposely to see!' `Crossed the Atlantic to see me? ' he exclaimed with intense astonishment.--- `What can you have with me to come so far? I do not remember ever to have seen yon---yet, now I look at you more closely, your features seem somewhat familiar:' `You can never have seen me before, sir! I have come to see you and ask you what (I said coloring at the seeming trivial nature of the subject) I fear you will regard as a trifling question, but one which is full of the deepest import to me!' `Well, sir, speak!' he said gravely seeing that I paused, and looking at me as if he suspected I was not exactly in a state of mental soundness. `Do you remember having sold some twenty-five years ago, a silver nursing bottle?' He smiled, but answered benevolently, `I dare say I have, sir, a good many of them. In those days I know we manufactured them?' `You stamped them with the name of your firm---Beufort & Co?' `Yes. But why do you ask?' `I have a motive, sir, if you will indulge me! Did you ever sell such an article to a person by the name of Marlboro'?' I hung upon his reply. He looked as if he were trying to recollect, and then answered slowly, `Not that I remember. My books however will show!' `Can you refer to them easily?' `Yes, sir. But this would hardly seem necessary!' `I owe you a thousand apologies, sir, but it is very necessary I should ascertain this. When I tell you, sir, that I am a foster-child and abandoned by my parents in infancy and that the only clue I have to my parentage is a silver nursing bottle which they left with me, stamped with your name, I am assured sir, you will excuse my zeal and overlook the trouble I give you!' `And this is true that you are such a child and in possession of such a bottle?' `Yes, sir! Here it is!' I ssid taking it from my pocket and then from two envelops (the inner one being the leaf from the music book with the tune of `Little Marlboro' upon it, in which the baby linen had been wrapped) and handing it to him. He took it and said immediately, `This is certainly one of my manufacture, with my stamp upon it! From its [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174-057.jpg) \- external link  - Page 006. ] shape I know it to be one of the earliest that we had made. I am ready to assist you, sir, if you can tell me how I can do so?' `If you will do me the honor to listen to me, sir, I will tell you all my past history and my hopes of the future!' `I will cheerfully hear you. Here are two chairs!' I then gave him a brief yet sufficiently minute account of the facts the reader is already familiar with up to the time of my embarking for England. He listened with the profoundest attention and at times with emotion he did not attempt to disguise. When I had ended he said, grasping my hand, `Sir, your narrative has deeply interested my feelings. I am obliged to you for narrating it to me. I agree with you that your search must be now continued in England; and you have my prayers for your success. I believe you will succeed. You shall have all the aid I can give you! The facts you bring to bear upon the search before you are, as far as they go, of importance. They are, however, in themselves nothing unless you can connect each link that follows with its fellow. You deserve all praise for your perseverance. Come with me, sir, to my counting-room, where my books are, and I will examine them. I was always in the habit of making a record of each days' sales, and to whom, if I knew the persons!' From the Silver Smith's Hall I went with him to his own carriage, which had been waiting for him at the door of the Hall, to his counting-room. It was in the rear of a magnificent establishment for the sale of silver wares. We passed through the glittering room and entered his counting-room, which he seemed to keep only to preserve his habits of business. There was at the desk an aged clerk almost as venerable as Mr. Beufort himself. `Jacob, turn to ledger B,---date 1818, and see if there is such a name entered upon it as F. R. Marlborough!' said his master as he laid down his hat and stick, and seated himself in his arm-chair. I was too nervous to accept the seat he offered me, but stood waiting to see what Jacob would discover. The old clerk having found the huge volume, dusted it and run his eye over the alphabetical list at length arrested his finger upon the letter `M.' He then run over the names beginning with this letter, murmuring `Marl---Marl---Marl,' in a half tone, as his eye traveled down the column. I watched him with intense anxiety. At length at the very bottom of the page, he placed his fore-finger upon a name, and emphatically pronounced the word `Marlborough.' `You've found it!' cried Mr. Beufort half rising up in his chair. `Yes sir ` Marlborough. F. R , page 319,' he responded in a formal tone. `Turn to it quickly,' I said, impatient at his mechanical formality. He tossed back the heavy leaves of the folio, and laid open the page named. I was instantly looking over his shoulder. It showed an account opened by the House of Beufort & Co. with Ferdinand R. Marlborough. I ran my eye rapidly over the items, which were a score in number. Among others was a ` Silver bottle  !' I uttered an exclamation of joy, and announced it to Mr. Beufort He came and looked over the book. `Extraordinary! Wonderful coincidence! Providence has taken the matter up, young man! Persevere and you will ultimately succeed! Your Silver Bottle will yet make your fortune! Strange, indeed!' [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174-058.jpg) \- external link  - Page 007. ] `Have you any recollection of this, Mr. Marlboro?' I asked earnestly. `I am trying to think. I have had so many customers that I am not sure that I recollect him. Do you know who it was, Jacob?' `He was quite a young man, I recollect sir, I sold him most of these articles myself.' `Can you describe his appearance?' asked Mr. Beufort. `He was about the height of this young gentleman, sir, and---(here he looked at me with a sudden gaze of surprise) I never saw two more alike, sir! It is surprising, sir,' he added, looking at me and bowing, `the astonishing resemblance between you and Mr. Marlborough!' I exchanged looks with Mr. Beufort, who looked very much excited with the most pleasurable emotions. `Your case is brightening, sir,' he said to me. I was silent. I was too deeply moved to open my lips to express what I felt. I trembled between hope and fear. `What family did he belong to, Jacob?' asked Mr. Beufort. `I cannot say, sir, though I have no doubt he was one of the nobility. He used to call in a tilbury when he came alone; but when he came with his lady, her carriage had a crest of an eagle strangling a snake!' `The very same!' I exclaimed almost wild with my feelings. `And he had a wife, Jacob?' `Yes, Mr. Beufort. A young wife!' `Let me see the dates,' he said, looking at the account. `His bills begin January first with the purchase of a diamond necklace, and a set of bridal pearls, doubtless for new year's or wedding gifts. The silver bottle was bought December 20th.' `The bottle I sold to the lady. She came alone in her carriage. I recollect the circumstance, from her wishing the crest and the initial `M' engraved upon it!' `Your memory is not only tenacious, Jacob, but very valuable just now!' `I always had a good memory, sir. I can recollect biting my fingers with my first teeth!' answered Jacob gravely. `I dare say, Jacob. You have shown evidences of it now. Is that the bottle you sold the lady?' Jacob took it and examined it closely. `Yes sir,' he answered confidently. `It is one of ours; but is it the identical one?' `Yes, sir. I know it by the crest. I engraved it myself!' `Then the matter is settled,' said Mr. Beufort, looking at me, and smiling with gratification. `We have now to find out who Mr. Marlborough was, and it is my opinion that will amount to the same thing as finding out your parents, sir! You have clearly proved them to be English, I think! The next step to be taken is to the Herald office!' `It is closed,' I said in a tone of disappointment. `Not so that admittance cannot be obtained on application to the proper [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174-059.jpg) \- external link  - Page 008. ] quarter. Come and breakfast with me at No---Terrace, at nine to-morrow, and we will then proceed together to the Herald office!' This good man then drove me to my lodgings, where I have now written the progress of events up to this hour. My next letter will make known the result of my visit to the `Herald's Hall.' Yours truly, LITTLE MALBORO.' [1] We have thought best to give the letters as they are, instead of bringing them into a narrative form. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174-060.jpg) \- external link  - Page 009. ] -  London \---, 1844. I have just returned from a visit to the Herald's Hall, and with a beating heart and trembling fingers I proceed to write what has transpired, before I leave London, which I shall do at day-light in a post chaise. It will be remembered that I was about to proceed to the Herald's office with Mr. Beufort who was to make use of his personal influence to obtain admittance for me. To this gentleman I feel under the profoundest obligations of gratitude.---From the first moment in which I made him acquainted with my story, he has taken the deepest interest in my researches; and has voluntarily and most kindly offered to aid me, not only with his influence and experience, but with money, should I at any time require it. But, thanks to my kind foster-mother, good Dame Darwell, I am amply provided with means to meet every possible contingency. I left my rooms this morning at ten, and entering Mr. Beufort's carriage, which he had sent to receive me, I drove to his handsome mansion on --- Terrace. Ho received me at the door, and said he would be at leisure in a few minutes to accompany me to the Hall, and that in the meanwhile his wife and daughter would entertain me. Thereupon he ushered me into a pleasant withdrawing room opening from the breakfast room, and presented me to Mrs. Beufort and her daughter, an accomplished and exceedingly lovely young lady of eighteen years of age, whose features at once reminded me of Emma Field, a young person no doubt still remembered by my readers as she will ever be by me! Indeed this beautiful girl is ever visible to the eye of my imagination whenever I look into the future! It is she who inspires me to action! To persevere in establishing my birth! It is for her that I would be honoured and esteemed! If I should hear to-day that she was no more, or what would be as her death to me, married to another, I feel persuaded that my energies would be paralysed and that I should be indifferent to the result of my researches after my family. If I gain honors it is to lay them at her feet! If I gain wealth it is to share it with her! And without her both would alike be valueless to me! I could not help betraying some confusion and surprise at the resemblance I discovered to Emma in Miss Beufort; a resemblance rather of air and general manner than of feature. The sight of her revived all my emotions of love for the absent, and I could not withdraw my eyes from her; till, at length, I discovered that she was embarrassed by my fixed regards. I immediately apologised [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174-061.jpg) \- external link  - Page 010. ] to her, saying that she so surprisingly resembled an American friend of mine that I could offer no other excuse for my inadvertant gazing. She smiled, and we entered into a conversation upon my fortunes, of which they were previously informed by Mr. Beufort. I could see by Miss Beufort's eyes that she wished I might succeed in discovering my parentage and that she sympathized with me in my situation of doubt and uncertainty. My conversation with Miss Beufort only deepened my tender recollections of her whom she so forcibly recalled to my mind, and inspired me with new ardor in my pursuit of that happiness and honor I hoped one day to share with Emma. `Ah, my young friend, so you are agreeably entertaining the ladies, I see! Perhaps we are entertaining a Prince,' added he, smiling pleasantly. `Well, sir, now if you are ready!' `If my parents prove honest and respectable I shall be satisfied, even if I find them in humble life,' I answered, understanding his allusion. We entered the luxurious carriage of the wealthy Silver-Smith, two livered footmen behind, and the coach rolled with a rapid and easy motion through the crowded streets of London. We soon left the Strand and stopped in front of a stately edifice, seemingly of great antiquity. Alighting at the grand entrance we passed into a large vestibule at the extremity of which was a flight of dark oaken steps with carved banisters. At the top was a sort of open terrace leading upon a low balcony, in which by a door sat in a carved Gothic arm-chair a man in a Herald's surcoat, who was the porter of the Hall. To him Mr. Beufort handed a ticket signed by the nobleman who regulated the affairs of the Herald's Hall. `You may enter, gentlemen! It is correct!' he answered, after peeping closely at the signature and seal through a pair of iron spectacles that looked as if they might have been worn by one of the Herald's of the days of the Conqueror. We entered a vast hall of Gothic architecture, lighted by a stained window at either extremity. It was the most remarkable apartment I ever entered, and I remained a few moments gazing around me. The ceiling was pointed and groined and formed of groups of light arches supported by columns springing free from the floor thirty feet in height. The arches, pillars and walls were all a dark gray, having the appearance of stone; and the original hue has been changed by time, in many places a deep black. The effect was singularly venerable and impressive. Along the roof was suspended hundreds of banners bearing all sorts of quaint devices, an I presenting a beautiful and strange comingling of gay colors. Some of these banners were very old, and torn doubtless in battle. Along the walls of the hall, beneath this canopy of suspended banners, were arranged rows of shields of every shape, and size, and degree of antiquity, this side the Conquest. Some of them had become perfectly black with age, others were coated with rust; and many glittered and shone as if newly burnished. I noticed that all of them, where they were not so much defaced as to render it impossible for anything to be discerned upon the surface, were carved or else inlaid with devices of heraldry. On some were delineated complete and elaborate coats of arms, by means of gold inserted in grooves cut [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174-062.jpg) \- external link  - Page 011. ] into the metal. Most of the shields were battered and indented, and in one I saw embedded the end of a broken pike-head. Upon the opposite side of the hall were arranged casques and helmets with and without visors; and standing around the apartment were numerous complete suits of armor cap-a-pie , as if enveloping the body of stalwart knights. Seeing my curiosity in observing all this, Mr. Beufort said, `You are here in the repository of the insignia of English family honors.--- There is not a family in the land of any descent that is not represented in this Hall by some appropriate device belonging to its name and inheritance. Here the history of every old British family is recorded from its remotest origin, and many of them extend their line beyond the Conquest to Norman lineage. Here are to be found not only their histories, but the causes are recorded which led to the distinction of each!' As he spoke one of the ushers of the Hall approached us, and overhearing Mr. Beufort's words, said courteously, after saluting us, `Yes; there is not a family above the rank of a simple baron whose name and lineage is not here on record with a copy of his arms, and how he came by them. There now,' he said, directing our attention to the rows of shields, `is a shield bearing simply for its device a rook. It is the device of the noble family of Rookley, the founder of which was wounded in battle and lay perishing in a copse where he had fallen under the weight of his armor; but who was saved by a rook which lighting upon a tree above him made such a strange clamor that his followers were led to approach the tree to destroy it, when the Knight was found lying beneath it nearly dead. He afterwards, in commemoration of his preservation, took the name of Rookley and adopted this device upon his shield! There is a shield with a lance's head sticking in it. It is the device of the De Lancey family. The founder was a gigantic soldier in the battle of Croisay, and singly defended his king with this shield against a score of Cavaliers, all of whom shivered their lances against it, and the last piercing it broke it in the metal as you see. The soldier saved the king's life, protecting him till succor arrived, and was knighted, adopting the lance head for his heraldic device and designation. Interesting as these chivalric remeniscences were, I was too impatient to learn if I was any ways interested in the records of the Hall of Herald's to listen with undivided attention. My eyes were roaming over the multitude of shields and banners with the wild hope of possibly seeing that device which had become so indelibly engraven upon my memory. Mr. Beufort seeing my impatience and referring it to the true cause, said, `We have visited the Hall this morning, sir, to ascertain if there is an English family which claims a device which we bear with us!' `If the family is English we will ascertain for you, sir,' answered the usher. He then led the way into an inner room, the walls of which were piled with old tomes and manuscripts on parchment. Writing tables of black wood were standing in the middle of the apartment which was hung round with numerous frames containing on a small scale hundreds of coats of arms, crests and cyphers with numbers labelled upon each. Upon the table over which it was laid a scarlet cloth curiously embroidered with silver and gold threads, and containing [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174-063.jpg) \- external link  - Page 012. ] in the centre the arms of the kingdom gorgeously done in needle work, and in brilliant colors, was an enormous volume of immense thickness and bearing marks of age. The usher advanced towards this ponderous folio and by the aid of both hands threw it open. I saw that it blazed with paintings of Heraldic insignia and that the text was all done with the pen instead of being printed. `Now, Mr. Beufort, if you will explain to me the device you wish to trace?' he said. `Mr. Beufort looked at me. I felt my heart leap to my throat, my agitation was so great. Now that I was about, perhaps, to decide the mystery of my parentage I felt nearly unequal to the command of my feelings. But as my trepidation was natural, I know that my readers will sympathise in it. With a face from which I felt all the blood had retreated and with a forced composure which my trembling hand belied, I handed him the original sketch made for the carriage-painter in Philadelphia, by the gentleman whom I supposed to be my father. He glanced over it with a professional eye and then laying it down repeated as if to himself, `Eagle rampant , serpent couchant \---talon grasping the head. He then turned to the large book and began to throw over the leaves adding, `I ought to know this---seems familiar! Can't think at this moment! Soon see! Very noble family am sure! E, eagle . Here is the letter.' He then ran his finger along the column of E's and arrested it on the word `Eagle!' I had left my place and was looking over his shoulder. The word was set down several times in conjunction with lions, bears, griffins, and then I read `Eagle and Serpent.' `Eagle and Serpent,' he repeated, `page 1009.' `The Eagle and Serpent is the crest of the House of Arlborough,' said an assistant who was writing at the next desk. `It is so! I thought I knew it! I should have recognised it at once! But then we have so many, Mr. Beufort, that it is difficult to keep the line of each running in one's mind without confusion.' `What Arlborough bears this device?' asked Mr. Beufort with interest. `The Duke of Arlborough,' answered the Usher. `Here,' he added, turning the leaves of the folio, `is the representation of the same crest opposite the name of Arlborough. And over against it you see the shield and full arms of the House!' `Is there any other family in England that bears this crest?' asked Mr. Beufort. `None. It belongs to the Arlborough's.' `Then any gentleman bearing this you would set down as belonging to this noble family?' `Unquestionably.' Mr. Beufort looked towards me and smiled encouragingly and well pleased; but I dared not indulge the hopes struggling with a thousand fears in my bosom. `Can you tell me who belong to the existing family of the Duke?' `Every member of it,' answered the Herald confidently; turning to another volume and running his eye over a catalogue of initial letters. He then opened [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174-064.jpg) \- external link  - Page 013. ] to the page to which the list referred, and among numerous names of the house, I discovered, with what emotions I cannot express, that of `FERDINAND RUNDEL ARLBOROUGH,' SECOND SON OF THE DUKE OF ARLBOROUGH, Born January 6, 1802. `That must be he who signed himself F. R. Marlborough. He doubtless perflxed the `M.' for disguise,' said Mr. Beufort. `Is he living now, Mr. Usher?' `He is---but I believe dwells abroad. Some years ago there was a misunderstanding of some kind between him and his father the Duke, and he has resided out of England ever since.' `This fact strengthens your cause, sir,' said Mr. Beufort, turning to me and grasping my hand. `Further investigation will, I am satisfied, prove your near relationship to this person. To-morrow morning,' he added to me as we left the Herald's Hall, not being able to learn any thing further from the Usher, `you shall go with me in my carriage to visit the Duke. I have met him often on committees and am known to him! We will see what we can learn there.' In the morning, therefore, I shall depart from London on this visit. Its result shall be duly communicated by the next packet. Yours truly, `LITTLE MARLBORO'.' [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174-065.jpg) \- external link  - Page 014. ] -  Arlborough Castle August 2, 1844. My last letter, it will be remembered, left me on the eve of my departure for the seat of the Duke of Arlborough in company with my friend Mr. Beaufort, for the purpose of following up the investigation which had terminated at the Herald's office. From the date of the present letter, it will be seen that I write from the place to which we were destined. Yes, within the walls and beneath the roof which I firmly believe to belong to the house of my fathers, I address this letter to those who have taken an interest thus far in my fate. With what emotions too I write! With what a trembling of the hand and throbbing of the heart! Yet all is uncertain and doubtful. Nothing is revealed---nothing established to enable me to decide. Yet enough has been discovered to fill me with hope and to lead me to believe that before twenty-four hours elapse I shall have found out who are my parents! I write in front of a deep gothic window which looks forth upon an extensive park. A league of grand old oaks covering dale and upland stretch away before me, with here and there an open lawn in which deer are browsing. Farther away still, peep from between two green hills a tower and a spire, the latter like a needle of silver pointing man to his home above and indicating to him the way. The tower is a huge ancient pile half-ruinous and marks the site of what was once a cathedral. In the distance swell up blue misty hills with here and there a sharp, bold peak piercing the sky. A glittering river winds through the valley of oaks, and all around is visible one wide scene of beauty. And all this vast domain appertains to the lord of this noble castle, who --- but I forbear to anticipate! Twenty-four hours will reveal all! In twenty-four hours all my hopes will be realised or forever crushed! The room in which I am writing is a noble specimen of the gorgeous chambers of the Elizabethan age. It occupies the interior of a spacious tower, and like it is six sided. It is hung with drapery, which is richly ornamented with the work of the needle, representing field sports, hawking and fishing scenes, and one or two battle subjects in which mounted knights with visors closed are tilting at each other with long lances. The furniture is of a very ancient and imposing character, being of black wood, elaborately carved, the chairs being covered with embroidery. There are little ebony secretaries inlaid with ivory, beaulets, bureaus, desks, supported by the feet of lions, and other articles for which I have no name, all of curious forms and of the most antique and [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174-066.jpg) \- external link  - Page 015. ] elaborate style of construction. There is in particular a large chair in which I am now seated, the back of which rises high above the head and projects over the sitter in the form of a canopy surmounted by a ducal crown. Upon the crown is perched an eagle of gold holding in his talons a serpent which he seems to be in the act of strangling. When I compare the device upon the Silver Bottle, which I always carry with me and now have before me upon the table, with this, I cannot describe the emotions that occupy my bosom. The one is the exact connter-part of the other; and it would be more extraordinary if there should be no connection between the two than if there should prove eventually to be the closest; noble as is the proud family which claims this armorial sign, humble as I am, without name, country or friends! nay, but have I but one friend, Dame Darwell my kind foster-mother! I have another tried friend too in Mr. Beufort! With what anxious, feverish tumult of hopes and fears I look forward to the morrow! I will try to banish this solicitude by recording what has past up to this moment. It was a beautiful morning when we left London. The sun never shone brighter, and I looked upon his enlivening presence as a bright harbinger of the future. After getting clear of the thronged streets, of the crowded suburbs, we entered upon a magnificent turnpike along which our four post horses flew at the rate of twelve miles an hour. We were whirled past countless picturesque country seats which lined the road, some half hid in foliage, others open to the view in the midst of some lawn; others buried deeper in the country amid the stately seclusion of olden parks. Some of them were pointed out to me by Mr. Beufort as the summer abodes of several distinguished men, such as Sir Robert Peel, Lord Brougham, the Earl of Lennox, and others. We also passed in the course of the morning `a box,' as it is called, where Lord Wellington used to sojourn for a few weeks of the season, and also the seat of Lord Cornwallis, who surrendered to Washington. We traversed many quiet villages, picturesque and venerable, with moss grown roofs, centurial trees, and ancient churches, looking, as all English villages look, as if they stood as they stand now in the days of King John and bold Robin Hood. There is a repose and an air of royal peace about these old English villages that are peculiarly inviting, and awaken in the bosom of the observer a hundred agreeable emotions of domestic happiness and seclusion. There were no new frame houses, new fences, piles of lumber about the quiet streets, characteristics of all our growing American villages. The English towns look as if they were built and finished hundreds of years ago. I have now an incident to record of the deepest interest to me as every one will acknowledge who has followed me through my adventures. We arrived at noon to dine and change horses at a pretty rural village, on the banks of one of the loveliest rivers I ever saw---a river that might have adorned the fields of Eden; for lovelier, greener lawns, more majestic oaks, more secluded groves, more shady copses and sunny uplands, more romantic islands, more enchanting meadows with grazing herds and bounding deer, interspersing and animating all, never have been, or will be found on earth.' The inn at which we stopped was a large old rambling pile that had entertained cavalcades of Knights, and as the host informed us, had once in olden [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174-067.jpg) \- external link  - Page 016. ] times the honor of entertaining Queen Bess and her train. It looked large enough to accommodate a hundred persons, yet it was but one story in height, but it covered with its countless out-houses nearly a good English acre. Before the door, over which the eaves of the roof projected full eight feet, grew two enormous and majestic oaks such as Druids in the pagan ages of the Island chose for the scenes of their mystic rites. They flung their gigantic branches not only over two thirds of the moss covered roof of the Inn, but over half the village street. Between them stood a stone pump carved with grotesque visages, and under the spout was a hospitable trough, at which a score of traveler's horses might quench their thirst together. The pump bore the date, in quaint old letters, of 1538. On one of the oaks was a plate, saying that it was planted in 1375. Every thing in England reminds one of the past. In America all that we behold raises in the mind the idea of the future! These two emotions give complexion to the characteristics which distinguish the two nations. We alighted from our carriage and entered the Inn. The host had come out to receive us, and to welcome us with a degree of hospitality in his looks, tones and manner that made us feel at home in his house. I am sorry to say that this manner of receiving travelers is peculiar to the landlords of English Inns. At American country Inns, the traveler if received at all, is received by the ostler who takes his horse. He enters the bar-room and finds several persons seated about. All stare at him, and he looks round for the landlord. Finally he asks for him, and one of the persons in his shirt sleeves seated at his ease among the group, with his feet upon a barrel, it may be, leisurely gets up and replies that he is the personage, with a look as if he did not like to be intruded upon. On the contrary the English host meets you as you descend from your carriage with a smile, escorts you into his best room, with a pleasant word, politely, and looking as if he really desired to make you comfortable, asks what you will have; and while you remain under his roof, he never intermits for a moment his attention to your comfort. But this is a digression. We were ushered into a neat, old fashioned parlor with an oaken floor polished like brass; white curtains draped the little ancient windows, and a fire place, in which an English ox might lie down without inconvenience, occupied half of one side of the room. Comfortable old-fashioned arm chairs, stuffed or cushioned, stood around inviting the weary traveler to rest his body in their capacious and luxurious embrace. We ordered dinner and I walked out to look at the village, and survey the exterior of an Inn which I was told by Mr. Beufort was a fine specimen of the old English hotel. As I passed along the front, I turned to take a view of its root with its numerous angular projections, turrets, and tower-like elevations, when my eyes were arrested by a female figure in one of the windows. The side of the person was turned to me, and a bonnet and veil concealed her face; but my heart bounded with that instinctive recognition in which love is never at fault! I knew that but one person in the world had that air, attitude, and figure! But how could Emma be in England? Yet I was convinced that I beheld her standing in the window. She was in conversation with a gentleman advanced in years.---His face was towards me, and I saw with increased hope that the features were American. At this moment an empty post-chaise drew [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174-068.jpg) \- external link  - Page 017. ] up at the door. She turned and glanced out of the window at it, raising her veil as she did so. It was the lovely face of Emma Field, every lineament of which was engraven upon heart, soul, and memory! I stood transfixed to the spot without power of motion. I was making an effort to realize that I was waking and not dreaming, for such an unexpected vision in England seemed as if it should belong rather to dreams than the realities of life! She directed her eyes towards me, for I was in full view of the window not ten paces off. Perhaps my attitude of surprise and bewilderment led her to observe me attentively. As I felt her gaze upon me the blood mounted to my cheek and brow! Our eyes met. She recognised me with a start and an exclamation! I saw with deep, unutterable joy, that the exclamation was one of pleasurable surprise. She looked a second time, smiled with a blushing, animated countenance, nodded and her lips moved. Her looks, nevertheless, expressed surprise at beholding me; while mine were bent on her filled with adoration and trembling hopes. The Postilions of the coach drawn up at the door now mounted their horses, and at the same moment the American gentleman came forth with a lady I had seen in the coach with Emma in Boston, leaning upon his arm. Emma was following them attended by Russel Carryl. My pride and natural sensitiveness would have led me to shrink from observation, but a nervous desire to know if she really despised me, and wished no longer to recognise one whom I had no doubt she knew to be regarded by men with infamy, led me involuntarily to advance towards her as as she was about to enter the post-chaise. Her foot was upon the step, when she hurriedly glanced around as if in search of some one. Her eyes met mine. They must instinctively have translated their sad and hopeless expression, for she smiled brightly though stealthily upon me with a smile full of hope, for me and my love's daring ambition. The next instant she was borne from my sight seated opposite Russel Carryl! The sight of this young man whose baseness had led me to resign from the Navy, and whom I had even in boyhood battled with on account of Emma Field, the sight of him now in her society, and under circumstances which led me to believe that he was her accepted suitor, (yet why that glance and smile of encouragement towards me from the lovely girl?) filled me with emotions of wretchedness that drove me almost to madness! I believed that he was my rival, my successful rival! else why this intimacy and this travelling in the same carriage? But if he was not her suitor, I felt that he would so paint me to her, whom I loved above all earthly objects, that I should be an object of pity if not of contempt in her eyes. Hitherto he had not poisoned her mind against me, else I should never have felt the sunshine of that parting glance thrilling through and warming my soul. He had not recognised me now. For this I was thankful, for I knew I should not be the victim of his malice while they rode. `Whither were they going?' This thought no sooner occurred to me than I hastened to inquire at the Inn, and ascertained from the host that he had heard one of the postilions say that they were proceeding to London. This incident gave a new turn to my thoughts. I confided the circumstance [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174-069.jpg) \- external link  - Page 018. ] and all the facts to my friend Mr. Beufort as the only explanation I could give him of my change of manner. `Fear nothing,' he said encouragingly. `You will yet triumph over your enemies, and be rewarded with the hand of the maiden you so much prize!' May his words be prophetic! I was now more impatient to bring my investigations to a point. The sight of Emma Field had inspired me with new ambition to succeed, dark and cloudy as the horizon of my hopes with respect to her now seemed to me. But I find I must commence a new letter, this having already been extended to an undue length. Yours very truly, LITTLE MARLBORO'. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174-070.jpg) \- external link  - Page 019. ] -  Arlborough Castle Aug. 2, 1844. For more than half an hour after leaving the Inn, where I had encountered in so remarkable a manner, Miss Field, I sat wrapped in my own thoughts, which Mr. Beufort, (divining their character) suffered me to indulge. I was inspired with new hopes, yet they were darkened even in their brightest aspects by the circumstances under which Emma had crossed my path, as the travelling companion of a man I had so little reason to love as Russell Carryl. Still I hoped , and being of too sanguine and buoyant a temperament to let obstacles stand in my way, I indulged, while I thought of Emma, the happiest visions of the future. But all , all depended on the success of my present mission! This reflection made me more earnest, more resolute in my purpose to clear up the mystery attending my birth. Should I fail after all in proving anything, I felt that the high hopes I entertained, of which Emma was the object, would be forever blasted. But I did not suffer myself to contemplate failure. We rode on through a eharming country, interspersed with villas, castles, and sprinkled with churches, whose spires and turrets everywhere peeping above the green oaks, gave a lively and picturesque aspect to the fair scenes which we beheld from our carriage windows. England may well be called a garden! It is every where beautiful to the eye! But I could not help reflecting as I gazed upon its pleasant vales and quiet villages, its stately country houses and palace-like mansions of her nobles, how many of her children were at that moment excluded from the enjoyment of these fair objects, shut up by thousands in her factories, or immersed by ten thousands in her cavernous mines! I felt that with all her glory, and beauty and power, and greatness, England at last was but a land of taskmasters and slaves; that every ninety nine of her inhabitants were slaves to the one hundredth! And my heart turned instinctively to American, `The land of the free, the home of the brave.' About three in the afternoon, as we rose a hill from which there was a prospect of great beauty and extent, Mr. Beufort said, pointing to a noble castle situated in the midst of the valley, surrounded by a park leagues in circumference, `There, sir, is the seat of the Duke of Arlborough.' I turned my eyes in the direction in which he pointed, with emotions I am unable to describe. I felt my heart bound and my pulse leap. About four miles distant in the midst of a magnificent area of woodland lawn and lake with a back ground of blue moun [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174-071.jpg) \- external link  - Page 020. ] tains, I beheld situated the place of my destination. It looked like a royal seat! like a royal domain. As I surveyed it and let my eyes rove over the towers of churches and the roofs of half concealed villages, and the far distant spires of a large town, all of which Mr. Beufort informed me appertained to this estate, my heart sank within me. I felt that I was daring and foolishly presumptuous in prosecuting the search. I experienced a feeling of self-reproof for letting my wishes to discover my parents suffer me to proceed to such lengths as I had done!---That the proprietor of that princely estate, that the proud Duke of Arlborough should in any way be any thing to me or I to him, a poor obscure American, without name or birth, seemed all at once so preposterous and absurb and altogether so unlikely, that I suddenly laid my hand on Mr. Beufort's wrist and said, `Sir, I feel that I am very foolish! It is impossible that I should be connected with this noble house. The circumstances that have seemed to favor the idea, are only singular coincidence without any reference to my case. My courage fails me, and I am beginning to accuse myself of presumption.' `Your feelings are perhaps quite natural, my young friend,' said Mr. Beufort to me, smiling kindly; `but we must not be governed in this case by feelings. The sight of the Duke's palace has no doubt presented a powerful contrast to your own condition, and you view your situation in its light. But you must take courage! The same motives and circumstances that had such strength in London are equally potent now. Take courage and we shall see that all will, somehow or other turn out as it ought to.' I was in some degree encouraged by his words, and leaning back in the carriage I tried to calm myself and prepare my mind for the events that were to follow. I was at length aroused from my reverie by the stopping of the PostChaise. I looked out of the window and a cry of surprise involnntarily escaped me. Before us was a stately gate-way, above which was an escutcheon, and over it hovered an eagle in stone trampling upon a serpent. It was the very gateway I had seen in my dream. [2] While I was looking at it utterly overcome by this singular circumstance, a man dressed in black came forth from the lodge by the gate for the purpose of throwing it open, when seeing me he started, gazed earnestly upon my features, and then with great respect bowed and opened the gate. This very man in black I had also seen in my dream, to which I request my readers to turn back. We passed through the gate before I could recover myself from my surprise. Mr. Beufort seeing my great emotion, inquired the cause, and I related to him my dream!---He was confounded with wonder. `All,' I said, as I looked out of the window, `is just as I then beheld it. The same noble avenue of trees, the same lake around which the road wound!' This identity so faithful filled me all at once with the most painful alarm; the most distressing fears! for if I had seen the first part of my dream so faithfully realized, should I not also find the tragical termination the same as I had then seen it? I turned pale and trembled with feelings of unutterable anguish. We approached a group of oaks upon a mound. As I beheld it, I said--- [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174-072.jpg) \- external link  - Page 021. ] `Sir, I am fated to find my mother here, and to find her dead! That group of oaks I distinctly call to mind; and to prove to you how vividly all I beheld is impressed upon my mind, we shall, after winding round it, come in sight of a small lake with a fountain in the midst, and after passing round the lake and crossing a lawn bordered by chesnuts we shall come in sight of the Castle! It proved precisely as I had said. Mr. Beufort, as we came in front of the palace, gazed upon me with looks of astonishment. `A Providence seems to be in this, young man,' he said impressively. `Fear not the result.' I could not, however, but fear! The idea that I should prove to be a descendant of this noble House was lost in the reflection that my mother's spirit would depart before I should behold her! This feeling was so strong upon me and had such an effect upon my mind, that when the carriage drew up before the terrace I did not wait to have the door opened by the footman, but throwing it open myself I sprang from the coach and flew up the marble steps of the Portico, up which I had been ushered in my dream! Heedless of the surprised stare of the attendants I rushed into the hall, and lifting my eyes, anticipating what I should see, I beheld at the extremity what I looked for---a bas relief in green marble of an eagle with his claw upon the head of a serpent! The double door beneath it was partly open, and without hesitation I advanced rapidly towards it in hopes that I should at least obtain a parting look---a glance---a word! from my mother's lips before she expired! For so vividly was my dream impressed upon my senses, that I had no doubt that I was hastening to her dying couch. Passing through the doors I entered a circular chamber of great height and splendor. It was hung with tapestry worked in gold thread. I recognised this aparrment at a glance. Even the figures upon the tapestry were familiar to me! How then could I be otherwise than impressed with the idea that I was about to see realized the subsequent portions of my dream? I sought with faltering eyes for the couch upon which I expected to see the dying form of her who I had been told was my mother. The place where the couch stood was occupied by a marble-slab supported by pillars. Upon the slab lay reclined at full length upon her side, as if asleep, the figure of a female exquisitely carved in the purest marble. I stood before it petrified with amazement. The features were those of her I had seen in my dream. `She is dead then! She is entombed!' I cried in unspeakable anguish and sorrow. ` I am too, too late .' At this moment a gentleman entered from a door behind this cenotaph, and without observing me knelt by the side of the marble figure and gazed upon the features with sad tenderness. It was the face and form of the same noble looking gentleman I had seen in my dream! How strange that the dream so frithful in all else should have changed in the substitution of the marble figure for the lonely corpse of the dead; a cenotaph for a couch! When I beheld him enter and saw him kneel, the idea that I had at length found only the tomb of my mother, overwhelmed me with such grief---such a crowd of emotions rushed upon me, that I tell forward and fainted at the base of the cenotaph! When I came to myself I found I was in this chamber from which I write and [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174-073.jpg) \- external link  - Page 022. ] lying upon a bed. By me sat bending over me with solicitude, the kind, friendly Mr. Beufort. Seeing that I was perfectly restored he allowed me to rise and to put to him a series of rapid questions. `It is now three hours since we arrived here,' he said, `and since you rushed so wildly into the castle!' `I owe, sir,' I said mortified, `a thousand apologies to you---but I recognised every thing around me! the portico---the saloon, the chamber containing the cenotaph were all as if I had visited them yesterday' How could I do otherwise than believe I should find my dying mother?' `How extraordinary!' he exclaimed. `In place of the couch of which I spoke to you was the cenotaph! In place of the body of my mother, the marble effigy!---All else was the same, even the gentleman who came in and knelt by it! Oh, sir, was it not all a dream a second time! Did I really see such a gentleman? Tell me all!' `Your entrance into the hall astonished every one who saw you! You were supposed to be insane! I at once divined your object, knowing what I did of your singular dream! I followed you as tast as I could, but we both being unknown to the servants, and our singular mode of entering the castle rousing their suspicions, I was detained by the steward who seized my arm, while others were despatched in pursuit of you!' `How singular my conduct must have appeared!' I said, quite ashamed. `It is all over now and will turn out right. I sent them for the Duke giving my name, and was detained till an usher came and informed me that the Duke was then out, but would return in the morning. I then was about to say I must be permitted to find you, when I heard a cry of alarm, and a call for aid from the circular hall in which you had disappeared. I, at once, with the others, rushed forward, believing some fearful event had occurred touching you. As I entered, I saw a tall man of singular dignity of person clad in mourning bending over you. You were lying perfectly inanimate. I hastened towards you, and as I came to your side I saw the gentleman was regarding you with the most fixed and intense interest. `Is he hurt?' was my first exclamation. `He has fainted, sir,' he answered, without looking up, still regarding your features with extraordinary earnestness; and once I saw him glance from your face to that of the effigy, as if mentally tracing out lines of resemblance!' `It is astonishing, sir,' I said, deeply moved, as Mr. Beufort related this incident. `I am overwhelmed with what I hear each moment! Is it possible I shall at last prove to be related to this family? perhaps to be the son of this noble-looking gentleman! I am lost in amazement!' `He made no effort to resuscitate you,' continued Mr. Beufort, smiling with hope and confidence upon me, `and alarmed for you I took upon me to order the servants to bring water and restoratives. In the meanwhile, I addressed the gentleman in the hearing of all, saying that you were a young friend of mine, who with me had come to see the Duke on business of importance, but that circumstances connected with the visit had rendered you highly nervous, and that you had left the carriage and flown into the castle under a temporary state of nervous impulse which was beyond your control! `This was the best explanation I could offer; and it proved satisfactory to the [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174-074.jpg) \- external link  - Page 023. ] Steward, who immediately ordered a chamber to be prepared for you, and you to be conducted thither. The gentleman had seemed to pay no regard to what I said, but only continued comparing your faco with that of the sculptured female. And on regarding it myself I was struck with the resemblance which had evidently struck him.' `Is it possible,' I exclaimed. `How singular is my destiny being wrought out!' `Wonderfully,' said Mr. Beufort. `I have no question whatever that you are closely related to the Duke or some member of his family' The Steward ordered you to be raised from the marble floor, I saw without asking the gentleman, who silently rising to his feet walked away and disappeared through a door in the rear of the cenotaph!' `The same by which I saw him appear,' I said. `I followed you to this chamber where you were soon revived, and then fell into a deep slumber!' `How long have I slept?' I asked. `Three hours!' `It has refreshed and fully restored me. How strange are all these events! Who is this noble gentleman?' I asked earnestly. `I have not inquired,' answered Mr. Beufort. `I have not left the room since you were conveyed hither. The Duke will be at home early in the morning, and before twenty-four hours we shall know all that regards your fate!' Such were the words of my benevolent friend; and being now quite recovered I urged upon him to go and walk in the Park, while I sat down to write to good Dame Darwell what had occurred; a duty I have done as faithfully as that I have enjoined upon myself in writing these letters. To-morrow, therefore, on the return of the Duke all will be known! I tremble as the cries of my fate approaches. Twenty-four hours may confirm all my hopes, or dash them to the earth forever. Yours truly, `LITTLE MARLBORO'.' [2] See Chapter VIII. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174-075.jpg) \- external link  - Page 024. ] -  Arlborough Castle August 4, 1844. It is with emotions of the deepest gratitude and happiness that I prepare to address this letter to those who have taken sufficient interest in my affairs to follow me through all the vicisitudes which have attended them. I address this letter to such with feelings in which I am persuaded they will deeply sympathise, sharing with me heartily my joys---joys tempered with sadness and tender regrets. In my last letter I said that a few hours would decide whether the web of my destiny would prove to be interwoven with that of the noble family under whose roof I was then a guest. I will proceed with the events subsequent to that letter as they occurred. After I had finished it and sealed it in the same package with one to good Dame Darwell, I sat indulging the train of reflections to which the circumstances of which I found myself the centre naturally gave rise. I sat before the gothic window which looked forth upon the town and park. The evening was just closing upon the lovely woodland landscape; and the light of the room was rich and mellow with the glow of the crimson sky. I thought of the wonderful train of events by which I had been brought beneath the roof where I then found myself! I recalled the wondrous dream and its almost exact realization. Then came sad thoughts which clouded the bright and ambitious hopes that I might yet prove allied to this noble house, sad thoughts if I were proved to be so I should find no mother's smile to welcome back her long lost child!--- This feeling modified the natural pride which would have filled my bosom at the prospect of so noble a lineage. I felt if I could see my mother and be once more embraced by her maternal arms, I would rather find her in a humble cottage, than share the honors of a ducal palace without her!' From these thoughts I dwelt upon the appearance of the noble looking gentleman, and recollected that in my dream he had called himself my father! Could he be so? Would the dream then be realized? If so, who was my father? Why is he in mourning? Why is the cenotaph before which he kneels erected in the very centre of the castle halls? Why did he bend over me with such tenderness? and what connection is there between me and that lovely effigy that he should so earnestly have been engaged in comparing with its lineaments my own? Why did he suddenly resign me with such apathy? Had he been deceived in the resemblance he fancied it excited, and which evidently had first struck him [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174-076.jpg) \- external link  - Page 025. ] on beholding me lying upon the pavement? Was he a person of importance in the house? Why then did the Steward disregard him in removing me from before him without addressing to him a word or look?' Such were the questions I put to myself! Such were the thoughts which filled my mind. Then I let my imagination go forward and revel in power, and rank, and praise of men! In these visions appeared Emma but I could never disassociate her with the hateful form of Russel Carryl! Ever to my imagination he siood smiling triumphantly by her side! Wherefore was she now in England? Suddenly an appalling thought flashed across my mind! I felt the blood leave my heart and fill my brain! My head swam, and the window---the landscape---the room whirled round! Horrible, maddening thought! It was that she was on her bridal tour! that she was Russel Carryl's wife! ' I sprung from my chair! I walked the room till I was in a fever! A knock at the door recalled me to myself. Mr. Beufort entered. He was surprised to see my agitation. I frankly told him the cause; for I kept nothing from him. I poured out all my feelings into his bosom as into the heart of a father or elder brother beloved! His arguments to disprove this notion allayed in a measure my suspicions and greatly modified my fears. I again hoped! To-morrow I felt would decide my fate in respect to my birth, and on the issue depended life and happiness; for it I failed what other lineage could I claim! If I failed how should I dare , branded as I was, appear in her presence as a suitor! I should even shrink before the eye of Carryl. But I will not detain my friends with my feelings. At an early hour I took leave of Mr. Beufort, who sought his room; and being fatigued in body and mind I threw myself immediately upon my bed without undressing. I know not how long I slept, but it was dark and still when I suddenly awoke! A man stood above my couch bending over me with a lamp in his hand, the light of which he cast full upon my face! It was the stranger I had seen in my dream! It was the gentleman whom I had beheld kneel before the marble figure upon the cenotaph! His face was pale and haggard! The dark eyes were unnaturally distended and brilliant. Yet over the whole countenance was a sad, touching, tender expression as if deep grief lay upon his soul. He was steadfastly gazing upon me when I opened my eyes I did not start! I did not feel alarm. I lay passive and regarded him with an interest that left me no room for fear. Sad and sorrowful though it was, a more noble, dignified human countenance I never beheld, and his stature was as commanding as befitted such an aspect! He did not seem to notice that I had opened my eyes. He was speaking as if to himself: `Such, such would he have been! But Heaven has robbed me of my reason that my memory of all the past may perish and I never behold him again! It is her brow! and such was the expression of her mouth! In infancy my boy had it thus, and in manhood thus would he have looked! But I am mad! I am accursed! She sleeps in death and I live as if there were no more death! He opens his eyes and looks upon me, and such eyes were hers! Thus Isidore looked when alive!' I was deeply moved by his words and tone of his voice. They thrilled to my soul. They awakened chords which had never been stirred to the sound of a [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174-077.jpg) \- external link  - Page 026. ] human voice before. Tears came into my eyes I knew not wherefore. But I could not restrain them! A sudden impulse seized me! I felt that I could not resist crying out `my father!' and rising and casting myself at his feet! But I could not stir! I lay powerless, while he steadily regarded me a moment longer, and then slowly turned away and crossing the chamber disappeared by a door near the table at which I had been writing, but before unnoticed by me as it was hid by the tapestry. I was left alone and in darkness! I could not sleep! This incident filled my thoughts and gave them food for hours! That this gentleman was my father I arrived at a suspicion that amounted almost to a certainty! Had I discovered my parents to find one in the tomb , the other mad ? The thought filled me with anguish and horror! At dawn I fell asleep, and three hours afterwards was awaked by the entrance of Mr. Beufort. I told him what had passed during the night, and repeated to him what had been said by the mysterious visitant! Mr. Beufort was for a few moments thoughtful. He then looked up and divining my thought, said, `I see what conclusion you have come to! It is irresistible in my own mind! There is no doubt that you have discovered your father! But who he is, remains yet to be ascertained; but he is, without doubt, of the Arlborough lineage! We shall soon learn all. His Grace is looked for every moment. I have foreborne to make any inquiries, or seek any information till I see him. Breakfast is served in the anti-room to my chamber. Come and take it with me. By the time we get through, the Duke will doubtless be here.' I followed him with heavy and foreboding feelings. The idea that my father might prove a lunatic, my mother no more, filled me with sadness; and qualified materially the pleasure I should otherwise have felt at the prospect of discovering my parentage, and finding myself in alliance with one of the noblest houses in England. I had just completed a hasty meal, when the sound of carriage wheels caught my quick ear. I rose from the table and sprung to the window which over-looked the approach to the Castle. In the avenue was a travelling chariot and two horses with out riders, dashing at speed up to the terrace. Upon the panels of the chariot I saw emblazoned the ducal coronet, and above it the crest, an eagle trampling upon a serpent! My heart throbbed at the near approach of the crisis of my fate! The carriage stopped; the door was opened, and, attended by two footmen, a stout, martial, noble-looking person of sixty-eight or seventy, with locks as white as snow, and plainly dressed in an olive surtout and white hat with a broad brim, got out without assistance. He aided to alight a beautiful girl of twenty and a stately elderly female of sixty still handsome, whom Mr. Beufort, who was now at the window with me, said was the Duchess, whom he had seen often in his ware-rooms in London when he was in business. The younger female from her resemblance, he concluded was a daughter; `Though,' added he, `I am not acquainted with any of the Duke's children, nor do I know what family he and the Duchess has! But we shall know soon. An important era of your life is at hand now, sir,' he said benevolently, seeing that I was becoming a little restless and nervous, `but do not have any fears. I have all confidence in the issue! After the Duke has [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174-078.jpg) \- external link  - Page 027. ] breakfasted, I will ring for a servant and send him my card, with a request to be allowed the honor of an interview with him!' `What shall you first say? How shall you introduce the subject, sir? You are infinite kind to take all this trouble upon you,' I said, filled with gratitude `If I was left to myself, I fear I should illy do my part.' `That same energy which brought you to England would carry you through whatever duty lay before you,' he answered me. `I have confidence in your firmness and strength of character. All you are called upon for now is decision and hope. The issue will be favorable. While he was speaking a servant appeared, and said that the Duke, hearing that two gentlemen from London were in waiting to see him, desired them to be conducted at once to his presence. `This promptness is characteristic of His Grace,' said Mr. Beufort. `In the House of Lords he was always the most active and energetic man there, and could get through more business in an hour than any other person in a day. He is now in his seventieth year, yet has all the vigor and vivacity of forty- five! You need not accompany me, sir,' he said as he was leaving the room. `I will speak with his Grace first alone!' Thus speaking he left me. I know not how I passed the interval of his absence. It seemed to me to be hours. I paced my room! I tried to read! I looked from the window! I busily run over in my fancy all that was transpiring in the progress of the interview on which depended so much! At length I heard Mr. Beufort's foot-step. I flew, and opening the door, admitted him. His face wore a smile that chased a thousand dark thoughts from my mind. He closed the door! I watched his countenance with painful intensity. I dared not open my lips to ask him a single question; yet my bosom was bursting with its fullness! `My young friend,' he said, taking my hand after seating himself, `I have had a most interesting interview with his Grace. He wishes to see you in a little while. In the meantime I will give you an account of what passed between us! I followed the servant down stairs into his Grace's library, where he was seated at a table opening and reading his letters by that morning's mail. On seeing me he laid down a letter he was perusing, and rising, offered me his hand. `Mr. Beufort, I am happy to see you, sir,' he said with that frank cordiality and ease of address which has made him so popular in public life and given such a charm to his social intercourse. `To what lucky circumstance am I indebted for this visit from you. It is not light occasions that brings London gentlemen so far down into the country. It is long since we have met! Time, I am glad to discover, has treated you kindly as well as myself!' `Your Grace,' I replied, `I am most happy to find you enjoying such vigor and health. Time has indeed spared you!' He smiled and said, `Yes; I find I can yet engage in the sports of the field, and sometimes take a five-barred gate still, if I am sure the ground is soft on the other side! Caution comes with old bones and sixteen stone, Mr. Beufort! Sit down sir. You arrived last night, my Steward informs me! `Yes, your Grace. I have come,' I added, thinking it best to bring the subject before him at once, `to see you in reference to a subject of the most [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174-079.jpg) \- external link  - Page 028. ] extraordinary nature, and one in which is deeply involved, the happiness and hopes of an estimable person.' He looked at me with surprise and curiosity, and said courteously, `Proceed, Mr. Beufort. I will hear whatever you have to communicate.' `My lord,' said I, `if I seem bold, and appear to you to tresspass the limits of that courtesy which is due from so humble an individual as myself to one of your exalted rank, I trust you will extend to me your clemency!' `Speak freely, sir,' he answered---`From your manner, I see your business with me is of no trifling import. I will be obliged to you to open the matter freely to me!' `I profoundly thank your Grace,' I replied; and then began by saying, `Your Grace had a son by the name of Ferdinand?' But the reply of the Duke, and the further account of the progress of the interview, I shall leave to another letter. Yours truly, MARLBORO'. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174-080.jpg) \- external link  - Page 029. ] -  Arlborough Castle August 4, 184--- I WILL now proceed to relate the particulars which my good friend Mr. Beufort made known to me touching his interview with the Duke. I will give the account in his own words: `My first question,' said Mr. Beufort, `after being seated, was, as I have just repeated to you. Did your Grace ever have a son by the name of Ferdinand?' I watched his countenance as I asked this question which I had put boldly and at once as being most likely to bring the matter to a point. He became suddenly pale, and I saw was deeply agitated. He fixed his eyes upon me in silence with painful earnestness for a few moments and then said in a broken voice, `Mr. Beufort, be so good, I beseech you, as to explain why you have addressed so unexpected a question to me? I perceive there is something deeper in your motive than mere curiosity.' `I have a very strong motive, your Grace,' I replied; `I am influenced by considerations that intimately concern the happiness and honor of a young friend in whose behalt I have visited you and solicited the honor of this interview! ' `Will you first be so good as to name your motive in making this inquiry?' he asked, still regarding me with intense emotion in his countenance. `It will give me pleasure to do so, your Grace,' I replied, `if you will condescend to listen to me a few moments.' `Proceed, Mr. Beufort,' said the Duke in a low voice, waving his hand to me, and still looking distressed. I then began to relate to him the principal events connected with your being left an infant at the Inn in America, and your subsequent course up to the time I saw you in London, with your hopes, wishes, and researches in reference to your parentage. But I did not mention the tokens by which you were led to believe that you were related to his House. I did not speak of the Silver Bottle, nor of the crest, nor the initials, nor the name you had discovered. I gave him no reason, in the whole narration, to lead him to suppose that your history had any reference to himself or any of his family. He heard me through with patience, and not without interest at times apparent in his countenance; but as I proceeded, the anxiety and agitation disappeared from his expression, and towards the close he had recovered his calmness and ease of manner. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174-081.jpg) \- external link  - Page 030. ] `When I had ended he was silent and thoughtful a moment, and then said, `This relation, Mr. Beufort, is certainly a very interesting one. The young man you say reached London last week in this adventurous search for his family. You told me he had certain tokens by which he hoped to trace his parentage. I trust he will be successful, particularly as you say he is so worthy a person, and, moreover, as you manifest so deep an interest in his welfare. Your object, doubtless, in calling upon me is to enlist my interest in his behalf. I assure you, my dear Mr. Beufort, it will afford me great pleasure if I can in any way favor your views touching your young American friend!' `I am under infinite obligations to your Grace,' I said; `the end I seek can be advanced by your grace, by a reply to the question I put to you. That you had a son of the name of Ferdinand I believe to be true; but I wish to know particularly if he still lives, and if there has been any event of unusual occurrence in his life!' `This is a surprising question, sir?' he said somewhat sternly. `I beg pardon of your grace, but I must be plain and bold to come to what I want.' `I had a son, named Ferdinand, Mr. Beufort,' he said, after a moment's agitation. `He is dead then,' I remarked. The Duke looked keenly at me, and then said in a sorrowful and peculiar tone, `Yes, he is dead, dead , Mr. Beufort!---Why do you interest yourself in him?' `Pardon me, my lord; but I have reason to believe that the destiny of the young American is, in a very intimate relationship, linked with his!' As I made this assertion the Duke fairly started from his chair, and bent his eyes upon me with extraordinary surprise. ` How mean you, sir? Your words seem full of some mysterious meaning.' `I will explain, my lord Duke. If you will deign me a moment's calm attention, you will understand the subject as clearly as I do myself. I hold here in my possession the nursery bottle which was left on the bed with the infant!--- Upon it is a crest doubtless that of the parents of the child. Here is the bottle which the young man has had in his possession from infancy!' I handed it to him. He looked at the crest and was transfixed with amazement. `It is the crest of my house!' he cried with surprise. `Do you say this was left with the child?' `It was, my lord!' `It is very extraordinary" He mused a moment gazing upon it, and then said, looking at me, `On this you base your supposition, that there is some connexion between this young man and my family?' `I do, my lord Duke!' I answered. `It is without doubt a singular comcidence,' he said, `and there are circumstances--- ' Here he suddenly paused, and a deep emotion passed across his features,--- [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174-082.jpg) \- external link  - Page 031. ] `It is singular, sir; but this alone is not enough to prove him to be attached to my house!' `Was Ferdinand, your son, never married?' `Yes,' answered the Duke in a voice of deep agitation, and for a moment he turned his face from me, and hid it in his hands. I was silent till he was composed; but was convinced that there lay at the bottom of all this emotion a secret in which you, my young friend, were most deeply interested. `Did he have any issue?' I asked, seeing him look at me. `No!' he answered. `He had no issue!' `It is very strange,' I said, perplexed at the reply so contrary from the affirmation I looked for. He spoke, too, as if he was not deceiving me, or disguising the truth. `Why is it strange? Why do you refer to Ferdinand in this manner, Mr. Beufort?' `For this reason, my lord. Circumstances lead me to believe that the young American is the child of Ferdinand, and doubtless by a private marriage, unknown to your Grace; I mean a marriage prior to the one to which you have alluded!' I was proceeding when the Duke's expression arrested me. His face became deadly pale, and he breathed quickly, while his lips trembled with powerful emotion. He looked as if some strong and painful recollections of the past were rushing upon him; at the same time I discovered in his countenance what appeared to me to be awakened suspicion of the truth of what I had suggested. Yet I was not sure that I rightly read it! I was moved by his distress and regretted I had gone so far; for I was satisfied that with this son were associated the most painful recollections. At length he said, forcing a calmness I saw he was far from feeling, `I must apologise to you, Mr. Beufort, for this emotion. I can best do it by explaining to you the cause. I feel you are a man of judgment and feeling, Perhaps something yet may come of all this; for your words have awakened in my mind suspicions that I confess may have some foundation. Hear the history of my hapless son, and then let us judge together touching the subject more immediately before us. `I had a son Ferdinand. He was my oldest son. Up to his twenty-seventh year I never knew what it was to grieve for his conduct. He was handsome, intelligent, high-spirited, generous, and devoted to me and his mother. He possessed every grace that could adorn the high rank to which he had been born.--- He was our pride and the honour of our house. It was our wish to have him suitably allied in marriage, and we had selected for him the lady Charlotte Bellingham, the only daughter of the Earl of Neville, a lady of great beauty, and endowed with every charm to fascinate and please, and possessed of every quality that could adorn a wife! She was five years Ferdinand's junior; and we knew that already her prepossessions were in his favor. We one day, without anticipating a refusal, for Ferdinand had long known her, and seemed to be pleased with her society, laid open to him our hearts upon the subject. To our surprise he said firmly that he could never regard Lady Charlotte otherwise than as a sister! After recovering from the first shock of his refusal, I [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174-083.jpg) \- external link  - Page 032. ] endeavored to urge upon him a change of opinion, and to show him that lady Char lotte was the only suitable person by age and rank for his wife in the kingdom, and that it was his duty to marry her. He firmly refused, and at length, to our amazement, informed us that he was privately married to the daughter of a poor baronet who lived not far distant, and a man whom I personally disliked. He gave as the only reason for this step that he loved her, and that he could not be happy out of her society, and that he would not purchase his own happiness by her personal degradation. I threatened him with the displeasure of the King, with immediate disinheritance in favor of his next brother, unless he at once consented to a divorce; for this ill-advised union as you are well aware, Mr. Beufort, was far beneath him, and it was my duty to annul it by the exercise of my authority. He at once manifested a spirit of independence that surprised and grieved us, and said that he would rather resign his rank than his wife! Finding it impossible to prevail upon him, I dropped the subject. But, in the meanwhile, I formed secretly a plan for separating them, by sending her away privately to the Continent, where he should never hear of her again, trusting time would cause him to forget this foolish passion!' `Was the lady young and beautiful?' I asked. `There was no fault to find with her youth or beauty, save that to her charms was owing all this mischief. She was also of good temper and a well-cultivated mind. But still she was no equal for the heir of Arlborough. By some means Ferdinand discovered our plot, and defeated it by flying with his wife to the continent. There, being found out by my spies, he fled France, and, as we supposed, went to Italy!' `He may instead have gone to America,' I said quickly. `I have had reason to believe that while he was supposed to be secreted in Italy he was in America. What you have said has deepened this impression! At length weary of persecuting my son, for he was still loved, I wrote to his last address promising to restore him to favor and his rank, provided he had yet no issue; for none of the blood of Sir Richard --- should inherit the ducal crown of my house. My chief object in inducing him to return to England was with the hope that I should yet be able to induce his wife by large sums of money to leave him forever. But I saw that if he had issue, their union would be yet more closely cemented.' `And did he return?' I asked earnestly. `Yes. Within three months after my letter was written he appeared in England and came to visit me. To my question if he had any heir, his reply was, I and my wife, my lord Duke, are alone in England. Your letter reached me where I was self-exiled, and I accepted the terms. I am not insensible to the rank and dignity of my birth and condition. I am proud of its honors. The name of my fathers is precious to me. But I should feel unworthy to inherit or to wear either if I could prove false to the lovely and confiding woman who has in hour and trust given her hand and heart to me! Receive us both, my lord, or receive neither of us! If I am to be honored as your son, honor her as your daughter; otherwise we once more leave England, and leave it forever!' `I felt it my duty for the present to assent to his views, and he and his wife became inmates of the castle. But there was a settled sadness visible upon her [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174-084.jpg) \- external link  - Page 033. ] countenance. She seldom smiled. If she had not been the daughter of Sir Richard --- I should have felt interested in her; but as to this was added the fact that she was the cause of our disappointment in the alliance we contemplated for Ferdinand, she was regarded by us with coldness and displeasure that I now feel,' added the Duke with a tremulous voice, `deeply sorry for. Day by day she failed, and seemed rapidly approaching the grave.' `Doubtless the reflection that she had marred the high hopes of your House,' I said to the Duke, as he paused as if checked by emotion; `preyed upon her mind and brought on a decline!' Yes, and something evidently deeper still was upon her heart,' said the Duke huskily. `Well, she died! Ferdinand up to the moment of her death had watched over her with a devotion that was most lovely to contemplate. As I regarded his tender devotion I almost repented my harshness to her; but this feeling it was necessary to sacrifice to those higher ones which affected the honor of my house. She died! From that moment a change came over the mind of the widowed husband. He seemed to have buried his heart with her in the grave. He would not quit the chapel where she lay entombed, and food had to be brought to him or he would have perished. He spoke to no one! He answered no questions! He did not smile! When I would approach him, he would fix his haggard eyes sternly upon me, and with one hand pointing to her tomb and the fore finger of the other raised to heaven, seemed to arraign me before the tribunal of the Almighty as her murderer!' -  Arlborough Castle August, 4th, 1844. ` When the Duke had thus spoken,' continued Mr. Beufort, `he buried his face in his hands, sighed heavily, and seemed to be overcome with the most touching anguish. There was a few moment's silence: and when at length he raised his head and looked at me I saw he was deadly pale. `You see me, sir, a wretched man,' he said bitterly. `I can never forgive myself the wrong done that innocent wife. I am punished in my son! He is a maniac, sir! not fierce and intractable, but quiet, touching, gentle. As he would not leave the tomb where his wife lay buried, I caused to be erected the cenotaph which you beheld in the circular hall, to draw him from it I succeeded. Near it he has a room which he only leaves to kneel almost every hour before the marble figure of her he loved so well. It is so long,' continued the Duke after a sorrowful pause, `it is so long since these events occurred that my son is supposed to be dead, for no one sees him. He receives from me every attention and kindness, but seems to regard me with cold indifferene. It was he whom you beheld bending over the young man.' `I then related to the Duke what I had observed,' continued Mr. Beufort, `and how he seemed to be comparing your features with that of the marble face. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174-085.jpg) \- external link  - Page 034. ] At this the Duke started and regarding me fixedly, oried--- `Is it possible, Mr. Beufort that there was a resemblance?' `There was a very close one, your grace. I was struck with it.' `Then what do you think---what do you suppose this young man is in whom both you and my son have taken such an interest?' `I have no doubt, your Grace,' I answered, `that he is the child of Lord Ferdinand, your son!' `It cannot be. They had no child!' `They may have withheld, and doubtless did conceal from you the fact they had any offspring when we recall the condition upon which your son was to be re-instated. I have no doubt, my lord duke, that a son was born to them and that he was left in the charge of this hostess of the Silver Bottle Inn. In a word, the child whose history I have previously given you, is unquestionably their son. They left him in America probably with the intention at some early period to reclaim him; but the early death of the mother and the madness of the father prevented the fulfilment of their wishes. The child, therefore, remained and grew up to a young man, when circumstances combined to induce him to make efforts to ascertain his parentage. You have before you the Silver Bottle left with him. Here is the sketch of the coat of arms made for the carriage. On the back you see is a torn address to F. R. Mar---. All the other circumstances unite with t hese to prove this young man's title to your name and blood!' The Duke remained silent and thoughtful, and I could see that he was deeply moved. Suddenly he rose up and said impressively--- `Mr. Beufort, if I could think this young gentleman should turn out to be my grandson, I should be perfectly happy. I would acknowledge him with joy. You say he his in the house. Let me see him. I would behold him!--- Hasten and bring him hither!' `I then left the library,' continued Mr. Beufort. `and came hither to seek you! You must prepare yourself, my friend, for the interview. It is evident that on your resemblance to his son your acknowledgment by him will depend. He is satisfied, as far as the circumstantial evidence goes, that you may be the son of Lord Ferdmand. Come with me and take courage!' I took Mr. Beufort's arm, and, trembling with deep feeling, for I was greatly agitated, as upon this interview hung all my hopes, I accompanied him through a long arched gallery elegantly sculptured and adorned with paintings and statuary. At its extremity we stopped before a door at which Mr. Beufort knocked lightly. `Enter,' said the voice of the Duke. The sound sent the blood from my heart to my brain like lightning. Mr. Beufort opened the door and I entered with him into the presence of the venerable nobleman. He was standing in the middle of the room and had his eyes fixed stedfastly in the direction of the door. As I entered and he saw me clearly, he clasped his hands together and uttered an exclamation of mingled amazement aud joy. `It is---it is my son. It is Ferdinand. Come hither and let me see thee more fully. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174-086.jpg) \- external link  - Page 035. ] I advanced and impulsively knelt before him. He gazed upon me a few moments with deep earnestness and then bending down took my hands and bade me rise that he might embrace me. He folded me to his heart and his tears bedewed my cheeks mingling with my own. At length he became composed; and leading me to a seat bade me to sit down, while he took a seat close by my side and held my hand in his. In this manner he sat and studied the lineaments of my countenance. Finally, he turned to Mr. Beaufort and said--- `I am satisfied, sir. He looks like my son at his age. One is the other's counterpart! I also see about the mouth the likeness of that injured woman, his mother! Young man,' he sald, addressing me, `I have heard all your story and am convinced that you are my own blood!' `And my father---my mother, sir?' I asked eagerly. `Is it true that I shall never behold them?' `She, alas, is no more. He is alive, but he cannot know you. He knows no one. I will be to thee in his stead, my child! But this is sad talking. Let me hear you relate your history! I would know all from your own lips.' As soon as I was able to compose myself, I proceeded to give him a brief account of the circumstances of my life, as they have been made known to the reader. He listened attentively for full two hours. When I had ended he knelt down and lifting his hands thanked God for vouchsafing to him in his old age so great a blessing as beholding the child of her who had died beneath his roof, that he might atone in him for the wrong of which she had been the innocent victim. He then warmly embraced me; and taking Mr. Beufort by the hand thanked him with the most grateful sincerity and fervor for the deep interest he had taken in my fortunes, and for placing in his possession one so long an exile from the house of his ancestors. My feelings at this happy crisis of my fortunes I will not attempt to describe. I was full of joy, gratitude, hope and love. I found it difficult to realize the truth, and had to make an effort to convince my reason that all was real and not a dream. At length the full force of my happiness rushed upon me, mingled with which were the loved features of Emma Field, and I wept for very joy. There was now no obstacle to my love. How did my heart throb with impatience to throw myself at her feet and assure her that I was no longer unworthy of her, an adventurer without name or birth! In the meanwhile the Duke and Mr. Beufort were talking together. `It is possible his father, Lord Ferdinand, may recognize him,' said Mr. Beufort. `The trial shall be made! You say he was comparing his features with that of the effigy upon the sarcophagus?' `Yes, my lord.' `Then an interest has been awakened. It is as you say, barely possible the son may succeed in drawing him out of himself. They must meet.' `It were best to let our noble young friend enter the vestibule as if by accidentt, and when he comes forth to kneel beside the sarcophagus, as he is wont to do, to let himself be seen. I have no doubt that from the intelligence and memory the sight of him before awakened in him that by judicious [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174-087.jpg) \- external link  - Page 036. ] management he might gradually be brought out of himself and restored to his intellect. Like things have been in the history of lunacy, my lord.' `It is too much to hope for,' answered the Duke. `I will do all that my heart and filial love can dictate,' I answered earnestly. `If lord Ferdinand could be restored by any means, his acknowledgment of having left an infant son in America would forever put to silence every doubt. I do not question this dear young man's right to my name and lineage, Mr. Beufort. I freely and will openly acknowledge him my grandson. He bears the impress of his ancestral name upon his brow and form. He who looks upon him will bear witness he is an Arlborough. No, Mr. Beufort, I only desire, as you must, the seal of this confirmation, which none can give but my poor Ferdinand. Shall we make the trial to-day? This evening, at sundown, he will be sure to be kneeling there. Perhaps then will be the best time to make trial of the effect his son may have upon him. If the Interest he took in him at first arose from broken and confused images of memory it is probable they may a second time unite, and link, and form a continuous chain from the past to the present. It may prove the key to the restoration of his reason.' `God grant it may, my lord,' answered Mr. Beufort, to which I devoutly responded an audible `Amen' from my soul's depths. This evening, therefore, I am to make the trial to endeavor to obtain my father's recognition. I tiemble lest all should prove vain, and I shall be unknown to him for ever. Alas? for my mother, I have already wept bitter tears. To feel her maternal heart throbbing against mine would give me more joy than to have bound upon my brow the ducal coronet of my ancestors. -  Arlbororough Castle August 4, 184---. I have now to record one of the most interesting events of my life, and one which has been to me the cause of infinite happiness and gratitude. In a word, I have been recognized and acknowledged by my father! His reason at my interview returned, and --- But I anticipate the narrative of the circumstances, and will at once proceed to relate them as I promised in my last letter. It will be remembered that the time set for me to see him was at the hour of sunset, at which season it had been long his custom to leave his private chamber adjoining the cenotaph and kneel beside it as if in worship. As the moment approached in which I was to make this trial, in its results so interesting to me, I became greatly agitated, and feared that my feelings would so far overcome me as to render it impossible to go through with the painful scene I had to enter upon. At length the shadows of the setting day began to gather upon the woodlands, and the last lingering glow of sunlight fade from the edges of the hills, and the moment of trial was at hand! [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174-088.jpg) \- external link  - Page 037. ] His Grace came to me and taking me by the hand embraced me like a father, and then, attended by Mr. Beufort, we left my chamber and proceeded towards the hall of the cenotaph. At the outer door the two gentlemen remained, and opening the door I entered alone, leaving it ajar, that they might be spectators of what ensued. The saloon was unoccupied, for it wanted yet three minutes to the vesper hour. I had intentionally come in before him, that I might better compose myself for the part I had to act in this interesting affair. With feelings that I find it impossible to describe I slowly approached the cenotaph, and kneeling reverently by its side, I gazed with awe and filial tenderness upon the marble resemblance of her who I believed to be my mother. As I gazed I insensibly forgot my object in being there, and with tears in my eyes and clasped hands I let my thoughts wander to the past days of her unhappiness, and in recalling these I then ceased to regret that she had passed away to scenes of unalloyed enjoyment. In my imagination also, I began to invest the white, cold and immoveable marble with the hues and motion of life, till I seemed to be kneeling by the side of her who only slept, and whom a touch, a whisper from her child would awaken.---Impressed with this feeling, I impulsively extended my hand and laid it lightly upon her clasped fingers, and said in a voice that startled myself for its depth and intensity of mingled love and grief, `Mother! mother, arise! It is your son who calls you!' At this moment I heard a step, and looking up beheld gazing down upon me across the cenotaph, Lord Ferdinand! He stood looking calm, sorrowful, and yet fearfully stern, his tall person and dignified air giving him an appearance at once lofty and commanding. I was instantly recalled to a sense of the task before me, and my self-possession returned. I saw his eye was fixed upon me with a look of mingled wonder and anger. He surveyed me, as I kneeled, for some moments in silence! At length he addressed me in a voice that thrilled to my soul---for nature told me that it was the voice of my father: `Who art thou that darest to kneel by this sacred shrine? Who art thou that callest upon the dead? Speak! This spot is sacred, and he who profanes it must purify it with his blood! Say, who art thou?' `Father!' I answered, scarcely able to articulate the word from the strength of my emotions, which well nigh suffocated me. ` Father! ' he repeated slowly; and thrice he repeated the word, each time with increased bitterness. `Yes, I had a father! But I will not tell to strange ears the tale! No! I had a wife, too! Oh, such a wife! Angels did love her while yet she lived, and angels are her companions now!' And elevating his finger he remained a few moments silently and impressively pointing heavenward. All at once he cried in a voice of thunder, `But who art thou that darest to kneel here?' `Her child!' `Her child! Ha, ha, ha!' and he laughed wildly and fiercely. The expression of his features was truly terrible. `Yes, she had a child! But --- but --- [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174-089.jpg) \- external link  - Page 038. ] Oh, my poor mad brain! Oh, thou Duke! Thou --- but hist! he is my father! I may not speak against him. She lies here now! Oh how full of gentleness and joy was thy spirit, my beloved! How soft with love beamed thy eyes upon me, how like chords of a well-tuned harp my heart-strings sounded the touches of thy gentle words! But thou livest now only in memory!' `She was very lovely, my lord?' I said, seeing him pause and gaze with sorrowful tenderness upon the beauteous features of the marble face, wishing to draw him to converse with me. `Her countenance, fair as thou seest it there, was but a rude mirror imperfectly reflecting the divine beauty of her soul!' `My lord, you said but now she was a mother! What became of her child? `Did I say she was a mother?' he cried hoarsely. `Hush then, and do not repeat it! It must be kept a secret! The dukedom rests upon it! Aye it does hang upon it! Be silent, if thou knowest it! By and by he will be found, and then upon his noble brow I will place the coronet of his house! But hush! It must not be breathed to the winds! She who lies there, and I are sole keepers of the secret!' The loud, cautious, impressive voice in which he spoke this thrilled to my soul. Every word was overheard by the Duke and Mr. Beufort, for though he spoke in a whisper, it was singularly deep and distinct, reaching the remotest corner of the saloon. While he was speaking he came round the cenotaph and stood by my side. I still knelt; for in such a presence! my mad father and my mother's shade! I could only kneel in awe. `I will keep the secret, my lord!' `I know that you may be trusted. I know thee not, nor why thou art here; but there is a spirit looks out through thine eyes that I love!' `Where, my lord, is your child?' I asked, with as much composure and firmness as I could command. `Breathe it not above thy breath!' he said, seating himself upon the pedestal of the cenotaph and laying his hand impressively upon my arm, while his eyes surveyed me with a peculiar intensity mingled with kindness that seemed to me to be parental, though he himself was unconscious of the source of this regard. `I had a boy! A brave, beautiful boy! He was an infant! I saw him only as an infant, but he is gone! gone! gone too? ' This was uttered with the most touching melancholy. `Dead?' I asked with my heart on my lips. `Dead! Yes, dead,' he replied, speaking to himself rather than to me. `Are not the lost dead? Yes, he is dead, for I know not where he is! My poor, cracked brain! I cannot guide its thoughts or memories! When I would think, all becomes chaos! Oh, if I could remember where! I should not be mad.' He rose up and walked to and fro before the shrine, his hands clasped across his forehead, and his face eloquent with the anguish of the bitterest woe. I rose, also, and gently placed my hand upon his arm: for I knew I held the key--- the talisman---which if properly used would unlock the store-house of [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174-090.jpg) \- external link  - Page 039. ] memory. I felt that if he could once be brought to a certain definite point of past time so as to recognise it, he could then be led down to the present moment, and reason would once more recover her lost path. `My lord,' I said, in the kindest tones I could assume, `you have been pleased to regard me with favor! Will you suffer me to hold a few words of conversation with you?' He looked me steadfastly in the face and then smiling with an affection in his glance that brought tears to my eyes, answered, `Yes, I will listen to you, for you speak to me in the tones of her I loved! Speak! but I will gaze on you, for you look upon me with the eyes of my beloved! ' `My lord,' I said, `I will speak of your son.' ` Softly , though,' he said, with an air of fear. `Softly; for this must be known only to us three! Did I not tell thee how the Dukedom hangs upon it! No, it must not be known! But I care not for the Dukedom! I did once, and did wickedly by deserting my poor boy! hoping to get him again; but God has punished me in taking away my memory. Dost thou know, young man, I am mad for the cause that I have forgotten where we left our boy! Sometimes I fancy 'twas at an Inn in the vallies of Switzerland; then I think 'twas in an auberge in the South of France! Then again I am persuaded he was drowned in the Atlantic.' He said this with a painful expression of perplexity and grief upon his haggard yet noble countenance. `You crossed the Atlantic then, my lord?' I asked eagerly. `I forget---methinks we were cast away and lost on the voyage! I remember a great storm! Yet, no! if we had been lost I had not been here, you know, nor she there .' [It will have been observed that in alluding to his wife, that he invariably seemed to regard her as actually before him in the cenotaph] `But my poor brain wanders!' and he placed his hand to his brow. `My lord,' I said taking his hand and seating him upon the pedestal, `I will tell you a tale.' `Marry, I should be right glad to listen! I could listen and look in thine eyes forever.' `In America, my lord, twenty-six years ago, there drew up to a small inn not far from Boston, a carriage, containing a gentleman and his wife, both in mourning. Does my lord listen?' I received no reply, but with both hands he laid a firm grasp upon my wrist and rivetted his eyes earnestly upon my face. `The carriage was yellow and driven by a negro man! They alighted, this gentleman and lady, who seemed overcome with grief. They entered the inn and were followed to a distant chamber by the negro, who carried beneath his arm a covered basket, about the safety of which the lady seemed to be very watchful, giving the man many an anxious and careful caution. They remained an hour or two and then ordering their carriage, though it was already [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174-091.jpg) \- external link  - Page 040. ] sun-set, they left the inn, taking the basket with them. But now comes the point of my story, my lord. An hour after their departure, the landlady hearing the cry of an infant followed the sound and entering the room they had left, found lying upon the bed---' `A child? An infant? a boy?--- my boy! Her son!' cried out lord Ferdidinand, catching the words from my mouth and speaking in a loud and terribly excited tone, a tone in which the wildest joy was mingled with trembling hopes. I had watched the glad dawning of intelligence as I spoke, diffusing slowly yet surely, the light of intelligence over the night of reason and oblivion. I had seen with joy, the progressive unfolding of the portals of his memory, and anticipated the certain recognition which followed. `It was a male infant, my lord, and doubtless left by travellers. In its hands it held grasped this Silver Bottle.' As I said this I drew from my bosom the bottle and placed it in his hands. He looked at it a few moments with an indescribable expression, or rather crowd of expressions upon his face; for his countenance underwent surprising changes as he held it. Slowly he sank upon his knees and lifting his hands to heaven he bowed his head with a look of inexpressible gratitude upon his breast, and said in a voice I shall never forget, `God, I thank thee?' He remained silent a few moments, and then rising turned to me and said in words broken by emotion--- `And the child---the child---the infant? Did---did---it live? ' `It did, my lord---it lives still!' `Still! Oh, tell me where! tell me that I may fly to him! He is my child! He is her son! Heaven has sent thee here to throw the light of memory upon my shattered brain, and I once more behold the past. That gentleman and lady were myself and she who sleeps there! We did wickedly in deserting our little one, but we knew in whose kindly hands we left it, hoping in a few short months to have it restored! But the wickedness of those who compelled us to this step is greater far. And I, in my ambition, did urge thee to it, gentle wife! But I know thy gentle spirit forgave me ere it fled!' He paused, overcome with inward feelings. At length he raised his head and said earnestly, `You tell me my boy lives!' `He does, my lord!' I answered scarcely audible, and trembling with the deepest emotion. `Where? I will fly to embrace him. I will kneel at his feet and implore his pardon. Tell me where my boy is: my child . That I may fly to his embrace! ' ` Here , my noble lord! here , my father! Behold! your son kneels to you for your blessing!  ' He gazed upon me for a moment with the light of instinctive recognition growing brighter and clearer in his parental eyes and then, with a loud cry, cast himself into my arms. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174-092.jpg) \- external link  - Page 041. ] The author of `Silver Bottle' to the reader: Dear Reader , Having, in the last chapter, brought our story down to that point where our hero is recognized and acknowledged by his father, we shall now pursue the narrative in our own words, `Little Marlboro' having with this event , closed his correspondence. After his extraordinary recognition by his father of his claim there remained no doubt whatever of its validity in the mind of the Duke, if there had been any before. He was acknowledged by him with new testimonials of affection; and lord Ferdinand, entirely restored to his reason, tenderly embraced the Duke, and then in a very clear manner gave a full account of the circumstances connected with the desertion of his infant. `It was my fault and my crime ,' he said with emotion. `My lovely wife with tears, entreated me to regard more my child's and her happiness than the rank and title, with the loss of which I was threatened. But too ambitious, yet loving my wife and infant with the deepest tenderness, I urged the step we finally took, though it nearly broke her heart. We then returned to England, and---the rest is known!' Lord Ferdinand then embraced his son, and it being noised that a son of Lord Ferdinand had arrived and that he recovered his reason on seeing him, the castle was filled with the greatest rejoicings. After the lapse of a week spent in congratulations and festivities, during which time our hero, `Little Marlborough,' had been re-baptized by the name of Henry Frederick , Mr. Beufort said that it was now full time for him to return to London. He said he had never been so happy in his life and should always congratulate himself on having been instrumental in bringing about so much joy. Our hero having now been fully recognized to be the son of Lord Ferdinand and his claim to the title unquestionable, it is to be presumed that he experienced that high degree of happiness that must necessarily flow from the favorable result of his long and persevering researches after his parentage. The high rank he had acquired, the elevated position in society he all at once found himself in, did not so much fill him with gratification, as the reflection that it rendered him worthy of her whose love had been the guiding star of his wandering barque through all his reveries. Of the beautiful Emma Field he first thought, and he felt that his happiness could not be perfect unless shared by her. He therefore resolved to obtain permission of his newly recovered friends, and, in company with Mr. Beufort, visit London.--- Reluctant as the Duke and his father were to part with him, they finally consented on the condition that he would be absent but a week. `If you are away longer than that, my lord Henry,' said his Grace, `I and your father will be posting up to London after you. But as you say you have [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174-093.jpg) \- external link  - Page 042. ] some private businets you desire to transact before you appear before the world in your own proper rank, go with Mr. Beufort. By the by, Mr. Beufort I wish you to be my grandson's banker to any amount he may require while in London, and pray, my good lord, take care of your health. We have found you too recently to lose you again!' `I assure your grace,' answered lord Henry, `that I shall do nothing that may bring upon me the reproof of those to whom I owe so much! Farewell, my honored father! I trust on my return your health will be quite restored. Nothing but the most pressing affairs would draw me from you at this time!' Taking a tender farewell of these and others of the family who were present, lord Henry sprung into the carriage which was in waiting. He saw that its pannels bore the crest of an eagle strangling a serpent; and his bosom glowed with pride and gratitude that he was now no longer a wanderer without any other clue to his family than the Silver Bottle and its device. After a rapid and pleasant journey they reached London. As they were entering the metropolis Mr. Beufort said, `Now, my lord, as you have frankly told me that you have come to town to find out your American beauty, what are your first movements?' `To ascertain where she is---seek her, declare my passion, and if she will make me so happy, I will make her my wife!' `If you find she is engaged or really married to Mr. Russel Carryl?' `Impossible! I am convinced their meeting was the merest accident. He could never be any thing to her!' `Well, there is no doubt now that you will eclipse him!' `I do not intend to do it by my rank and title, Mr. Beufort. I mean to keep them secret from her!' `And if she accepts you?' `Declare then my true name and rank!' `If she refuses, you can also declare them, and no doubt greatly to her vexation! ' `Do not speak of refusal. I am persuaded I have an interest in her heart. She knows my past history, and the cloud that hung over my name has been the only obstacle both to her more open demonstrations of affection as well as it has been of my own!' `If such is your intended course, my lord, you had best drive, as the coach is yours and bears your arms, to the C--- Hotel in Regent street, and put up there under your proper title and rank. You need not be seen, but take private rooms and remain in them till I can ascertain for you where about your American friends are putting up. I will go about it at once, as soon as we reach London. Possibly they may be at the C---. We can inquire as we drive there!' Shortly after this conversation, the travelling carriage of the Duke of A--- was announced as being drawn up before the door of the C--- Hotel. The excitement among the servants and so up to the proprietor was in proportion [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174-094.jpg) \- external link  - Page 043. ] with the rank of the personage named. From it alighted not the Duke, but a young gentlemen and an elderly gentleman, in whom the host recognized Mr. Beufort. `I thought my lord Duke had honored us,' said the proprietor looking a little disappointed. `Not the Duke in person, but his grand-son, lord Henry.' answered Mr. Beufort. `He has been absent abroad for years, and but recently returned!' This explanation was sufficient. Lord Henry was ushered into the hotel, and escorted to the finest suit of apartments; and it was not long before it was known to most of the nobility sojourning in the C---, that a grandson of the Duke of A--- had arrived in England and was then in the house. Lord Henry kept himself very close for the remainder of the day, leaving his good friend Mr. Beufort, to make such inquiries touching the Field family as would be necessary, he being better acquainted with London, and more likely to be successful; besides our hero did not wish to appear abroad as lord Henry A--- until he had seen Emma. About eight o'clock in the evening a servant entered and said with that profound respect characteristic of English footmen in addresing titled personages, `My lord, a gentleman below desires an interview. He had no card, but he gave his name as Buffet!' `Mr. Beufort! Show him up!' `I will, my lord!' Our hero's heart throbbed violently during the absence of the servant; for he expected that his friend was the bearer of news, from the party in which he was so much interested. The next moment Mr. Beufort entered, and lord Henry saw at a glance that he had pleasant news. `You have seen them?' `Yes, my lord. But sit down and I will tell you all about it. After some little inquiry I learned that the family you seek, were at No. --- R --- Terrace. Thither I drove at once, and as it was a hotel, I alighted and went in. I soon found that the party consisted of Colonel Field and lady, Miss Field, and Mr. Russel Carryl!' Lord Henry turned pale and bit his lips, while he took a quick turn across the room and back again. He then repeated impressively, ` Miss Field! They are not married!' `Be calm, my friend. You have nothing to fear from that quarter!' `Are you sure?' cried lord Henry earnestly. `Quite. I will tell you how I learned. Taking advantage of my years, I thought I would call upon the lady in person, and have a quiet tete a tete! I first, however, ascertained that her father and mother had gone out. I then sent up my name to see him, closely following upon the heels of the servant. On opening the parlor door and announcing me, a piano which was playing ceased, and I heard a very sweet, pleasant young lady's voice reply, that her father had gone out, but would return in half an hour. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174-095.jpg) \- external link  - Page 044. ] `I will then, with your permission, Miss, wait his return, I said, entering the room. Seeing my grey hairs, and doubtless observing that I had a respectable appearance, at least that I didn't look like a burglar, she rose and politely invited me to be seated!' `Emma! beautiful, charming Emma! Oh, how greatly do I envy you, my dear Mr. Beaufort, the having been in her presence.' `We soon entered into conversation, and I must give you credit, my lord, for excellent taste and judgment; for a young person of greater personal charms or a more cultivated mind, I have rarely seen. From one thing to another I led her on, till I learned that they were travelling for the benefit of her father's health, and had been in England two months, and were in a few days to leave for Paris!' `Not if I have the eloquence and influence to detain her,' said our hero very positively. `Perhaps it will turn out that you have, my lord,' answered Mr. Beufort, smiling. `I then remarked that there were many Americans in England, and that I had recently met with one, a young gentleman in whom I had been deeply interested. I saw at once by her countenance that she was thinking of you, for love's object is always uppermost in the thoughts. `Of whom do you speak, sir?' she asked, coloring, and her voice slightly tremulous, as if she feared, yet hoped I should name you!' `Me? Oh, could it be that I held such quick place in her thoughts! Ah, Mr. Beufort, I dare not hope!' `Hear me, and then judge, my lord. I answered her, that the young gentleman I alluded to had, when an infant, been left by his parents at an Inn in America, near Boston, kept by a certain Dame Darwell. That this good woman had reared him as her own son: but that having come of age, and through rivalry, having incurred the hostility of a young man of wealth and birth, he had been defamed by him as a person of infamous birth! This fired the young man to seek proof of his lineage; and after various adventures, he was led by circumstances to visit England, believing he should here find what he sought, viz., proofs of his honorable birth. One chief motive that spurred him on,' I added, seeing that she listened with the deepest and most earnest attention, as if she was aware I spoke of you, `one chief motive that led him to make such exertions to discover his parents was love! ' `Love?' she repeated with a glowing cheek, and with an animated manner, that showed how profoundly her senses were enlisted in my words. `Yes, lady,' I answered. `He had from earliest youth loved a beautiful maiden, and this love grew with years, till manhood confirmed his passion, and it became part and parcel of his being. He at length would have woed her, and doubtless would have won her, for he was worthy of her; but that cloud upon his birth, darkened by the gratuitous calumnies of a rival deterred him; and hiding his deep love in the secret chambers of his own bosom, he went forth to seek for proof to confute this calumny, and clear his name from an imputed stain which would else forever bar him from seeking an honorable alliance with the idol of his soul. His researches, as I have said, brought him to Enaland, where a singular circumstance connected with his search, brought me in contact with him!' [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174-096.jpg) \- external link  - Page 045. ] `His name, sir?' she gasped, clasping her hands together, and bending earnestly towards me. `Marlboro' Darwell!' `The same!' she answered; and turning deadly pale (for she had been alarmingly red and pale by times, as I was speaking, I had to support her with my arm to save her from falling. She soon revived and said, with an embarrassment that made her most interesting. `Pardon me, sir! I suffered my feelings for a moment to get the better of me! Your narrative has interested me. But, sir, did --- (here she hesitated, and then continued with greater firmness), did this young gentleman tell you who--- who \---.' She stopped short. But I finished the sentence for her, by saying, `Who the young lady was?' Yes, the lady. But I don't know that I ought to tell it. But as I trust you will keep the secret, I will divulge it. There it is!' And I placed in her hands one of her own cards , which I had taken up from the table. She blushed as crimson as a peony at sun-rise, and then the bright tears, like great globules of dew rolled sparkling over her cheeks. She smiled through them a moment afterwards, and said sweetly, `Sir, I do not know, but as you are a friend to Mr. Darwell, you shall be my friend. I freely confess to you that ---.' `What?' cried lord Henry, rising, and seizing his friend by both hands. `Sit down, good, my lord, and you shall learn,' answered Mr. Beufort, smiling. Lord Henry re-seated himself and remained as composed as he could, while Mr. Beufort thus continued: `Said she to me, `As you, sir, are Mr. Darwell's friend I will also regard you as mine. Frankly, sir, I confess to you that he is a person by no means indifferent to me. I have long entertained the kindest feelings towards him.' `Said she so much in so many words, sir?' cried our hero. `In so many words, my lord. I give her own language. I then expressed to her the happiness I knew this intelligence would give you, and when I answered her that you almost adored her, you should have seen the happy expression, the joyous lighting up of her beautiful countenance. Her bosom heaved with emotion, and her eyes over-run with gratitude. But all at once a cloud came over her features, and sadness took the place of hope and joy. She looked earnestly at me and said, `Sir, you know my heart now, and you must know it only to pity me. Mr. Darwell though having so strong a hold upon my regards, you are aware can never be more to me than a friend! It is this reflection that has cast a sadness over my happiness! I think only of himself, sir, but my parents, the large circle of my friends would look only to his birth.' `But if I could show you that he has succeeded in finding his family and proving his title to an honorable parentage?' I said. `Can you do it, sir?' she cried earnestly. `I can, Madam,' I replied. `He has within the last ten days discovered his father and grandfather also, and been recognised and acknowledged by them. They are very respectable people, and he will do honor to them I am sure.' `Then, if this be true, how I sympathise with him in his happiness,' she said gratefully. `Oh, sir; can this be indeed true?' `I assure you, madam, it is so. If you desire it, I will prove it to your parents! ' `No, no, not just now! Is Mr. Darwell still in England?' she asked with embarrassment. `Yes. He is now in London.' `In London?' she exclaimed with almost a cry of joy. `He is, madam, and I assure you it would give him the greatest happiness to permit him to pay his respects to you.' [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174-097.jpg) \- external link  - Page 046. ] `Well, my dear lord, the upshot of the whole pleasant matter was that she said she should be most happy to see you to-morrow. Don't fly now . Tomorrow will come in due time! As I was going to leave, Col. Field entered with his lady, and with him the American Minister, whom I well knew. As I was about to introduce myself to the Colonel, the Minister did it for me, and so at once I was placed in a position to enlist his confidence. I then, as soon as I could conveniently, began to tell your story, addressing myself to His Excellency, but intending my narration for the especial benefit of Colonel Field and his lady. I gave the whole account, only concealing the name and rank of your family, which I said I was not at liberty to divulge, but which I pledged myself as highly respectable and wealthy. When I had done, his Excellency begged that I would bring you to see him, and also Colonel and Mrs. Field seconded the invitation for you to visit them with me; and they were warm in their congratulations upon your good fortune in removing so successfully the stain upon your birth, of which they had been made acquainted by Russel Carryl.' `I must meet that man,' cried lord Henry, angrily. `Only to treat him with contempt, my lord! He is beneath your notice. I learned he only travelled with , but is not of , the party, being only an intruder for the purpose of pressing his attentions upon Miss Field. He called while I was there; and while the parents received him with sufficient friendship, I noted that Miss Field was cold and distant, and seemed to regard him with positive dislike. So you see, my lord, as the way is now open before you, you have only to make the best use of your time; for you must return to A--- Castle at the end of the week, or the Duke will be here after you! In the meanwhile, I would advise you to live as becomes your rank at the hotel here, and receive the attentions and notice which the nobility will extend towards you. To the world you must be Lord Henry A---, the representative of the A---family; but to Miss Field, and Mr. Carryl, and the family, you may, still be plain Mr. Darwell. It is not probable that you will meet them as Lord Henry, or that they will recognise you to be one and the same person until you choose to make yourself known.' The following day about twelve o'clock our hero took a cab and drove privately to the lodgings of Col. Field. Sending up his name as Mr. Darwell of the United States, he was ushered into the drawing room. Emma was alone. On seeing him she arose, advanced a step to offer her hand in welcome and then stopped short covered with blushes, and her cheeks in beautiful confusion. Our hero approached her with equal embarrassment. She raised her eyes, their glances met, and with a bright smile she extended her hand, which he took and pressed to his lips. `It is long since we have met, Mr. Darwell,' she said with a trembling tone in her voice and making an effort to be firm. `It is, in person, Miss Field, save for a moment at long intervals,' he answered, `but in memory you have not been absent from me a day since first I met you as a school-boy and received from your hand a boquet of flowers. A bud of that gift I still retain, and the memory of the giver confers upon them, still, both life and fragrance.' We will not attempt here to record the conversation between two true and loving hearts, which for years had lived in each other's light though that light had been long obscured by the dark clouds of circumstances, now dissipated forever. Before they parted, our hero had wooed and won her as Mr. Darwell, assuring her that in a few days she should see his father and know more intimately all that related to his family. As he was descending to the hall he encountered Russel Carryl upon the stairs with two young men, one of whom he recognised as the midshipman with whom he had fought. On seeing him, Carryl, suspecting whom he had been to call on, looked angrily upon him and then sneeringly said, so that he might hear: [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174-098.jpg) \- external link  - Page 047. ] `There goes the widow Darwell's protege! I wonder if he has got so wise as to know his own father?' This infamous insult lord Henry took no notice of, feeling that when Carryl came to know his true rank and his acceptance by Miss Field, he would be sufficiently punished. `There he goes in a wretched hired cab,' said Carryl, who kept his own tilbury and affected the excess of London fashion, and whose chief ambition was to know a nobleman. To have walked arm and arm with a lord down Regent street, he would cheerfully have given a hundred guineas! `I wonder,' he added, `if he has had the audacity to call on Miss Field. If he has, I will cane him.' He sent in his card and that of his friend, and was confounded and indignant by the reply brought by the footman, `that Miss Field was engaged and could not see him.' `This is all that nameless fellow's work. He has been to see her, and as I know she has long had a liking for him, I dare say he has succeeded in blinding her eyes to his low birth, and doubtless has been defaming me.' Here, however, this young gentleman was wrong. His rival had too noble a soul to condescend to such means to ingratiate himself into the regards of Miss Field; but, as he himself had adopted them and made the defamation of our hero to be an instrument towards his own success, he naturally attributed similar motives of action to another. The following evening an unusually magnificent assembly was to be held at the palace of the Earl of---. Lord Henry was a great card, and although the invitations had some days been issued, he received one, and by the advice of Mr. Beufort accepted it. As he was desirous Emma should be present, he succeeded in getting an invitation for her to go in company with the family of the American Minister. All the nobility in London was present. It was soon noised that the heir of the Duke of --- was in the room, and our hero soon found himself the lion of the evening. But he thought little of the honors and adulations so long as they were not shared with Emma. At length he discovered her and was about to approach her, when he was detained to have presented to him some members of the House of Lords. In the meanwhile Emma, who knew her lover was to be there, was looking for him amid the crowd. `How would you like to be presented to this young nobleman whom every body is taking about?' said his Excellency to her with a smile; for he had our hero's whole story from Mr. Beufort, together with whom he had dined that afternoon at C--- Hotel. Therefore, knowing all the history of our hero and his love, the Minister had prepared himself for an interesting scene. `I have no wish,' she answered, smiling. `Well then perhaps I can find Mr. Darwell. Wait here till I cross the hall. I will seek him and bring him here. I dare say you won't object to seeing him !' Mr. --- did not wait to observe her confusion, but soon disappeared in the throng. In three minutes afterwards he returned, leading up our hero. `You can't help yourself now, Miss Field,' said his Excellency. `Here is his lordship come to be presented to you.---Miss Field this is Lord Henry A---. Lord Henry, allow me to present you to Miss Field.' Emma stood confounded! Could it be true? Could the minister be trifling with her? Lord Henry approached and taking her hand said in a low voice, but with a smile, `Emma, I trust that you will keep the promise you made to me as Mr. Darwell, now that you see me before you under the name and rank of Lord Arlborough. ' `Is this indeed true?' she asked with a deep flush of joy. `It is. My father is the Lord Ferdinand, eldest son of the Duke of A---.' [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174-099.jpg) \- external link  - Page 048. ] At this moment several persons of high rank came up to be presented to the lion of the evening, and the formality of the presentation convinced her that all was true. She now trembled for herself, and would have feared that she should be no longer regarded by him, but for the sweet echo of the words he had spoken to her. As His Excellency had been pressingly importuned by Mr. Russel Carryl to use his influence to get him an invitation to this noble party, he finally consented and was so far successful as to have permission to attach Mr. Carryl to his suite. Russel Carryl was therefore present; but he had not yet seen Miss Field, nor encountered our hero. `Where, sir, is this distinguished young nobleman, the heir of the title of Duke of Arlborough, every one is talking about, as just arrived from the continent, where he has been since a boy?' asked Russel Carryl of the American minister, coming up to him with his back towards lord Henry. `Would you like to be presented?' `Above all things,' answered the young man. `There he stands talking with Miss Field, his back towards us. I will present you if you will approach with me. My lord, allow me to present ---' `That--- that is not the Lord A---!' suddenly exclaimed Russel Carryl, starting back in the utmost surprise and confusion, on getting a glimpse at the profile of his rival. `It is the same! My lord, I beg leave to present to you, at his particular desire . Mr. Russel Carryl, who ---.' Both our hero and Miss Field turned round at this name. Russel Carryl stood for a moment petrified with astonishment, enduring the cold and haughty gaze of the man he had injured, and then covered with confusion and vexation which no words can describe, he abruptly broke from the minister and hastened to bury his disgrace and well merited contempt amid the crowd. The triumph of our hero was complete! He felt at that moment of triumph fully avenged of all the wrongs then man had heaped upon him! We have now only to close our story in the good old fashioned way, that is with announcing the marriage of the hero and heroine, which took place with great splendor three months afterwards, at the Palace of the Duke of A --- in London. It would have been celebrated earlier; but our hero as faithful in his love and attachment to good Dame Darwell, as he had been in his devotion to the maiden who had won his young heart, would not have the marriage take place without the worthy Dame's presence. He, therefore, sent over for her, and sure enough Dame Darwell was there in person present at the wedding; but to tell how happy the good Dame was, we should have to write another book! It is hardly necessary to say that she recognised Lord Ferdinand, and that he recognised her as the hostess of the Inn where they had left the infant! The good Dame has consented to remain in England with her foster son; and with this end she has made over her Inn and other property to Aunt Keezia and cousin Mariah the minister's wife, and `The Silver Bottle Inn' has now become the village parsonage. Russel Carryl left England precipitately, and soon after returned to the United States, where, after running through his fortune, he became intemperate, lost his character, and is now become an idle and despised frequenter of low coffee-houses, and the moneyless haunter of the vile precincts of gambling halls! Thus we end our story. Its progress will show that virtue and perseverance will overcome every obstacle of birth, fortune, and circumstances; and that the depraved and unprincipled, though favored by these in the outset, will ultimately sink to the level of their true characters. THE END. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174-100.jpg) \- external link  - Blank Page. ] [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174-101.jpg) \- external link  - Blank Page. ] [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf174v2&image=174-102.jpg) \- external link  - Blank Page. ] [
