 application in any sentence of length. In proportion to the brevity of the sentence, would, of course, be the facility of the variation. This led me at once to a single word as the best refrain . The question now arose as to the character of the word. Having made up my mind to a refrain , the division of the poem into stanzas was, of course, a corollary: the refrain forming the close to each stanza. That such a close, to have force, must be sonorous and susceptible of protracted emphasis, admitted no doubt: and these considerations inevitably led me to the long o as the most sonorous vowel, in connection with r as the most producible consonant. The sound of the refrain being thus determined, it became necessary to select a word embodying this sound, and at the same time in the fullest possible keeping with that melancholy which I had predetermined as the tone of the poem. In such a search it would have been absolutely impossible to overlook the word "Nevermore." In fact, it was the very first which presented itself. The next desideratum was a pretext for the continuous use of the one word "nevermore." In observing the difficulty which I at once found in inventing a sufficiently plausible reason for its continuous repetition. I did not fail to perceive that this difficulty arose solely from the pre-assumption that the word was to be so continuously or monotonously spoken by a human being---I did not fail to perceive, in short, that the difficulty lay in the reconciliation of this monotony with the exercise of reason on the part of the creature repeating the word. Here, then, immediately arose the idea of a non -reasoning creature capable of speech; and, very naturally, a parrot, in the first instance, suggested itself, but was superseded forthwith by a Raven, as equally capable of speech, and infinitely more in keeping with the intended tone . I had now gone so far as the conception of a Raven---the bird of ill omen--- monotonously repeating the one word, "Nevermore," at the conclusion of each stanza, in a poem of melancholy tone, and in length about one hundred lines. Now, never losing sight of the object supremeness , or perfection, at all points, I asked myself---"Of all melancholy topics, what, according to the universal understanding of mankind, is the most melancholy?" Death--- was the obvious reply. "And when," I said, "is this most melancholy of topics most poetical?" From what I have already explained at some length, the answer, here also, is obvious---"When it most closely allies itself to Beauty : the death, then, of a beautiful woman is, unquestionably, the most poetical topic in the world---and equally is it beyond doubt that the lips best suited for such topic are those of a bereaved lover." I had now to combine the two ideas, of a lover lamenting his deceased mistress and a Raven continuously repeating the word "Nevermore"---I had to combine these, bearing in mind my design of varying, at every turn, the application of the word repeated; but the only intelligible mode of such combination is that of imagining the Raven employing the word in answer to the queries of the lover. And here it was that I saw at once the opportunity afforded for the effect on which I had been depending---that is to say, the effect of the variation of application . I saw that I could make the first query propounded by the lover--- the first query to which the Raven should reply "Nevermore"---that I could make this first query a commonplace one---the second less so---the third still less, and so on---until at length the lover, startled from his original nonchalance by the melancholy character of the word itself---by its frequent repetition--- and by a consideration of the ominous reputation of the fowl that uttered it---is at length excited to superstition, and wildly propounds queries of a far different character--- queries whose solution he has passionately at heart---propounds them half in superstition and half in that species of despair which delights in self- torture---propounds them not altogether because he believes in the prophetic or demoniac character of the bird (which, reason assures him, is merely repeating a lesson learned by rote) but because he experiences a phrenzied pleasure in so modeling his questions as to receive from the expected "Nevermore" the most delicious because the most intolerable of sorrow. Perceiving the opportunity thus afforded me---or, more strictly, thus forced upon me in the progress of the construction---I first established in mind the climax, or concluding query---that to which "Nevermore" should be in the last place an answer ---that in reply to which this word "Nevermore" should involve the utmost conceivable amount of sorrow and despair. Here then the poem may be said to have its beginning---at the end, where all works of art should begin---for it was here, at this point of my preconsiderations, that I first put pen to paper in the composition of the stanza: "Prophet," said I, "thing of evil! prophet still if bird or devil! By that heaven that bends above us---by that God we both adore, Tell this soul with sorrow laden, if within the distant Aidenn, It shall clasp a sainted maiden whom the angels name Lenore--- Clasp a rare and radiant maiden whom the angels name Lenore." Quoth the raven "Nevermore." I composed this stanza, at this point, first that, by establishing the climax, I might the better vary and graduate, as regards seriousness and importance, the preceding queries of the lover---and, secondly, that I might definitely settle the rhythm, the metre, and the length and general arrangement of the stanza---as well as graduate the stanzas which were to precede, so that none of them might surpass this in rhythmical effect. Had I been able, in the subsequent composition, to construct more vigorous stanzas, I should, without scruple have purposely enfeebled them, so as not to interfere with the climacteric effect. And here I may as well say a few words of the versification. My first object (as usual) was originality. The extent to which this has been neglected, in versification, is one of the most unaccountable things in the world. Admitting that there is little possibility of variety in mere rhythm , it is still clear that the possible varieties of metre and stanza are absolutely infinite---and yet, for centuries, no man, in verse, has ever done, or ever seemed to think of doing, an original thing . The fact is, originality (unless in minds of very unusual force) is by no means a matter, as some suppose, of impulse or intution. In general, to be found, it must be elaborately sought, and although a positive merit of the highest class, demands in its attainment less of invention than negation. Of course, I pretend to no originality in either the rhythm or metre of the "Raven." The former is trochaic---the latter is octameter acatalectic, alternating with heptameter catalectic repeated in the refrain of the fifth verse, and terminating with tetrameter catalectic. Less pedantically---the feet employed throughout (trochees) consist of a long syllable followed by a short: the first line of the stanza consists of eight of these feet---the second of seven and a half (in effect two-thirds)---the third of eight---the fourth of seven and a half---the fifth the same---the sixth three and a half. Now, each of these lines, taken individually, has been employed before, and what originality the "Raven" has, is in their combination into stanza ; nothing even remotely approaching this combination has ever been attempted. The effect of this originality of combination is aided by other unusual, and some altogether novel effects, arising from an extension of the application of the principles of rhyme and alliteration. The next point to be considered was the mode of bringing together the lover and the Raven---and the first branch of this consideration was the locale . For this the most natural suggestion might seem to be a forest, or the fields ---but it has always appeared to me that a close circumscription of space is absolutely necessary to the effect of insulated incident:---it has the force of a frame to a picture. It has an indisputable moral power in keeping concentrated the attention, and, of course, must not be confounded with mere unity of place. I determined, then, to place the lover in his chamber---in a chamber rendered sacred to him by memories of her who had frequented it. The room is represented as richly furnished---this in mere pursuance of the ideas I have already explained on the subject of Beauty, as the sole true poetical thesis. The locale being thus determined, I had now to introduce the bird---and the thought of introducing him through the window, was inevitable. The idea of making the lover suppose, in the first instance, that the flapping of the wings of the bird against the shutter, is a "tapping" at the door, originated in a wish to increase, by prolonging, the reader's curiosity, and in a desire to admit the incidental effect arising from the lover's throwing open the door, finding all dark, and thence adopting the half-fancy that it was the spirit of his mistress that knocked. I made the night tempestuous, first, to account for the Raven's seeking admission, and secondly, for the effect of contrast with the (physical) serenity within the chamber. I made the bird alight on the bust of Pallas, also for the effect of contrast between the marble and the plumage---it being understood that the bust was absolutely suggested by the bird---the bust of Pallas being chosen, first, as most in keeping with the scholarship of the lover, and, secondly, for the sonorousness of the word, Pallas, itself. About the middle of the poem, also, I have availed myself of the force of contrast, with a view of deepening the ultimate impression. For example, an air of the fantastic---approaching as nearly to the ludicrous as was admissible---is given to the Raven's entrance. He comes in "with many a flirt and flutter." Not the least obeisance made he \---not a moment stopped or stayed he, But with mien of lord or lady , perched above my chamber door. In the two stanzas which follow, the design is more obviously carried out:--- Then this ebony bird beguiling my sad fancy into smiling By the grave and stern decorum of the countenance it wore . "Though thy crest be shorn and shaven thou," I said, "art sure no craven, Ghastly grim and ancient Raven wandering from the nightly shore--- Tell me what thy lordly name is on the Night's Plutonian shore!" Quoth the Raven "Nevermore." Much I marvelled this ungainly fowl to hear discourse so plainly, Though its answer little meaning---little relevancy bore; For we cannot help agreeing that no living human being Ever yet was blessed with seeing bird above his chamber door \--- Bird or beast upon the sculptured bust above his chamber door , With such name as "Nevermore." The effect of the d enouement being thus provided for, I immediately drop the fantastic for a tone of the most profound seriousness:---this tone commencing in the stanza directly following the one last quoted, with the line, But the Raven, sitting lonely on that placid bust, spoke only, etc. From this epoch the lover no longer jests---no longer sees any thing even of the fantastic in the Raven's demeanor. He speaks of him as a "grim, ungainly, ghastly, gaunt, and ominous bird of yore," and feels the "fiery eyes" burning into his "bosom's core." This revolution of thought, or fancy, on the lover's part, is intended to induce a similar one on the part of the reader---to bring the mind into a proper frame for the d enouement \---which is now brought about as rapidly and as directly as possible. With the d enouement proper---with the Raven's reply, "Nevermore," to the lover's final demand if he shall meet his mistress in another world---the poem, in its obvious phase, that of a simple narrative, may be said to have its completion. So far, every thing is within the limits of the accountable--- of the real. A raven, having learned by rote the single word "Nevermore," and having escaped from the custody of its owner, is driven, at midnight, through the violence of a storm, to seek admission at a window from which a light still gleams---the chamber-window of a student, occupied half in poring over a volume, half in dreaming of a beloved mistress deceased.
