 [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202fcov.jpg) \- external link  - Front Cover. ] [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202spin.jpg) \- external link  - Spine. ] [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202edgf.jpg) \- external link  - Front Edge. ] [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202bcov.jpg) \- external link  - Back Cover. ] [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202edgb.jpg) \- external link  - Bottom Edge. ] [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-089.jpg) \- external link  - Title page. ] THE SLAVE KING; OR THE TRIUMPH of LIBERTY. VOLUME II. BY J. H. INGRAHAM, ESQ.   1846. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-090.jpg) \- external link  - Page 004. ] [ Entered according to act of Congress, in the year 1846, by H. L. Williams, in the Clerk's Office, in the District Court of the District of Massachusetts  .] [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-091.jpg) \- external link  - Page 005. ] There is an interval of nearly two days between the events related at the close of the last chapter and those which will form the subject of the present volume. In this interval, however, brief as it was, great changes were effected in the government of the valley of Andalusia, that deeply interested alike Moor and Christian. Before proceeding with the events that followed this change, we will devote a chapter or two to an account of it. When Abdelasis, the false Saracen Prince, who had so basely requited the hospitality of Alfonzo by attempting to deprive him of his liberty, found that pursuit after him through the labyrinths of the forest was in vain, he recalled his troop together and proceeded to return to Cordova. He had not ridden far, silently brooding over his defeat in losing [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-092.jpg) \- external link  - Page 006. ] the possession of the daring mountaineer, before he called to his side his confidential officer, Hamet Osmen. `Well, Osmen,' he said, trying to throw off his chagrin by assuming a light air, `we will let this Christian dog go. By and by he will come into my hands!--- Just at this time to have captured him would have given me no inconsiderable power; for the mountaineers are strongly attached to him; and the possession of their idol would give me a control over them. At least none of them would have consented to join the Emirs against me, while I held him as hostage!' `And none of them would join the Emirs in any manner, noble Prince,' answered Hamet Osmen; `they love none of our foes too well to favor eithor of them.' `That is true; but still it would have been to my advantage holding so formidable a personage. But this was not my only motive in resolving to arrest him, as you shall by and bye learn from me;--- but not now. When did you leave Cordova? ' `An hour before noon, my lord. After we missed you on the mountain side we searched for you, and wound our bugles, and left no efforts untried to find you. At length we gave you up for lost; but still I hoped you might have fallen in with some mountaineer, and by means of gold been guided into the valley.' `It was not long after I saw you, and sent you on one path while I took another, to head the wolf, that I met him and gave him battle; but I soon after fainted and heard no bugle. This Alfonzo and a monk, it seems, bore me to a hut, and there dressed my wounds and gave me a sleeping draught. To this I owe my recovery.' `The wonder is, it was not a poison they administered to you, my prince!' cried Osmen, with horror at the idea.--- `Allah be praised for your escape! You did well to arrest this peasant, for no doubt he would have poisoned you if he could have done so. But you asked when I left Cordova:---your highness shall hear. As I said, after searching long in vain, and night coming on, I resolved to return to Cordova---hoping that possibly you might have got clear from the mountain, and found your way alone to the city. On our way through the forest, a man suddenly appeared to Abul the pack-mule rider, and told him to say to me not to trouble myself about you--- that you were safe in a herdsman's hut in the mountains, and would be in Cordova well within three days. Having said this, the peasant disappeared as suddenly as he had appeared, and Abul galloped forward and gave me the information. Resolved at once to ascertain where you were, I turned back and searched for the man, scouring the forest; but at length I was compelled to give up the hope of finding him, and with reluctance pursued my way to the city, trusting that the intelligence given by the man would prove true. `This man was none other than Alfonzo, the herdsman!' said Abdelasis.--- `He said to me that he had met a Moorish troop in the forest, and given precisely the information you have repeated. It would seem that he did not care to have you come in person to his hamlet, with so large a party of followers to carry me away. These mountain Spaniards are very jealous of the invasion of their homes by the footstep of the Moor.' `After reaching Cordova, and not finding you at the Palace, nor hearing of you in any other quarter of the city, I gave up the hope, which so long had cheered me, that I should yet find that you had returned before me. And I had now either to believe the story of the peasant [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-093.jpg) \- external link  - Page 007. ] to Abul, the pack-rider, or to suspect the worst.' `I am grateful, Hamet Osmen, for your faithful attachment to me.' `My lord, my life is in your hands!' answered the Moor, bending his neck till his forehead rested upon the saddle-bow. `Thou shalt not be forgotten! Go on and tell me what affairs thou hast left behind thee in Cordova!' `Thou shalt hear, my lord, all in good time; though by Allah, I have no special news, save that the Emir's are ready to draw the scymetar to cut off each other's heads at any moment.--- This morning I did not feel easy about your absence, even with the assurance of the unknown mountaineer that you were safe; so I resolved to take a select party and ride to the mountains and once more search for you, especially in the huts of the herdsmen. But Allah blessed me with the sight of my lord, on his way to meet me.' `And now for Cordova. The news thou hast for me! for something must have transpired since I left. How goes it with Algezir?' `He is still in his Seraglio, which has the air of a castle. There was a rumor that he had desired the Council of Emirs to meet him in his Seraglio on some business; but each had refused to attend, fearing treachery when once inside of his walls.' `They know Algezir is not to be trusted. But they are cowards all and weak men. If Allah gives me life for two days more I will stand upon their necks and give Algezir's red-bearded head to the dogs. I know that am strong and that he cannot withstand my power. To-morrow I will lift the standard of the Prophet in the court of my palace, and from the midst of my steel-clad guard of faithful Zenetas proclaim myself Caliph of the kingdom.' `The time is ripe, my lord. If you do not strike soon Algezir will do so. It is impossible Cordova can longer remain torn so many factions.' `Within two days Algezir or Abede lasis reigns Caliph of Spain!' cried the young Emir. `Thank the Prophet, we are now well out of that black forest.--- How proudly rise the domes and mina rets of the capital above the Guadal quivir; and the crescents that surmount them seem to smile welcome to the new Caliph.' `Long live the Caliph Abdelasis !' shouted Hamet Osmen in his enthusiasm and tossing his spear in the air, he galloped forward again shouting, while the troop, catching up the words, made the air ring again. `That will do, my faithful friends answered Abdelasis. `It is well we are in so lonely a part of the valley, so that that the cry could not reach our foes; for, if it touched their ears, we should hardly be admitted into the gates of the the city. Let it pass now, Osmen; but do not be so rash again. When you see the standard of the Prophet unfolded and tossed upon the winds by my hand, then you may make the name of Abdelasis your battle-cry. But now keep silent.--- Let us enter the city in close order and peacefully. The party of horsemen now trotted rapidly forward, passing gardens and las and vineyards, and groves of date and figs, and orchards of oranges, the trees glittering with their golden fruit and by and by reached the shady bank of the beautiful Guadalquivir. Here the road turned to the right and followed the shore, which was a scene of gardens and palaces. Gilded barks were floating upon the tide, and music and laughter came from the snow-white pavilions nestled amid the green foliage on the banks.--- All around them was a scene of beauty [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-094.jpg) \- external link  - Page 008. ] and life and enjoyment. They met turbaned travellers on ambling horses, followed by laden mules; parties of merchants met them, or were passed, reposing under the trees; slaves were bearing water in jars upon their heads from the river, to irrigate the terraced gardens that adorned the shore; and now and then a wealthy Moorish citizen of Cordova would prance by, followed by a Sedan-chair, borne by Christian slaves, in which, closely shut up from view by silken curtains, rode his wives or daughters. As they approached the gates, there suddenly came to their ears loud cries from the walls. Shouts were borne to them from the streets, with the clang of armor, and far and wide along the battlements rose upon the air the uproar of battle. The gates were all at once filled with terrified citizens, pouring out on foot, old and young, male and female. The travellers and merchants who were approaching the town turned and fled, and repassed the cavalcade in wild terror, crying, `The Emirs are at war! Cordova is in revolution! Algezir aims at the throne! Fly all peaceable men!' and so they rode on to widen as far as possible their distance from the city. The commotion was not witnessed unmoved by Abdelasis. He had no sooner caught the sound of battle raging within than he raised himself in his stirrups and calling upon his followers, he cried, `Now is my time! Forward!' Like a thunderbolt, the Moorish horsemen rolled forward along the dusty road, which each moment became more densely thronged with those who fled from the confusion and warfare within the walls. As they came near the portals, Abdelasis met a young Moor, who dashed up to him with looks of joy, and yet with alarm visible on his face. `Ho, Ibrahim! Whither so fast?--- What uproar is this?' cried the Prince. `Allah be praised!' cried the youth. `Is it possible that I find my lord alive?' `Yes, and ready to take advantage of this hour. What is going on in Cordova? ' `You shall hear, my lord,' answered the young man, who seemed hardly to realize that the Prince was alive. `You see that your absence was bruited about, and at length this morning flew from lip to lip, that you had been slain by a wolf in the Sierras, while hunting. This report no sooner reached the ears of Algezir, the Emir, an hour ago, than he sent a confidential messenger to ascertain its foundation. The messenger, it seems, returned and confirmed the truth of the report. Thereupon, Algezir has suddenly raised the banner of the Caliphate before the Great Mosque, and proclaimed himself Caliph. He is at this moment at the head of a thousand of his followers, attacking the council of Caliphs, which were assembled in the council chamber of the Seraglio, to endeavor to effect a combination to overthrow the formidable Algezir. At this moment he is assailing the gates of the Palace, and at every corner the followers of the Emir are doing battle with those of Algezir. ' `And where are my people? Has any attack been made upon my Palace?' `Not yet, my lord,' answered the young Moor, as he galloped at the side of the Prince, who was all the while pressing forward at the head of his troop.--- `Algezir will first overthrow the Emirs, and then invest the palace. But your friends are resolved to defend themselves to the last. They have only need to know that their Prince lives, and to have you place yourself at their head to sally forth, and attack the force of Algezir with success. I was riding to find Osmen and bring him back to the city, to aid us [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-095.jpg) \- external link  - Page 009. ] with his skill and courage, when Allah gave me instead, my Prinee. THE RIVAL EMIRS. The young Emir had listened to the rapid relation of events given by Ibrahim, with the deepest interest, all the while galloping onward to the gates. The populace, who were non-combatants, were crowding out of the portal, each carrying some valuable, and every face expressive of the deepest alarm. Several of the men who were escaping from the scene of battle, recognised Abdelasis at the head of his score of horsemen and shouted his name to those around, and in accents of gratification and welcome. `Allah be praised! Abdelasis lives, and is entering the city! Now the power of the cruel Algezir will fall. Long live Abdelasis, the son of Musa, the Caliph! The mantle of the Prophet descends upon him.' `Long live Priuce Abdelasis!' shouted his followers, uow catching up the cry, and making it ring again, till it resounded into the streets of the city. `All true Moslems, who are for order and just rule, let them follow me this day!' cried the Prince. `Come to my palace and you shall find arms. Let us onward.' With these words the youthful Emir dashed forward, and rode with speed through the arched gate-way, the people crowding close to the pillars on the right and left, to suffer him to pass with his troop. After entering the city, he turned short to the right, to avoid the crowd in the main thoroughfare, and by a narrow and unfrequented street, rode at top speed towards his palace. Suddenly on turning an angle in the street, he came upon a party of the followers of Algezir, pursuing a larger force of the Emirs; for the conclave of Emirs had united their troops to oppose the common foe Algezir. The pursued were fighting but in confusion and panic; while the Algezirs, about thirty in number, press them closely, and with courage.--- No sooner did Abdelasis see how affair were going, than he couched his lance and led his men against them, shouting aloud in his own cry--- `Il Allah! Allah, Il Allah!' Their appearance was so sudden, and the onset so resistless, that the Algezirs were routed, and compelled in their turn to fly---for the unexpected appearance of Abdelasis, whom every man supposed to be dead, terrified them as if they had seen a spirit. `Pursue them!' cried the Prince, `to the troop of the Emirs, and remember that you owe your safety te Abdelasis! The captain of the Emir's grasped the hand of the Prince, and said, `Long live Prince Abdelasis!' `Can I depend upon you and yours?' asked the Prince, as he returned the pressure of the officer, whom he well knew. `In all that you undertake, my lord answered the Captain; and then taking up the war cry of the youthful Emir, he rallied his men, and led them gallantly up the street, in pursuit of the flying foe.--- Abdelasis did not wait to see the result but turning into another street kept on his rapid way towards his seraglio or Palace. He rode through a narrow lane bordered with orange-trees, and came suddenly to a gate that led into a spacious square, on the opposite of which, embowered in noble trees, stood his marble palace. At the gate he found a strong guard drawn up to receive him, for Ibrahim had ridden forward to announce the safe return of the Prince. Abdelsis rode at full speed into the beautiful court of his palace, hailed by the joyful [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-096.jpg) \- external link  - Page 010. ] acclamations of his followers, who filled the court and the palace to the number of two thousand armed men. There were amoug them sons of Princes, Viziers, Colonels and Knights of the noblest Moorish blood. They were magnificently arrayed, and seemed to vie with each other, in the magnificence and costliness of their armour, and the beauty of their horses. Upon beholding their chief, the young knights and captains crowded around him and hailed him with acclamations. Abdelasis galloped round the court, showing himself to his people, and receiving their congratulations; and then, reining up near the palace steps, he called his chief officers about him, and said--- `My noble friends, Allah has restored me in safety to you. Instead of finding yourselves besieged here by Algezir without a chief, you find me here to lead you forth against him, and prepared to seize the sceptre of the Caliphate. At this moment, the din of battle in the great square of the Mosque reaches our ears, mingled with the sounds of contest in other portions of the city. Algezir, at the head of the flower of his troops, is at this moment attacking the Palace of the Caliphs, where the Emirs have been artfully surprised by him while in Council, and their troops fight at disadvantage without their chiefs. It is my purpose to attack Algezir in the rear, by entering the square through the street Ben Hamel. Osmen, go and bring me the green standard of the Prophet.' While Osmen was gone into the palace, Abdelasis, with skilful generalship, formed his followers---one quarter of whom were cavalry---into columns for attack, and with his trumpeters placed in the van, waited the return of Osmen---who soon came forth from the palace, and kneeling by the stirrup of his chief, presented him with the sacred banner, which had been consecrated on the tomb of the Prophet at Mecca. A profound stillness reigned throughout the vast court of the palace, broken only by the falling of water in the noble fountain that adorned its centre, and by the swelling sounds of the distant warfare, borne to the ears of the impatient warriors upon the breeze. Abdelasis, having received the standard, kissed it with great reverence, and then elevating the staff, unfolded its silken field broadly upon the air before all eyes. He then waved it slowly to and fro, while the armed hosts surrounding him, with one voice, cried--- `God is great, and Mahomet is his Prophet!' Again the prince waved the royal standard, and every voice cried--- `Long live Prince Abdelasis! Death to his enemies!' `Now, Ibrahim,' said the prince to the handsome Moorish youth who had met him outside the city gate, `take this sacred standard and bear it by my side. Warriors and friends, now let us show this Algezir that there is a Prince in Cordova more powerful than he. I draw my scymetar before all your eyes, and I swear by Allah, that I will not put it out of my hand save to grasp the sceptre of the Caliphate!' These words were received with a shout, and a deafening clang of steel struck against steel. The next moment Abdelasis was galloping forth from the gate of his palace, with Ibrahim on his left, bearing the green banner of the Prophet, and Osmen upon his right; close around him also rode his faithful body-guard of Zenetan horse. Troop after troop of gorgeous cavalry came next, each led by a knightly captain, clad in glittering steel armour, inlaid with silver or gold---fell into column and thundered after him, till four hundred horsemen [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-097.jpg) \- external link  - Page 011. ] were in rapid motion into the heart of the city, in the direction of the loud din of contest. The foot soldiers followed at a fast trot, each man armed with a lance and curved sword, and some of the companies carrying likewise bows and a quiver of steel-pointed arrows at their backs. This large army, numbering nearly two thousand men, were soon all in motion through two parallel streets towards the great Mosque. A strong guard for the defence of the palace was left behind, and the gates were closed as soon as the rear of the troops left the court. Abdelasis rode on at full speed, so that only his two friends and his body-guard could keep up with him. Louder and fiercer arose the uproar of battle from the square, as they approached it. The streets were thronged with citizens flying in all directions, now from the scene of battle, now from the terrific advance of Abdelasis and his cavalry. Friend and foe, young and old, were alike ridden over by the prince and his followers, as he dashed forward like a war-eagle on the wing. He had not slackened rein or spoken a word since he issued from the gate of his palace, until he came within about two hundred yards of the entrance of the vast square which had become the sanguinary theatre of the revolution in progress. Here the Prince waved his hand to halt, and leaping from his horse he walked forward a few steps and ascended a flight of steps which led to the corridor, and thence to the flat roof of a house that commanded the scene of conflict. The inmates of the house had fled from it, and he encountered no one but a trembling slave, too decrepid to move.--- He soon reached the roof, and before his eyes laid the battle field which he was to charge upon. The square was a vast area in the centre of the city, and save on the side from which the Prince overlooked it, entirely surrounded by noble buildings, palaces, mosques, and Christendom Cathedrals now turned into Mosques. The sides of this magnificent area were lines of columns, corridors, terraces extending for several hundred feet, in the most sumptuous style of Moorish and Gothic architecture. Vast domes rose above stories of marble pillars, and minarets pierced the sky on all sides like a forest of needles.--- The Seraglio of the Caliphate or palace royal of Cordova, was directly opposite the eyes of the Prince. This was a beautiful structure of rose-colored marble, ornamented by ranges of pilastres and columns of the purest alabaster; while vaulted roofs and entablatures of carved porphyry increased the splendor of its effect. On the left of it was the Mosque of Omar, the most majestic temple of the Moors in Spain, and on the left rose the imposing towers of the Cathedral, upon the summits of which glittered the crescent. Over all these glorious piles of marble, and porphyry and alabaster, over all this opulence of architecture shone the cloudless afternoon sun, lending a new splendor to the scene. But the eye of the Prince lingered not on these beauties. The roofs of the temples were thronged with armed hosts, the towers and the domes bristled with spears, and from the tall minarets lances glanced downward like lightning, while flights of arrows, from terraces and corridors, darkened the air. The porticoes of the Mosques were alive with warriors, and the piazzas of the Palace were converted into fortresses; and the Emirs could be seen defending them with great valor against the fiercely attacking forces of Algezir. The whole area, vast as it was, was filled with battling parties. Every avenue from the square was a battle ground. On all sides the fierce war raged. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-098.jpg) \- external link  - Page 012. ] The Prince's eye having taken in at a glance the situation of the field, now searched for the Emir Algezir among his people, and at length beheld him seated upon his horse near the statue Taric, in the square, surrounded by his chief officers, and giving orders. The bosom of the Prince burned at the sight, and he waited only to take one more glance at the field, when he descended from the roof, leaped into his saddle, gave one or two directions to Osman, who galloped at the rear, and then waving his sword, he gave the command to his columns to advance into the square at full charge. Side by side with the Prince rode the youth Ibraham, bearing aloft the sacred standard. Already had the news that the forces of Abdelasis were approaching to mingle in the conflict, been received; and as Abdelasis descended from the roof the news reached the ears of Algezir, as he sat in the midst of his aids. `My lord!' cried the bearer of the intelligence; `the troop of Abdelasis have taken horse and are advancing upon us!' `They will easily be beaten back, without their chief,' answered Agezir haughtily. `They have nothing to fight for! Go and meet them, and offer them peace, on condition they acknowledge me as Caliph, and lend me the aid of their swords; otherwise, when I have hanged these Emirs, I shall put them to the sword! Say these words to Hamet Osmen, who doubtless heads them!' The messenger had hardly gone from his presence to meet the coming forces which, from the place where Algezir stood, were not yet visible, when another horseman spurred up, and cried, `My lord, Abdelasis himself is alive, and heads his own followers!' `It is false!' cried the Emir changing countenance. `Who told thee this?' `I saw him with my own eyes, my lord! He rides at the head of his troops, who fill all the street, and above his head floats the standard of the Prophet!' THE YOUTHFUL CALIPH. When Algezir heard this news, he looked as if he felt that his power and his victory were about to be taken from him; for his troops were everywhere getting the better of the Emirs' forces, and three of the Emirs had been slain. He remained for a moment as if stunned by the intelligence. At length he said, as if he doubted the truth of it, `Show me this Abdelasis, and I will believe it. It may be some of his knights who have assumed his armor and energies. ' `He wears no armor, my lord. His face is open to all eyes. Behold!' `Look! he comes! The Abdelases charge upon us, my lord!' shouted his officers, riding hither and thither to rally their forces to meet him as he came prancing into the square with trumpets sounding, his banners flaunting, and with the thunder of the trampling of his cavalry. Algezir beheld and recognised his foe, and then his amazement and hesitation gave place to courage. His voice was heard high above the uproar of battle, and placing himself at the head of some of his best troops, he pressed forward to meet the charge of the Prince, who was advancing upon him at the head of his horse, with lances in rest and shouting the battle-cry, `Allah, il Allah! Down with the pale Emir!' The two parties met in full career, and a score of riders at the head of each column bit the dust, overthrown in the fierce shock of the encounter. Abdelasis and Algezir met scymetar to scymetar, and while their followers were fiercely fighting around them, they fought hand to hand with desperate valor. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-099.jpg) \- external link  - Page 013. ] Algezir at length, being pressed hard by the Prince, would have been slain but for his friends, who separated the combatants. The tide of battle rolled onward. Everywhere was heard the warcry of Abdelasis. Everywhere he was seen with the sacred banner held above his head by the brave Ibrahim. His followers kept their eye on this and fought their way towards it. Unable to withstand the fierce energy of the Abdelases, who came pouring into the square in fresh squadrons, both foot and horse, the forces of Algezir gave way. In vain their leader called upon them to stand for the day might yet be his. They were panic-stricken. The sudden appearance of Abdelasis had filled their minds with fear and consternation; for on the presumption of his death, had they raised the standard of Algezir. The troops, too, that had been attacking the palace of the Emirs, had been called by their Chief's trumpet to aid in repelling Abdelasis; and seeing this, the Emirs, who had been ready to surrender the palace, took courage, and sallying forth, charged them from the portals. Thus placed between two foes, Algezir's forces were broken and fled from the scene where they were so lately victors, pursued along the streets by the now conquering partisans of the Emirs. Algezir, as he was escaping by a narrow street that led along the wall of the mosque, was overtaken by Abdelasis, and, after a brief passage of arms between them, was overpowered and taken captive, while his guard fled, leaving him to his fate. That fate he well knew would be death. He therefore folded his hands upon his breast and calmly awaited it. `Melec,' said the Prince, turning to an Abyssinian near him, and who had not left following him through all the fight, `do thy duty.' The tall Abyssinian drew from its scabbard a heavy, glittering scymetar, and taking a hair from the mane of his horse, passed it across the blade delicately, the hair splitting evenly as it was drawn athwart the razor-like edge. He smiled with satisfaction, and leaping from his horse, advanced to the Emir, and without ceremony took him by his beard and pulled him down upon his knees.--- He then stepped back. There was a flashing circle moving in the air, and the head of Algezir rolled at the feet of his conqueror. A crowd of his followers, at this instant, pressed round, and separated the Prince from the body. They would have rescued their chief. The Abyssinian, standing up, bade them take him, and pointing to the body, he fell back, and, leaping upon his horse near at hand, followed the Prince. Abdelasis and his guard, now once more galloped forward, not having been detained more than a minute by this summary execution on the battle-field. The Prince pursued a troop of the fugitives a short distance towards the gate, and then reining up, said to Osman and Ibrahim, `This is far enough for us to go; now let us return to the square, and occupy it, and let the Emir's forces cut to pieces those of Algezir. I must see that I am not conquered in my turn by them. Sound the recall,' he shouted to his trumpeters; and the clear notes of his bugles sounded throughout the city. The pursuers ceased their pursuit, and hastened back to rally around their chief in the square. There Abdelasis made a stand, and, marshalling all his forces, formed them again in close order of battle. The most of the Emirs on seeing the Algezirs give way, had gathered their people about them, and followed in hot pursuit; but there were three of them, who, instead of moving, remained near [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-100.jpg) \- external link  - Page 014. ] the Mosque, and with their bugles, were collecting their friends about them. Their movements Abdelasis had antieipated, and now clearly saw through. `Osman,' he said to his lieutenant, `thou seest those Princes there. They join not in the chase because they would take advantage of the absence of the rest, and so endeavor to win the Caliphate each for himself. Now that the Algezirs are defeated, we must make an end also of the power of the Emirs. We will charge upon these troops ere they are fully forward to resist us, and cut them in pieces. Thus will Cordova be mine.' With these words the Prince caused the charge to be sounded, and in a broad phalanx, he rode across the square upon the seven or eight hundred Moorish soldiers, assembled in three divisions, each under its own chief, and each jealous of the other. But they were willing to combine to resist the successful Prince, and endeavored to force him back by a flight of lances and arrows. But heedless of these weapons, the conquering Abdelasis spurred on, and fairly rode down the lines of the Emirs. In a few moments their defeat was complete. Two of the Emirs were slain, bravely fighting, scymetar in hand, and the third fled into the Mosque for safety, from his enemies. On all sides the defeated enemy fled, and were pursued down every street with great slaughter. Abdelasis now resolved to complete the work he had so propitiously begun. He ordered divisions to pursue the Emirs who were in pursuit of the flying Algezirs, and attack them in the rear. These chiefs, finding themselves thus pressed, and unable to withstand the charge against them, were filled with consternation. Some of them fled to the Mosques, others finding the gates in possession of Abdelasis' troops, threw themselves upon their own swords and died, while two of them sur rendered themselves prisoners, promising allegiance to the Prince; for every few minutes by his command, a herald had proclaimed pardon and peace to all who would lay down their arms, and acknowledge him as Caliph. Hundreds of the followers of the Emirs and of Algezir, finding that the star of Abdelasis was in the ascendant, availed themselves of this clemency, and, casting their arms at their feet, cried, `Long live Abdelasis. Long live the son of the prophet.' The sun was within an hour of his setting, when Abdelasis first entered the square at the head of his cavalry, and as he sank redly beyond the vale of the Guadalquiver, he was master of Cordova, and Caliph of the Moorish Empire in Spain. Ere darkness veiled the city, the sounds of combat had ceased, and there were but two parties within the walls, the conquerors and the vanquished. The Emirs, save the two who had sworn allegiance to Abdelasis, and the one who had made a sanctuary of the Mosque, were all dead, and their followers had purchased their heads, by transferring their allegiance to the conqueror. Every gate and strong-hold of the city was occupied by the troops of the Prince, and not a hostile arm was to be found in all the capital, raised against the power of the victorious Caliph. The Prince took possession of the Royal Palace of the Caliphate, and by the light of the rising moon raised the standard of the Prophet above its battlements. The trumpets sounded, and a herald proclaimed that, `Abdelasis Mohamed, Prince and Emir and descendant of the true Prophet of God, was from that hour Caliph of the Moorish Empire in Spain, and that life and death, laws and liberty are in his hand. Let all men bow the knee to Abdelasis, Caliph and Emperor. God is God and Mahomet is his Prophet!' [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-101.jpg) \- external link  - Page 015. ] This proclamation was made not only in front of the palace where Ibrahim elevated the standard, but at all the gates of the city and in the bazaars and public places. Before midnight the streets were silent. The wounded had been removed to an old Christian Church, which Abdelasis converted into a hospital for their accommodation, and the dead were carried away to be buried. The insubordinate had been lodged in prison and the rebellious executed. Guards were posted in every square and placed at each gate of the city; and patroles paraded the streets till morning. At the rising of the sun the muezzins from their minarets called in their loud sonorus tones, `God is great! There is but one God and Mahomet is his Prophet!' But to this usual religious cry and call to worship Allah, they added on this morning---`and Caliph Abdelasis is the Prophet's vicegerent! Let all true believers fear and obey him!' Thus had Cordova fallen into the hands of the courageous Abdelasis. By ingeniously uniting the sacred authority of a descendant of Mahomet with his power as a chieftain and conqueror he effectually secured the obedience and allegiance of the moslems when they saw him seated on the throne of power. By unfurling the banner of their faith above his palace he proclaimed himself not only their ruler but their delegated Prophet. Thousands of the haughty Moors who would still have resisted and plotted against the mere Prince and Caliph, yielded passive submission to the representative of their prophet. The revolution had been complete. Moorish Spain was once more governed by a Prince of the regal line who had a right to carry at the head of his armies the sacred standard. No longer torn by the daily dissensions of a score of gover nors, Cordova began already to feel the blessings of having the reins of government held in one man's hands. By ten o'clock, the morning after his brilliant conquest, Abdelasis made his appearance in the Divan of the Palace, followed by his nobles and proclaimed that he was ready to give audience, to redress grievances and execute judgment. He was arrayed in the gorgeous green and gold robe of the Imperial Caliphs, and his lofty brow was crowned with a crescent of diamonds that glowed like the sun. His countenance expressed grace and condescension. His officers stood around him also gorgeously attired in robes suited to their station. Hamet Osmen he had appointed his Vizier, and he now sat at his right hand clothed in purple and green with a golden scymetar at his girdle, and a lawn turban upon his head, sparkling with emeralds. On the Prince's left stood the youthful Ibrahim, whom he had made the Reis Effendi, or High Chancellor of his Empire. Numerous were the cases which were brought before the new Caliph, all of which he decided to the satisfaction of the parties and won for himself a name for great wisdom as well as for great bravery. Before night the fame of the Prince, who studied to ingratiate himself with all, looking upon every man now as his subject, had gone abroad not only through the city but into the wide valley. He invited by proclamation all who had fled to return, and they should be protected in their homes, and goods, and pursuits; and all who had gone forth from the city the day before now came into it again and resumed their avocations. Thus within twenty-four had Abdelasis by his courage and skill conquered a kingdom and established himself on its throne, ruling with absolute power. Once more the old Moors lifted up their faces and prophecied great glory in the [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-102.jpg) \- external link  - Page 016. ] Empire under the new Caliph; and, indeed, so far as appearances went, he seemed destined to confer additional glory upon the Moorish conquest of Spain. THE TWO HERLSMEN. The news of the revolution in Cordova, of the overthrow of the government of the Emirs, of the death of the powerful Algezir, and of the accession of the conqueror, Abdolasis, to the Caliphate, thus consolidating the Moslem power in Spain, reached the ears of Gaspar and Alfonzo in their mountain home. The intelligence spread also far and wide in the valley and beyond the Sierras; but the news was received with indifference both by the Chrlstians and by the Moors. The former heard it with apathy, because it mattered little tn them who ruled in Cordova, so long as it was the power of the crescent that was wielded there; and the latter were satisfied because, if Abdelasis ruled in the place the Emirs, it was the decree of Allah. Thus they became submissive through their fatalism. `What is to be is to be! God is great, and Mahomet is his Prophet. Let Abdelasis live a thousand years. With these emphatie words the Moslem of the valley everywhere received the news of the change of Government. `There is great news, father,' said Alfenzo, as he entered the cabin, after having folded his gazelles at the close of the day in which Abdelasis sat upon the divan, giving judgment as Caliph. There is great news from Cordova. The Emirs have been defeated, and Abdelasis, our late guest, sits on the throne of the Caliphate! ' `I heard it, boy! I was down in the valley, and there met a Spanish slave, gathering dry sticks, with which ha was lading an ass. He told me the news.' `Who was this slave that prefers life to liberty, or even to death?' Sancho, who once dwelt by the sprtng of the palms, and whose Moorish master now holds his house, and even his daughters in his harem---Sancho has since had his heart broken, or he would not live so submissive as a slave!' `There are ten thousand Spaniards, father, with whole hearts and strong arms, this day, submissive bondsmen to the Moor. Would to God it was not so! What said Sancho that he had heard; for I only got a thread of the news from Pioso, the goatherd's boy, who said he had met, as he was driving his goats towards the city this morning, some who told him that Abdelasis was Caliph. Heard you particulars?' `I was told by Sancho that yesterday afternoon the Emirs fought among themselves, and Algezir, taking advantage of their confusion, attacked them, when Abdelasis, who was supposed dead, suddenly made his appearance with a large force on the ground, defeated Algezir and slew him, and then utterly dispersed the forces of the Emirs, slaying all but one or two who fled to the mosques, and then he proclaimed himself Caliph, unfurling their sacred standard from the portico of the royal seraglio.' `This is more news than I got,' answered Alfonzo, with animated interest. `So our false Moor has indeed triumphed. How different now would have been the state of things in Cordova, had we detained him here or have let him perished upon the mountains. Heard you anything further?' `That the new Caliph has filled the strong places of the city with his troops, taken possession of all the gates and placed them under a strong guard, and proclaimed pardon to all who will swear allegiance to him; and he has also called back all who fled, promising them [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-103.jpg) \- external link  - Page 017. ] protection and security to their lives and property.' `He means to establish his throne by clemency, that he may rule by and by with tyranny. He begins mildly, to end cruelly. I know the man, father.' `His gracious manner of proceeding promises no good, I am sure. His smile is worse than his frown. Now that he is Caliph, boy, how is this new government to affect us? But this is a silly question. What matters to you and I who rules in Cordova? We are herdsmen under the Emirs, and we shall be herdsmen under Abdelasis. We were poor yesterday, and we shall be poor to-morrow also.--- Spaniards no longer have any interest in the government of their native land. We are slaves, and all the change we have is change of masters.' `Yet we may feel the power of the new Caliph, father. The cup of bitterness and woe against poor Spain may not all be emptied! I fear the worst from the accession of this treacherous Prince. He is popular with his own people, and he is now formidable to his enemies. He will govern in such a manner that he will become their benefactor and our curse! He may be to them a mild ruler and an bonorable man, while only to us Christians he shows the dark side of his character! ' `He cannot press us down lower than we already lie. I fear him not. But as you say, he may be wicked enough to do us more mischief than his predecessors have left to be done. Now I can conceive that he may command any Christian to pay a tax of half he possesses into his coffers; and forbid their coming into Cordova, except they submit to circumcision, which they keep up with their father Abraham, though they are degenerate sons of Ishmael, and deny the Scriptures, as father Godfrey says!' `Have you seen the holy father to-day? ' `No.' `I was at his cell twice and he is not there. I fear he may have gone to Cordova! ' `What should take him there?' This question Alfonzo could not answer; yet he believed that he had gone there in order to see Ben Osmin, who had already been gone since the morning before; and he was led to this belief from the fact that the hermit had been seen going down into the valley the evening before, but had not been known to return; and that he had gone to Cordova was, he thought, more than likely, as he had sent Ben Osmin there before him. That Ben Osmin had really gone, Alfonzo ascertained that very morning, by paying a stolen visit to the Emir's tower. He found the gates closed and fast, and all quiet about. The only guard was Lopo, the dog, who seemed indisposed in his jealousy of all comers, to recognise even the lover of his fair mistress. Satisfied that they had departed at the time Genilla had said she should go, that is early the morning before, he slowly left the place and hastened to the mountain to his herd. But he carried with him a sad heart, and a mind filled with apprehensions for the safety of Genilla in the city. He was prompted more than once to hasten to Cordova to ascertain her safety and urge her to return without longer delay in so dangerous a place, where power and might were right. But he could not desert his charge, nor could he with safety go into Cordova; for besides being known to Abdelasis, he was known to many Moors who had been with El Zegris and who were now in Cordova. But when, ie the course of the afternoon, he got the news from the boy Pioso of the revolution in the city, his anxiety [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-104.jpg) \- external link  - Page 018. ] for the safety of Genilla in such a scene rendered him inattentive to further particulars of the intelligence brought by the lad. He hastened with his flock down from the mountain, and folding it, resolved that he would commit its charge to Pablo, until he should learn how it went with Genilla in the warlike city. He now was half resolved to go at once under some safe disguise to see what had become of Ben Osmin and his fair daughter, amid all the tumult of battle in which she had been environed.--- The idea that the hermit had gone into the city confirmed him in his half-formed determination to visit Cordova; for he feared that danger would menace the holy man as well as threaten Genilla. Love will seek excuses innumerable to defend any course it decides upon. So Alfonzo, nearly persuaded himself that his presence in Cordova was necessary for the safety of father Godfrey, although he was by no means certain that he had in reality gone there. That he was not in the mountain, he was well assured. He, therefore, when he recalled to mind his mysterious visit to Ben Osmin, and the subsequent departure of the latter, conceived that the same events which led the Moor to go to Cordova might have rendered it necessary also for father Godfrey to meet him there. It was these reflections, assisting his wishes, that led him to ask Gaspar the question he did. The interrogation with which it was answered, he could not reply to, or rather, he did not care to. If he had answered it, he would have to unfold more circumstances touching his knowledge of Father Godfrey's late movements than he wished to betray to Gaspar. `He could not go to the city, boy,' added Gaspar, without tossing his grey head. No, no, he is not in Cordova. Is it so rare a thing for the holy father to be absent, that you think he is gone to Cordova, if he be gone a day.' `But just at this time, father, it is dangerous for him to be in the valley. The Moors, elated with their new government, may be insolent and commit excesses. I am half of a mind to go to Cordova and see how things look there. I would like to have been there yesterday, during the fighting. It must have been a stirring scene. I shall, be able, father, to get into the city and out again, if I disguise myself as a Moor, which I will do. We have plenty of turbans, kaftans, and other of their Infidel apparel, taken from those whom we have conquered from time to time.' `I see no need of you going to the city, boy, unless you are tired of life. And I should disown you, to see your face under a Moslem's turban. Stay at home, and let the Moors and their city alone.' `I would see this Abdelasis on his throne; you know I have a quarrel with him.' `And I also,' answered the wolf-slayer, in a low fierce tone. `I would find occasion to punish him, Caliph though he be, and surrounded by his guards though he were.' `It would be needless. If thou goest, I go also. We both have quarrels with him. But it will not do for the mole to war with the eagle. We must be content to let things be. Come, boy, let Cordova and her Saracens alone. It grows late, and we should eat our suppers and go to bed. Where is Xariffa?' `Here, father,' answered the beautiful girl, entering at the moment, holding in her hand the beautiful net which she had heen at work upon when Abdelasis was in her apartment. `What is that, sister?' asked Alfonzo, looking upon her lovely face and figure, with the admiring eyes of fraternal affection and brotherly pride. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-105.jpg) \- external link  - Page 019. ] `The net for my hair I have been the last three days at work upon. Is it not becoming?' and she threw it over her head, and letting the front fall upon her brow, she bound her tresses in it by a knot, and stood before them, looking, as if conscious of the beautiful appearance it gave to her head. `It is very becoming, child,' said Gaspar, smiling. `You are always handsome, and need no such ornaments; but still it is very pretty. `You have great taste, Xariffa. Such a head-dress would become a princess. How gracefully it falls to the shoulders, like a scarf for them. If it were less open it would serve for a veil.' `Look. It is a veil already,' ssid Xariffa, smiling. And casting it about her face, and drawing the meshes together, it concealed her face like silken lattice. `Father, I see your eyes are cast-towards the table, and doubtless, you think I had better have been baking bread for thy [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-106.jpg) \- external link  - Page 020. ] supper and Alfonzo's, than idling my time in such work. But I have not forgotten thee; come and see.' With these words, she took her father's hand in hers, and beckoning to her brother to follow, she led them towards her own room; and throwing open the door, she pointed silently to a neatly arranged table, placed in the midst of the floor, covered with a white cloth, and set out with two or three plates and cups, dearly cherished mementos of former glory, and loaded with such a display and variety, that Gaspar exclaimed, `By the red mass, what does this mean, girl? Bread, curds, goat's milk, leeks, dates, and wine. This is a feast for our Emir.' `This is a surprise,' exclaimed Alfonzo. `You have shown us your best housewifery, Xariffa.' `What does it all mean?' asked Gaspar, looking both surprised, and pleased at what he saw. `This is thy birth-day, father. If thou hast forgotten it, I have not,' answered the maiden, with bewitching grace. `By the rood, I had forgotten it. My blessing on thee, child. Never had a father such a treasure as I have in thee. Kiss me, dear! Kiss her, boy! There. Now let us thank God, and eat.' THE BRIDE. The sumptuous supper, which the filial attention of Xariffa had provided for her father, in honor of his birth-day, had just been eaten by him and Alfonso, when there was heard in the outer room a loud voice, calling out---`Ho! Alfonso. Ho, Gaspar!' The two men sprung to their feet, and hastened to the main apartment of their hut, where they beheld two mountaineers, a young and an old man. They were looking very much excited, and upon the forehead of the young man was a heavy wound. `How is this? What has happened, neighbors?' cried Gaspar and Alfonso, in the same breath. `The Moors, Gaspar! The accursed Moors, Alfonso!' answered the old man, trembling with fear and rage, while he shook his clenched hand. `Yes,' criod the younger, more calmly, yet evidently labouring under intense emotion; `it is a new outrage of our tyrants, Alfonso. Thou shalt hear all.' `Sit down, Tito, sit down,' said Gaspar, offering him at the same time, a small bench. `No, no. This is no time to sit!--- Tell him, Louis! Tell him what hath happened. But, then, what good for them to know it. We can do nothing, we are slaves!' `Yes, they shall hear. The brave Alfonso shall know all, and he may aid me in revenge, if not in rescue! Thou knowest, Alfonso, that I was to have been married this night to the fair Agata, the daughter of the old miller, who lives at the mill?' `I heard so, Louis.' `And this afternoon when the sun was about two hours high, I started with my father and brother, and two friends, to go by the cliff path, and so down the valley road to the mill. But when we came near it we saw it in flames, and hastening forward, the cries of combat reached us, above which rose the shrieks of a female. I recognised the voice of Agata and rushed forward. As we got to the gate of the wall that encloses the court, we saw at least a dozen of Moors, engaged in plundering the house, while two of them were bearing off Agata between them on their horses. Upon seeing our approach, they galloped forward to pass us, but I seized one of the horses by the rein, and struck with my staff the [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-107.jpg) \- external link  - Page 021. ] rider to the ground; but the other succeeded, with Agata in his arms, in escaping into the plain, followed by the rest of the Moors.' `I would have stayed the man who fled with the maiden,' said old Tito, but he rode over me too quickly for me to grapple with him. But two of the Moors we tipped out of their saddles; but their horses escaped, or we would have mounted them and pursued!' `It would not have availed, Alfonso,' answered Louis, with accents of deep grief. `They flew like the wind across the plain. She is lost to me for ever! I shall never forget her looks and cries of anguish as she passed me, shrieking--- `Save me!' Oh, save me, Louis!' I did all man could do, but Heaven ordered that I should lose her! I was turning to pursue her on foot, when old Simeon came tottering up to me, bleeding with many wounds, which he had received in defence of his house and child. I stopped to support him. He had life only to tell me that he had done all in his power to protect Ageta; that the party of Moors had come to him demanding money, which not having to give, they had attacked and fired his house, and carried away his child!' `To sell her into slavery in the public Bazaar!' cried Tito, with indignant warmth. Gaspar, thou hast heard this outrage now. But thou answerest nothing. Does it not touch thee?' Suppose it had been thine own---' `Hush! Utter not such a thought to me! I was silent, because I could not find words to express my feelings. My heart was swelling too high for utterance. Boy,' he added, turning to Alfonso, who had listened with the most intense interest to the account of the young bridegroom, and now walked up and down the paved floor, with quick and firey steps.--- His eye blazed, and his hand grasped vehemently his wolf-spear. There was a stern determined resolution in his tread that spoke more eloquently than words. `How long since was this?' he suddenly stopped and demanded of Luis. `Not two hours; I have come hither as soon as I could, giving the news as I came to each hut. Oh! Alfonzo, that you could once more rouse the Sierras to arms, and avenge for me this wrong!--- But what can be done? Nothing, I know; we are but a few hundreds, and the land is filled with Moors.' `No, no---nothing can be done;' answered old Tito, shaking his gray head. `We must bear it;---but it does us good to tell one another of our wrongs---this is all we expect!' `When will Heaven have pity on our poor land?' cried Xariffa, with strong earnestness, having heard all. `Alas for the helpless fate of Agata! So good, so gentle, so fond of thee, Luis!' `Do not speak of her, Xariffa!---my heart will burst!' sobbed the young man, covering his face with both hands. `By the red mass!' cried Gaspar, `I feel in my arm the energy of a thousand men to avenge a wrong like this. As you were about to say, it might have been me instead of Simeon the miller. Did he die?' `We left him stark and stiff,' answered Tito. `Yes, he died after telling us what had befallen him and his; and I at once came along the mountain road this way, while my brother and my two friends went northward to give the alarm, and rouse the indignation of the people, and put them on the watch lest their own homes be invaded; for Simeon said that the Moorish captain told him that they were but one party of several, sent from Cordova to-day by the new Caliph Abdelasis, to levy subsidies of gold and silver for the support of the new government; [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-108.jpg) \- external link  - Page 022. ] and also with orders to make captive the most beautiful of the mountain maidens.' `So, if Simeon had given them gold,' said Gaspar, `they would still have taken his child.' `I thought,' cried Alfonzo, in tones that rung again, `I thought that the cup of our woes and degradation was full; but I see that there are yet outrages we can suffer! My friends, we must expect from Abdelasis such things as these, if we will bear them:---and what can we do?' `Nothing but bear them!' answered Tito despondingly. `We cannot help ourselves!' said Gaspar. `We are weak and they are powerful--- we must submit.' `I would that I had five hundred good Christian arms with mine,' cried Alfonzo, `I would not bear these things---I would lead them on to the very gates of Cordova---I would rescue Agata for thee, Luis, or have Abdelasis's head!' `Where wilt thou find even a hundred men, boy, who would follow thee to Cordova? We may get together a band to drive robbers from our Sierras, as we would band together against wolves to destroy them; but go to-night with Luis by thy side through the whole breadth and length of the mountains---let him proclaim at the door of every hut the wrong he has suffered, and let you call with the voice of a trumpet upon their inmates to arm and follow thee to the gates of Cordova, to bring back or avenge the maiden---what would they answer? Would they move? would they not call thee a madman? The men of Spain fear the Moor as well as hate him, boy! They dare not go forth in their strength to give him battle again, and drive him from heir soil.---We are all become slaves and serfs!' `I fear it is true what you say, father. I should fail in getting men to follow me to rescue this maiden. They fear the Moor; they are slaves---they, and you, and I---and we fear our masters! Oh! if my life, laid upon the altar of my country, would save it, gladly would I sacrifice it! But these wishes are vain, neighbors. Luis,' he added, grasping the hand of the unhappy youth---`You have lost Agata, and my heart bleeds for you! I feel for you as if you were my brother: for this is a wrong that comes home to us all. To-morrow every young man may stand in your place---every maiden in the place of the lost Agata. If by giving my life I could aid you, cheerfully would I give it; but I know not what to do---my father hath spoken too truly.' `I fear he has. Yet I know not what hopes led me to come to thee, Alfonzo! All eyes turn to you in danger!--- All hearts throb with pride when thou art named. Yet I know you cannot help me.' `And heavy is my sorrow and shame that I cannot. The Moor is stronger now than heretofore. Abdelasis is powerful! He will consolidate his empire by the union of the numerous parties that have hitherto weakened and torn it. We can do nothing! We can only pray to Heaven to have mercy upon us and not inflict upon us more than we can bear!' Thus speaking, Alfonzo walked slowly and sadly across the room. Luis stood silently gazing after him, and seemed to be wholly overcome with his great loss--- the heaviest and most grievous man can suffer. Old Tito did nothing but utter terrible denunciations against the Moors, and vehemently call upon the saints to interpose to their overthrow. Gaspar sat upon a bench, sullen and silent, his face between his hands, which rested upon his kness. By the door stood Xariffa, gazing in upon them with a pale countenance and looks of anxious solicitude. For [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-109.jpg) \- external link  - Page 023. ] some minutes all was still; each one engaged in his own painful thoughts. Suddenly the silence was broken by a heavy tread without, as if men and horses were approaching. Alfonzo sprung to the window, and, by the glowing twilight, for the sun had just gone down, he beheld three men coming very fast towards the hut. By their garb he knew them to be mountaineers, though two of them carried scymetars and a third was mounted upon a richly caprizoned Arabian steed. They were evidently bearers of some news, from their excited manner. `Who comes without?' cried Gaspar, slowly rising from his bench. `One of them is Guiseppo, and mounted upon a Moorish horse; the others are friends, though armed with scymetars!' answered Alfonzo as he threw open the door. `Thank the saints, thou art at home, brave Alfonzo, and thou Gaspar; and here is Luis and his father too!' were the words of the one upon the horse. `I am glad I have found thee!' `What is the matter? Hast thou met the Moors?' cried Alfonzo. `Yes, and slain each our man!' `God and the saints be blessed!' shouted Tito. `Hast thou seen Agata? Say that she is rescued!' cried Luis, as he laid his hand upon the arm of the speaker. `I know nothing of any rescue or of a maiden, neighbors,' answered the man, as he leaped from the horse. `Thou shalt know all. But briefly learn that this horse was half an hour ago straddled by a Moor, and that the two scymetars my two honest friends here bear were grasped by Infidel hands!' `How came this about?' demanded Gaspar, as he walked round the horse and looked at his rich harnessing, and then took one and the other of the scymetars into his hand to look at. `Hast thou heard the law yet?' asked Guiseppo, who was a short, crooked little man, with a very brilliant eye and a resolute air. `What law?' asked Alfonzo. `Dost thou speak of a law of the new Caliph's?' `Yes. Thou knowest Abdelasis is king of the Moors?' `We know it. Proceed! What law is this?' `It will astonish you. But I don't know that we ought to be astonished at any thing. This very day noon he issued a decree that every Christian within the realm of his rule should, within thirty days, report himself at the palace of Cordova, and there be registered, his name and his worldly goods, and his children and their ages; and this on pain of death for disobeying the edict!' `Do I live to hear this thing?' cried Gaspar, with intense feeling. `Peace, father,' said Alfonzo, with forced calmness: `words are not for such acts as these we are listening to! Peace, father, he has more yet to say!' THE DEATH OF THE MOORS. All bent eagerly forward to hear what heavier outrage than this already related, could be conceived against the conquered Christians by their conquerors. `Yes,' answered Guesippo, `I have more to say. The edict which I have spoken of, not only calls on us to register our names before the Reis Effendi, but it declares every Christian who shall refuse to become a follower of the Prophet, and worship in the Mosque of Omar on the day he registers his name, a slave, and as such to be brought and sold, as other slaves, in the bazaar!' `Do my ears hear thee aright, Guesippo? ' asked Alfonso, in a low impressive tone; and he laid his hand upon his shoulder for the answer. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-110.jpg) \- external link  - Page 024. ] `What I have just now said I will repeat. ' `No, no. These are enough. Now, tell me how thou hast heard this?' `Yes, Guesippo,' cried Gaspar and Luis in one breath! `Tell us how it came to thee?' `From the Moor's lips who sat in this saddle.' `Ah! Didst thou know him?' `Listen and know all I know, Alfonso. I was going with these two herdsmen, to sell a dozen goats to the Mufti, who lives in the Mosque, in the plain, once the Church of the village of San Maria. I would not sell to the Infidel, but we must live, neighbours. We must have gold and the Moors alone have it. I have often sold to the Mufti before, and made him pay well; though I would have been glad that the first mouthful of goat's flesh had choked him, and every Infidel that ate of it. I will secure this firey horse to the stake by the corner of thy hut, Gaspar!' `A thousand wishes wont kill one Moor,' answered Tito, as Guesippo returned and leaned with his back against a block at the door, while the others gathered around him with dark looks and earnest attention; the tall form of Alfonso over-topping them all. Directly opposite, and keenly facing Guesippo, stood Gaspar, leaning on his broken boar-spear, his wolf's knife by his side.--- Old Tito, supported by a staff taller than himself, stood within the door in the shade; and next to Gaspar, with her hand upon his arm and indistinctly seen, bent the fair form of Xariffa, eagerly listening. `I had sold my goats,' continued Guesippo, `and left the Mufti with my silver in my pouch, and accompanied by my two men here, who had helped me to drive the goats. I had not gone more than half a mile, when I heard galloping and shouting behind me, and looking back what should I see but three Moors on horseback coming after us at top speed. The road was narrow, and there was a thick brush hedge on either side, so that we could not get out of their way; for I had no desire to be too familiar with them, especially as I had a pouch of silver at my girdle. So I resolved to run for it; but finding they were coming up, I spoke to my men and said, we are three Christians to three unbelievers! Let us give them battle in the name of the Virgin. Each of you seize a horse by the bit, while you defend your heads with your staves, from the blows of their scymetars, and it may be, we will unhorse them! My men promised to do as I did, and turning full upon them, we rushed to meet them with loud cries, each of us seized a horse by the bit, and guarded our heads with our staves from the blows of their scymetars. Two of the Moors were unhorsed by the sudden shock given them by their horses being stopped so suddenly. The other broke away and fled, seeing us despatch these two before they could rise. One of the horses got off also, but I held mine firmly by the bit, and in an instant was in his saddle in pursuit of the fugitive. But he rode better than I, and turning back I bade my men take the scymetars of the dead Moors and come after me. So we held on our way at a good speed fearing pursuit; for the village was not half a mile behind us. But, thank the saints, we have reached here in safety, and show you our horses and arms as proofs of our words!' `You have done well, Guesippo, you and your friends. By the mass!' cried Gaspar, `I would I had the killing of these Moors!' `And you saved your gold?' enquired old Tito. `Yes, and have this fine horse and [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-111.jpg) \- external link  - Page 025. ] these scymetars besides; one of them, you see, has a hilt of solid gold.' `We should have great spoil of these Infidels, if we would have courage to fight them,' said Gaspar. `And these Moors were not then those who bore away Agata,' said Luis, with a tone of deep disappointment. `I had hoped, at least, that if she were not rescued she had been avenged.' Here Alfonzo briefly informed Guesippo of the outrage against Luis, and the death of Simeon the miller. `I saw such a party of Moors at a distance, passing east of the Mosque,' answered Guesippo. `They were a good three quarters of a mile off, and were riding towards Cordova.' `It must have been the same,' cried Luis. `Oh, my poor, lost Agata---what must be thy anguish, as well as mine!' `Slaves! slaves! slaves!' slowly and impressively repeated Alfonzo, as he walked up and down the room. `We are then become slaves! Oh, Christian men! can Spain submit to this? There are thousands in the land who have yet thought themselves free, so long as the Moor kept his hand from their tables; but they will now feel the weight of the Moslem yoke! Would to God they could feel it cut into their necks so deeply that, unable to bear it longer, they would throw it off as one man, and cry, `Liberty! and for God and Spain!' At these stirring words, those about him started, and Gaspar waving his staff, repeated the cry--- `Liberty! God and Spain!' `Words---mere words, my friends!' said Alfonzo, dropping his head sadly. `We have voices, and can speak---that is all! They have not cut out our tongues yet; but so long as we can do no more than talk, let us be silent. Men should use their steel, not their tongues!' `Alfonzo, if thou wilt tell me how to use mine to purpose,' cried Luis, `I swear to thee it shall be drawn and made good use of! I will not give rest to my body till I have avenged or rescued Agata.' `Thou talkest madly, boy!' cried Gaspar; `thou mightest as well say you will pluck Abdelasis by the beard before his divan.' The young man blushed, feeling too keenly the rebuke; for he felt that he was impotent---that he could in truth accomplish nothing. `I cannot tell thee, Luis, what to do--- save to bear or die,' answered Alfonzo, in answer to his call upon him for aid. `Spain will never move to throw off her yoke, or avenge her wrongs, without a prince to lead her to the field.' `We must have a leader, Alfonzo--- but it need not be a prince,' answered Luis. `If thou shouldst raise thy standard upon a peak of the Sierra, every man within sight of it would hasten to rally around thee.' `I believe it, boy,' answered Gaspar. `There is no doubt of it,' cried Guesippo. `Do not all men know thee to be brave---to love thy country---to mourn for her wrongs? Trust me, neighbors, that all in the mountains would sooner follow Alfonzo here than a prince whom they know not. We have tried thee, Alfonzo. ' `Mock me no more!' answered Alfonzo, with a bitter smile. `Mock me no more, my friends, and you my father. I have slain wolves and driven robbers--- am I therefore a leader of a people? You make me scorn myself, to think I should be so idly talked of, and entreated. My standard! What is it?---a wolf's hide? No, no! Make me not angry, my friends.' Thus speaking, the young man left them, and walked into the cabin. `Yet I will maintain my words, though he be angry,' said Luis to the rest. `If [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-112.jpg) \- external link  - Page 026. ] it were known that all men might have an opportunity of redressing their wrongs by flocking to the standard of Alfonzo, even were it no more than a wolf's skin hung upon his spear, he would find himself at the head of an army ere thirty days.' `I know it. The Spaniard is no longer asleep,' said Gaspar, `we are all awake to our wrongs. Our hatred of the Moor is ready to drive away our fears.' `I pray you, Gaspar,' said Guesippo. `I pray you talk with thy son.' `And press the matter upon him. He is the only man in Spain can save Spain,' said Luis. `Fair Xariffa, speak to thy brother, and rouse him to give the subject attention.' `My brother needs no rousing, friend,' said the maiden; `he feels too keenly now the wrongs his country bears. I have heard him groan, by night when others slept, over the oppression of his country. But he feels that he can do nothing, and what can he do? He is, even as yourselves, poor and without power. He would die for Spain, but his death would not redeem Spain. We must look to heaven, not to man, for aid.' `The maiden spcaks truly,' answered Tito. `I see nothing that we can do.' `And shall we tamely become slaves to the Moor?' `I would like to know what man will first give his name to be put on the register, ' said Gaspar with closed teeth, and speaking through them. `If I were by I would put my knife into his body.' `Yet, thou wilt have to do it thyself, Gaspar, brave as thou art,' answered Guesippo. Thou must do it or lose thy life.' `I will not register my name there. May I cut off my right hand ere it is so false to me.' `What wilt thou do?' asked Luis. `Wait till they come after me.' `And then?' `Write my name on their hearts with my broad knife,' responded the wolf-slayer, as he pressed the point of his knife upon the palm of his own hand. Then those who would, after me, write their names, may dip their pens in my blood, if they will. I go not to Cordova to worship in their Mosques---not I.' `Who talks of going to Cordova?' asked Alfonzo, coming forth with a stern brow, and firey air. `Who will bend his neck to the heel of the Moor? Speak; for I would see him?' `That is the temper I am glad to see thee in, my boy,' cried Gaspar with delight. `Thou didst mistake. Said I, for one, I go not to Cordova.' `And who also says he will not go among you?' asked Alfonzo, in the hoarse deep tones of a man who is deeply excited, but is endeavoring to repress all outward emotion. `I say not that I will not go to Cordova, but I say that I will never bow my knee in the Mosque of Omar,' firmly responded Luis. `I must see Cordova; for I must avenge Agata. I go there, not to use a pen, but a dagger.' `Bravely worded, boy,' cried Tito. `That spear hath the metal in it;' said Gaspar. `With one thousand men of such spirits, I would not fear to call on Abdelasis in his seraglio. What thinkest thou, boy? You seem gloomy.' `Gloomy? No, no; I am right merry. Have we not enough to make us glad? We, poor, valueless peasants, are to become of worth. We are to be priced by the head. Rejoice, Gaspar! Thou wilt be worth, perhaps, six hundred moidores of silver, and thou Luis, as many, perhaps. I may sell for five hundred; and thou, Guesippo, for five hundred and fifty, while Tito may be priced at three hundred, going less, in consideration of his age. Merry! Have we not reason [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-113.jpg) \- external link  - Page 027. ] to be merry; to think that we poor rogues of Christians are really worth so much counted gold. Who dares to be gloomy?' No one answered him. His words sunk deep into their hearts. With but few words more they separated, each to his home and bed, there to forget awhile their own and their country's wrongs. THE GAZELLE-KEEPER ON THE HILLS. Early on the ensuing morning, ere the day fairly broke, Alfonzo opened the door of the hut and walked forth. He had passed a sleepless night. The wrongs of his country, his sympathy for Luis, the edicts of Abdelasis, all pressed upon his thoughts and kept him waking. The most of the night he passed in pacing his room and devising a thousand schemes of exalted patriotism; but each of which he rejected as visionary. Conscious of his own weakness and that of Spain, compared with the power of Abdelasis, he he felt that all he could do was to weep and pray for his country. He felt---so reasoned he---that it was for God's honor that the crescent should be overthrown and the cross replaced, and he trusted that God would open a way to have it done. He trembled too for the safety of Xariffa. Ignorant that Abdelasis had seen and spoken with her, he nevertheless feared for her lest she might be taken away during his absence, as Agata had been borne off. He could not, however, place her where she could be safer. His hut was his only castle, and no place he could command was safer than that. To be there always was impossible; yet he hoped that the retired bamlet would escape the marauding parties of the Moors. At any rate, he resotved that either he or Gaspar would always remain at home; and he determined to arm all in the hamlet, and keep up a watch upon the path down to the valley. The ab sence of Genilla also, to Cordova, with her father, now for two days, deeply occupied his mind. His thoughts were tortured with the imaginations of a thousand evils which might have befallen her. At one moment he felt it his duty to go and seek her and ascertain her fate, and at the next he felt that a duty equally sacred called upon him to remain for the protection of Xariffa. He could not divide himself. He was, therefore, in a state of the most painful anxiety and suspense. Gladly, therefore, did he hail the first note of the cock which proclaimed the night departed and day at hand. It was still dark when he came out of doors. The stars were glittering like diamonds, and scarce a change in the deep blue of the sky, told which was the eastern horizon. The air was still, and silence and peace reigned everywhere about him, save in his bosom. He walked on a few paces, and he then thought he saw some object move in the darkness before him. He looked intently, and listening, he was sure he heard a small stone move, as if it had struck against another, as a footstep would disturb it. He thought of his fold of gazelles on the north side of his hut, and of the prowling wolf, and whistled low for his dog, while he stepped back into the door for his wolf-spear. He came out instantly, followed by Gaspar, whom he had called up. Both were armed and advancing cautiously towards the deep shadows under the woody rock, where he had heard the movemenls; he could discover nothing. They walked around the fold, and all was quiet. Ban the wolf-dog came towards them and rubbed his nose against them, and seemed to suspect something. `It must have been your fancy, boy,' said Gaspar. `I am sure I saw some object moving, but so indistinctly, I could not tell [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-114.jpg) \- external link  - Page 028. ] whether man or beast. The next moment I heard the noise under that date-rock.' `It may have been the dog himself.' `It is likely, since we discover nothing. If it had been a wolf, he would have left his scent on the air, and Ban would have snuffed it! Do you go to the hills this morning, father?' `Why do you ask that? Have I not four score goats to feed on the mountains? Must I not watch them and show them where to browse, and pick up their scanty forage? I am not rich enough to stay in the valley a day while the Moor is in the land. I might ask you if you were going to keep your sixty gazelles and kids in their folds to-day!--- Come, let us rake our breakfasts in our scrips and off!' With these words, Gaspar, who this morning was in a worse humor than usual, removed the oaken bar from the gate of his fold, and going in sullenly, drove out his herd and turned them up the mountain. He then entered his cabin, where Xariffa was already stirring, took his bag or scrip containing his breakfast, and fastened it to his rough and hairy girdle. `Now the good angels keep thee on the hills to-day, father!' said the maiden, as she kissed, as her custom was, his cheek before he went out. `Thy face is heavy! I hope thou art not ill!' `I am sick for poor Spain, daughter,' was his answer. `Keep close within today. Thou knowest enemies are abroad. I shall not wander out of sight of the cabin, so that if the Moor be seen in the valley, coming this way, I may be here to do battle for thee!' `Father, the Holy Virgin will protect all who trust in her!' `I hope so, child, I hope so! Let me kiss thee again! There! Now take care of thyself. I feel sad to-day, very sad and heavy. But it will pass off when I get upon the hills where the fresh air blows!' At this moment entered Alfonzo, who had also turned his gazelles from the fold and sent them with Ban up the hill-side. `Boy,' said Gaspar, `we have a kid here to guard against worse wolves than menances our folds. If thou canst keep in sight of the hamlet through the day, and also have a sharp eye upon the roads in the valley. If thou seest any parties prowling about our glen, hasten home, sounding thy goat-horn with the fierce war notes that used to ring in the ears of El Zegris!' `I will do so, father. I feel that we have in Xariffa a most sacred charge.--- At any hour the Moor may be in our hamlet!' `Fear not, brother,' said the matden, smiling, though in truth she felt sorrowful at heart; for since she knew that the youthful Moor who had declared his passion fer her was the same Abdelasis, now become Caliph, she trembled at a power which, prompted by his mad love, might make her its victim. `Fear not, brother. The fearless are ever secure!' `Heaven grant that no danger come nigh thee, my sister. I go now upon the hills, but as no Moor can come near the hamlet without being seen in the valley, I shall be here as soon as a foe can be. But I trust our little humble home will escape the eye of the destroyer!' Xariffa now prepared her brother's breakfast as she had her father's, and in a few minutes afterwards he was slowly winding his way up the side of the mountain after his gazelles. The dawn was just silvering the east as he reached the rock by the old date tree where he had first heheld Abdelasis, when haughtily advancing he commanded him and the hermit to give way and let him pass.--- The valley of the Guadalquiver still lay [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-115.jpg) \- external link  - Page 029. ] in darkness and the repose of night. A he ascended, the light increased, and when about six hundred feet up the mountain, he paused, and by a signal dispersed his gazelles to forage. He then watched the opening day. Gradually the sky brightened, changing its pale, silvery hue to a mellow rose, and the rose deepened into a purple, which rapidly catching the glories of the advancing sun, became a rich deep hue of gold. The valley threw off its veil of darkness, and the forest stood boldly forth from the plains, and then the vineyards became distinct, then the villas upon them and the gardens; and soon the Guadalquiver, catching the golden radiance of the moon, shone like a burnished spear; and suddenly the crescents of the Mosques in Cordova flashed back the first beams of the sun which had already some minutes before kindled the peaks of the Sierras. The position from which Alfonzo beheld the day advancing hid from his sight the hamlet; as he intended to go higher up the mountain still, where it would once more be in view beneath him, as well also the Emir's tower. He, therefore, now began slowly to drive his flock before him to the higher region of the mountain. He had proceeded but a short distance, when he beheld Gaspar, who was standing upon a bold rock on the opposite side of a vast cleft in the hill, and waving his bernish towards him and at the same time pointing down the mountain in the direction of the valley. Alfonzo could also hear him shout, but could not understand what he said, for he was a third of a mile distant. But suspecting from his manner, and seeing him begin rapidly to descend the rocks with great leaps, that some enemy was in sight, he hastened forward to a bold promontory which commanded a full view of the hamlet and the family. As he ran he heard the sound of a horn blown in the direction of the gorge. Loud voices came to his ears from the hamlet. He thought he heard a female shriek. He bounded onward---he flew! he out-stripped the wind. He reached the promontory and glanced down the sleep mountain side. The roofs of the eight or nine cabins composing the hamlet were directly beneath his feet. Could his eyes be believed. But his ears confirmed their vision. There was a party of not less then three score Moorish horsemen---the fierce Zenetan cavalry by their red sashes and long lances, in possession of the hamlet. The door of the hut was thronged with them. Two or three mountaineers were seen flying up the glen with terror, and Pablo was visible ascending the mountain, blowing the horn he had heard. A glance showed all this to the startled eyes of Alfonzo. He comprehended all his sister's danger. It was with an effort he resisted the impulse to fling himself from the lofty height on which he stood among his enemies. He saw one bring his sister forth shrieking, and leap into his saddle with her in his arms. He staid but a second to wind a war blast upon his horn, and then, with rage and grief burning his breast, he flew to her rescue, not calculating the numbers against him. The strange conduct of Gaspar was now explained to him. He saw that he had first discovered the Moors in the hamlet. As he descended, Gaspar met him at the intersection of the paths. Neither spoke a word, but, grasping hands, bounded down the steep path towards the hamlet. As they descended they could see the Moors galloping out of the hamlet, and beheld them going at a slow pace carefully down the rocky way by the cascade. They could see Xariffa [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-116.jpg) \- external link  - Page 030. ] clasped in the arms of the foremost, borne farther and farther from their eyes Who can picture their grief and bitterness of soul? At length they reached the hamlet. They stopped not to go into their now deserted cabin. They knew that she, so loved, was no longer there. Pablo and two of the herdsmen of the hamlet joined them. The five pursued with the speed of hounds. But horse were fleeter even than the feet of love or the wings of vcngeance. When they got into the plain and could see before them a mile through the forest, the party of horse were just visible disappearing in a slight depression of the road, and evidently moving at a very rapid rate. `Stay, Alfonzo! We may as well stay and leave her to her fate. We can do nothing. God has cursed us! Let us lie down and die!' and Gaspar, the strong stout Gaspar, with his iron frame and courageous heart, sank upon the green sward beneath a forest tree, and buried his head between his knees. Alfonzo could not gainsay his father's words. He well knew that pursuit would be in vain. That to attempt, even if he came up with the party, to rescue her, would be attended with the sacrifice of his own and his father's life without benefit to her. He stopped, therefore, following the waving plumes of the Zenetan horse until they were out of sight, and then striking his forehead in the anguish of his soul, he cried, as he gazed upon his prostrate father, `You are right, we can do nothing, you and I and these three; but the time has come when these shall become three thousand! From this hour I swear, and hear me Heaven! I swear that I will live only for vengeance and the freedom of Spain! This hour I dedicate myself to my country! If there be no Prince to lead, let men follow a peasant, so he lead them to liberty and revenge!' THE CONSPIRACY. At these stirring words of Alfonzo, uttered as they were in the stern moment, and under the fierce influence of the bitterest grief, Gaspar raised his face from between his knees and smiled. The smile was not scornful nor mocking, but it was like a beam of sunshine from his soul. He rose to his feet, and looking Alfonzo steadfastly in the eyes, he said, `Young man, thy speech would have brought me to life, had I been dead. Did thy words come from thy heart?' `From the depths of my being, my father. I can no longer remain passive.--- Well did Guiseppo say I needed to be roused. I am now roused fully. It only wanted this last drop to make my cup too bitter to be drank. `Xariffa!' he cried, stretching out his hands in the direction the Moors had borne her, `be patient! Thou shalt be avenged! Henceforth I know only thee and my country. Father, I am but one---and these our friends are but three more; but we will increase apace. There is Luis and Tito, and Luis's brother, and there are our neighbors on the east and west and north of us. They will join us when they hear that Alfonzo would avenge his sister, for they all loved her.' `Oh, this is worth living for, boy!' cried Gaspar. Now thou art thyself. I see that it wanted but this. You no longer doubt your power and influence! ' `I doubt nothing. I am all hope. I will accomplish everything that I am going to undertake. Xariffa may not be saved from the harem of the despoiler, but she shall be avenged. Now, father, let us talk calmly of what shall be done. For the present let us forget my sister.--- Let us bend our minds to the great purposes that are pressing upon them. Thou art ready to be with me in what I will do, father?' [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-117.jpg) \- external link  - Page 031. ] `There is my hand, boy; and I make upon it and thine the sign of the cross.' `It is enough! Now hear me! There are yet to be found in the mountains the hundred men who have fought with me against El Zegris. Go to each of them and say that Alfonzo needs them again, and that he raises his standard--- `The wolf-skin!' `No---not now. That will do to go against robbers with. But now we are to fight the infidel and war against the crescent. Say to them that Alfonzo has raised the standard of the Holy Cross on the rock of St. Paul, and they that love Spain must hasten to it without delay, and each bring his companion with him.' `Oh, this tells again. I could almost forgive the Moor for robbing me of my child, to know that another blow is to be struck for Spaiu.' `I would I had not been so selfish. I would that the tale of other's wrongs had come home to me as this has done. I did, indeed, have need to be touched close to my heart to feel as I ought. But there shall be no lack of action now. I will avenge both Luis and myself, if my countrymen will stand by me. Oh! who have we here? A horseman, and lo! a score of footmen running after him!' `It is Guiseppo. There is Luis also and a score of friends,' cried Gaspar.--- `They come armed. Hear their shouts. They have heard of our loss, and come bravely to the rescue.' `Thank God! This does not look like cowardice!' said Alfonzo. `I do in my heart believe that the hour has come not only for me to act, but all Spain to feel that it must rouse from its bondage. How bravely they come on. What ho, friends! Welcome!' `Is this news true?' cried Guiseppo, who, mounted on the Moor's horse he had captured the day before, came first up, brandishing a scymetar in his hand. `Too true, Guesippo.' `And where are they?' `Beyond pursuit: we abandoned it here in despair.' `I could go no further, neighbors,' said Gaspar; `when I saw my child disappear beyond succor, I sank beneath this great tree, and should have died here, but for words that came from Alfonzo that put life into me, and, as you see, have made me strong again.' `What were they?' cried Luis; `let us hear them.' `That from this hour he would consecrate himself to the liberty of Spain and the overthrow of the Saracen! He spoke from his heart, and I stood up and embraced him, thanking God that the only man who can redeem Spain had resolved to redeem her. Yes, Alfonzo, surprised you look: but I assure you that every patriot in the land has had his eyes on you with hopes they hardly dared breathe.' `I thank them all; I will fulfil those hopes, my friends, or perish! The audacity of the Saracen has got to its height; our forbearance has given him power and insolence: we are slaves because we had not courage to be freemen. Luis, Gaspar, my father, you my friends all, go and tell each his neighbor the tale of wrong done this day. Luis, I need not urge you to be diligent in rousing the people---your wrongs shall be avenged as well as my own and our country's. Now, Luis, bear to each man thou meetest the word that Alfonzo has raised the standard of the cross, and calls on all Christians to rally around it. Here come more of our friends.' `By the mass! we shall number fifty soon!' cried Gaspar: `see how they rush onward!' `Would that the Moorish party were now near!' said Alfonzo; `we would rescue Xariffa, and punish her captors! [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-118.jpg) \- external link  - Page 032. ] But we have now only to look to vengeance. Welcome, neighbors! you are too late to pursue the Moor, but not too late to draw the sword in defence of Spain!' As he was speaking, a party of at least twenty-eight men, herdsmen and mountaineers, armed with spears and pikes and large knives, came up one after the other. They had heard the sound of the war-trumpet, and hearing from the women they met in the hamlet what had occurred, they boldly pressed forward to join Gaspar and Alfonzo in pursuit. `Dost thou know, Juan,' said Gaspar, to one who seemed to be the leader of the party,---`dost thou know that Alfozo has promised to lead against the Moor, as he did against El Zegris, all who will follow him?' `Then he will find himself at the head of ten thousand men, for this number of our countrymen will follow him,' answer-the man with animation. `But this is too good news!' `It is nevertheless true, my friend,' answered Guesippo; `we are to have a leader, and the Moor shall yet tremble on his divan! We must strike now for Spain, or never. We have but thirty days in which to become slaves, or free Spain of the Moors!' `The nobles will not follow him,' said a young man of the party that was just come up. `They despise the peasants of the mountains.' `We need not the nobles' aid,' answered Gaspar; `we peasants will free Spain. Every true man, noble or serf, will rally around him who dares set up the standard of the cross within sight of the crescent. Our nobles are exiles, and poor and depressed, and their pride is gone. If they will not come to the rescue, let them remain in their bondage. We at least will be free. Thirty days, neighbors, is a short time to drive the Moor out of Spain---but, God willing, we will do it.' `We must go to work secretly at first not to alarm the Moor and awaken his vigilance,' said Alfonzo, looking around him into the dark forest in which they were thus accidentally assembled.--- `There are no foes looking on---yet let us be cautious with our voices. `The Moor must be ignorant to the last moment. The time to do something for Spain is ceme. I feel my own weakness and inexperience, but as you call on me to lead in this great movement, I will do so, till some one abler shall take the conduct of it. It is needful that some one should stand up for Spain, though it be one so humble as I am.--- What I am I give to you, and to my country. ' `Lo! The hermit.' `Father Godfrido!' `See! There comes the holy Abbot,' cried several voices, pointing along the forest path where he had just appeared; and Gaspar hastened to meet the old man who was advancing towards the group at a rapid pace, and with looks of surprise. He was hailed by them with animation, mingled with reverence. Alfonzo ran, and meeting him, embraced him with affection. `God has returned thee in safety, holy father! I began to fear evil had befallen thee!' `I am well. But what means this assemblage? ' demanded the hermit, as he gazed round upon the stern faces, and armed hands, of the congregated mountaineers, as they stood grouped beneath the majestic tree, which grew over the road. `Hast thou met no Moorish horse?' asked Gaspar, earnestly. `I beheld a large party of cavalry a mile or more distant, but turned aside into the adjoining wood, and so let them pass.' [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-119.jpg) \- external link  - Page 033. ] `That party of horse, father,' said Alfonzo, taking his hand and pressing it with deep emotion, while his brow wore a cloud of dark vengeance, `That party bore away in its midst, my sister Xariffa, as a captive! I was on the mountain, when they came to the hut: but, doubtless, they approached in the night---had been lying in wait in covert till I should depart; for well they knew they would not all return, who came on such an errand. After I reached the mountain, they rushed upon our peaceful home--- and I only heard the cry of alarm in time to see them galloping from the hamlet, with Xariffa in their power. I sounded the war-cry, and gathered together such friends as I could, and pursued, but in vain. Here we stopped, and here have we been binding ourselves together, no more to return to our pursuits, till Spain is free of the Moorish yoke! Doubtless, thou hast heard of the thirty days time given us, within which, to become Moslems, or die!' `Yes, my son, I have heard it,' answered the hermit; for I have been in Cordova!' `And come back in safety.' `I wore the dress of a Mufti, and so escaped the vigilance of the Infidel!--- There I beheld Abdelasis, and heard with my own ears proclaimed the bondage of my people! I came back to the mountains, my son, to call upon thee to do what I see thou hast resolved to do--- make an effort to free Spain from the Infidel! I see by thy bearing in the midst of those who stand around thee, looking up to thy face with hope and confidence, that thou art chosen tbeir leader! ' `Alfonso is our chief! We will follow him wherever he will lead!' cried Guiseppo. `We will avenge the wrongs of Spain or perish.' Gaspar now briefly stated what had been done by them, and when he ended, the hermit said with a face beaming with joy--- `The hour at length has come for which I have for twenty years fasted and prayed. Heaven has heard the prayer of our bleeding land. For this moment, my son, Alfonso, have I been training my mind and heart. I knew that this hour would come. I knew when it came all men's eyes would be fixed on thee! Thou hast higher ends in view, my son, than mere vengeance against those who have robbed thee of thy beloved sister, for whom I will mourn by and by! I will forget her now, though thou mayest remember her to nerve thy arm if need be. But I know that thou art afflicted in all the afflictions of thy country. I know that thou lookest to her emancipation in thus consecrating thyself to her. Thou standest up among thy people, not the avenger of a sister merely, but with a nobler aim, as the redeemer of thy country! As such I hail thee! Kneel, my son, and receive my blessing, and be consecrated to thy great mission!' The young chief reverently kneeled before the majestic person of the hermit, who laid his hand upon his head, and raising his eyes heavenward, he said in the most solemn manner, while all uncovered their heads, Gaspar and Luis and Guiseppo kneeling a little behind Alfonzo. `I now consecrate and set thee apart, Alfonzo, as the redeemer of thy country; her leader in battle; her defender and saviour, in the name of the most Holy Trinity. May the blessing of the God of armies be upon thee and the spirit of the Lord Jehovah guide thee!' Thus speaking, the holy hermit took from the olds of his garment a small silver cruse of peculiar construction, and from it poured a few drops of fragrant oil upon his head, adding, `Thus I anoint thee the Deliverer of [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-120.jpg) \- external link  - Page 034. ] Spain, in the name of the Father Son and Holy Ghost, Amen!' `Amen!' profoundly responded Gaspar; and from every lip echoed the like deep and solemn response. THE DEPARTURES. Alfonzo , thus solemnly anointed leader of the Christians, in this incipient movement to overturn the Moorish power, rose to his feet, looking both surprised and serious. The consecration had made a deep impression upon his mind, as well as upon the minds of those who had witnessed it. He was diffident of his influence over others, but still feeling that some one should rise in behalf of Spain, humble as he was, he was willing to give himself, his life, all that he was, to her. The hermit now took from its sheath the dagger of the young chieftain, and going to a helm tree near at hand, he struck from it two branches, one shorter than the other, and stripping them of their bark, he bound them together in the middle with a withe of the bark, thus constructing a rude cross. This he placed in the hands of Alfonzo, and said, `Behold the symbol of salvation. By this, conquer its enemies!' `I will do it, if Heaven give me help,' answered the young chief firmly, as he kissed the cross. `Now give it back to me, my son! I take it from thy hand and bearing it aloft in my own, I go forth to call the mountains and valleys beyond to its defence. I will tell every man that Alfonzo the Destroyer, the Saviour of Spain, hath sent this cross to all who love Christ Jesus, and calls upon them to come to his standard, for the freedom of Spain!' `And I, too, will go forth and rouse the land!' cried Gaspar. `Nay, father, I need thy council and experience,' said Alfonzo. `Keep thou at hand and aid me in bringing to a head this great revolution that has been put upon me. Thou shalt get together at once our friends of the mountains and be their chief until I am ready to lead them. I have work to do, also; for there are men to stir up whom I must see in person! There are men, now slaves, in Cordova who must be told of this, and Spaniards who purchase their homes from spoil with large tribute. These must be told what is at work for Spain. Be thou at the hamlet there to receive and martial all who come to thee. Let each one here who loves Spain give himself to the work. Let them go in every path and defile of the mountains, let them penetrate the gorges of the hills and every nook of the plain. Let others, in such disguises as can best secure their safety, visit the valleys, and the towns in them; and let the good news go from lip to lip to all parts of the land! Within thirty days, if we are true to ourselves, Spain will be free and the Holy Cross take the place of the fallen crescent.' This address was received with deep feeling by the three score hardy mountaineers who heard it, and after some further particular directions, and some cautions to move with secrecy and let not a Moor's ear get the news of the revolt till the day of action arrived. `We must see first my friends,' said Alfonzo, as they were about separating, each on his own mission to his countrymen, `we must first see how many men there are in Spain that wish to throw off the Moslem yoke. We must not move without being sure of conquest. In ten days we can tell how large a force can be depended on when the standard of the Cross shall be lifted up. Each of you will return to me within that time, and you will find me at the rock of St. Paul's. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-121.jpg) \- external link  - Page 035. ] There shall I lift the Holy Sign of our salvation when the day for its display shall arrive. Till then let us advance cautiously; for the Moor must be taken in a snare, and unprepared to resist his fate. You will each let me know how many can be looked to to join us. Say to all that by the day of St. James, the cross will be lifted up and the blow which is to break or rivet forever the Moorish chains upon us, will be struck; for my friends, few or many, to rally around me, I shall raise the standard and trust in God.' The mountaineers now separated each to the important duty assigned him by their young chief. These men had all been with Alfonzo on his gallant expeditions against the banditti of the Sierras, and loved and honored him. They felt that he was the only man to lead them against their haughty couquerors. Their spirit they resolved to infuse into the souls of all who had not seen and known their chief. The solemn consecration he had received at the hands of the Christian hermit had its impression upon them. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-122.jpg) \- external link  - Page 036. ] After the ceremony, Gaspar had informed them that the cruse used and the oil were the very same with which the last King (for he had seen that ceremony) had been consecrated by the archbishop, for he knew the cruse again and recognised the fragrance of the ointment. Alfonzo, Gaspar, the hermit, Guiseppo and Luis were left standing together beneath the tree, Guiseppo holding by the bridle his Arabian; they remained silently watching the retiring figures of their friends, as they went away in various paths, till all disappeared. Now may Heaven send its blessing with each one of those honest and brave men,' said the hermit. `I foresee the redemption of Spain, my children. The voice which these patriots of the cross will utter shall find an echo in every Spanish heart. The people only want a leader, and they have one of themselves, and one whom nobles will not disdain to follow; for whose name in Spain is wider known for valor than thine, my son.' `I know that father,' cried Gaspar.--- `But the boy is so modest he blushes at praise, and I believe thinks no better of himself than as if he had never done anything but tending gazelles all his life. Why, there is not a child in the land that will not answer when asked who cut off the head of El Zegris. It was Alfonzo the Destroyer. What I have heard and seen this day, father, has made me young again. I forget my child in thinking of what has followed her capture. She has become a sacrifice to the freedom of Spain.' `Speak not thus, father! Xariffa is in the hands of the Moor, and nothing can lessen my grief at this reflection. Though I should take Cordova at the head of my countrymen, I should weep my sister lost.' `Thou shoulds think more of thy country than of the maiden, my son. Provi dence hath ordered this, to bring good out of evil. Thou mayest yet recover her in safety. We all loved her. To me she was very dear, and thou seest tears are in my eyes, as well as thine, while I speak of her. But it is not wise to give way to useless grief. To recover her is impossible, till thou shalt take her with thine own hand from the Moslem Harem, which doubtless will become her prison. Give her to the care of the good Saint, and give thy thoughts to thy country.' `I will do so, father. I should not have waited till Xariffa was taken, ere I moved. But I did not feel confidence in myself. I now feel not confidence in myself, but in the justice of the great cause to which I am committed. I will forget Xariffa till the hour comes when I can recover or avenge her.' `Which way now, my son?' `I am going to Cordova.' `It is madness; you will be slain.' `I must do my work. I must not shrink in the outset from danger. I must stir up conspirators within its walls as well as without.' `Thou hast spoken wisely. How do you go?' `I shall go in the disguise of our foes. I must use caution and subtlety. My father has two or three Moorish costumes in the hamlet, and one of these I'll put on. Let us go thither.' `Noble Alfonzo,' said Guesippo, `thou art our chief. This horse becomes thee, not me. I give him to thee.' `Nay, I need him not.' `But thou shalt take him, boy,' cried Gaspar. `If thou art to disguise thyself as a Moor, thou wilt carry it better in the saddle than on foot. Guesippo, the sturdy rogue, needs no such luxury. Mount him?' `Thou, holy father,' said Alfonzo. `No. It is thy place, my son. It is [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-123.jpg) \- external link  - Page 037. ] not far to the hamlet, and I will walk thither with Gaspar, and Luis, and Guesippo. ' Unable to resist, Alfonzo leaped into the saddle, and sat the noble charger like a prince. `I go with you to Cordova,' said Luis, coming to his stirrup, and speaking earnestly, in a low tone. `I must see and know where my Agata is.' `Thou art needed to get together thy friends, Luis. Thy presence, and sad tale of wrong, will carry with it fire to all who hear thee.' `Wilt thou then seek her out, and learn her fate?' `As faithfully as I will do that of Xariffa. ' The young man pressed his hand with gratitude. The whole party now proceeded towards the mountain gorge, in the entrance to which the hamlet was situated. Alfonzo rode on in advance, with the hermit at his side; leaving Gaspar to collect and drive back half a score of scattered kids which were wandering away. When at length, Gaspar reached his door with his companions, they were not a little startled to behold what seemed to the eyes a Moor, come forth and leap into the saddle of the Arabian, which was standing at the door. A smile and wave of the hand from him, to them, caused Gaspar to exclaim, `I had never supposed a Christian would look so much like a Moor. By the mass, boy, thou hadst like to have had my boar-spear flying through the air at your breast.' `Is it a fair disguise friend?' asked Alfonzo, as he rode up to them. `It is needful that I should be wholly free from suspicion. Look at me well.' `Thou art a thorough Saracen,' cried Guesippo. `It is with much ado I could keep my spear's point quiet,' said Gaspar. `If I did not know thee I should swear thou wert a son of the Prophet, like the rest of them.' `Then I will venture on my nightly mission in this disguise,' answered Alfonzo, with that serious, sad air which had not divested his face for a moment, since the capture of Xariffa. `In three days, Gaspar, I will return hither, and tell thee all how the hearts of men beat in Cordova; for there are three thousand artizans in the city, besides five thousand slaves, and many rich Spaniards, who live only at the will of the Moslem, by paying heavy sums every month---a state worse than bondage. I shall move among all these, and know how they will receive the news of a revolution for the over-throw of the power of their masters.' `In the meanwhile,' said Gaspar, `I will be in your place here, to receive all who come with arms to rally around thee!' `Farewell, my son,' said the hermit, coming forth from the hut where he had been with Alfonzo while he dressed; `I go to carry this cross from hamlet to hamlet, and call on every Christian to flock to the standard of Liberty, for the freedom of Spain from the curse of the Crescent! But first I will walk a little way by thy stirrup, for I have a few words to say to thee touching Cordova and thy visit thither!' Luis now came up, and Guiseppo also, and taking an affectionate leave of their young chief, departed on their mission. Gaspar embraced his son with emotion, and commanding him to the grace and protection of all good angels, retired abruptly into the cabin. Alfonzo, dismounting, led his horse down the path, while father Godfrey, walking by his side, said, `Before thou leavest me, my son, I would commend thee to one in Cordova whom thou wilt find ready to receive [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-124.jpg) \- external link  - Page 038. ] thee, and to give his gold and his life for Spain! It is the Signor Velez, once high in authority when our old Spanish Kings reigned; but who now lives in outward obscurity. Thou wilt find his house the fourth door from the Mosque of Omar, on the left hand. The outside of the house is mean, but thou wilt find hospitality within. When thou appliest at the door, place this little cross in the hand of the master, and he will receive thee without further question!' As the hermit spoke he placed in the hands of Alfonzo a small silver cross, on which was graven in Hebrew the word `Jehovah.' `Thanks, kind father!' answered Alfonzo. `I needed some place like this to go to! Can I trust him fully with all our plans?' `Yes; thou wilt find him wearing, as thou dost now, a Moorish dress---for outwardly he professes to be a Moslem, but it is only a garb that he may be a spy upon his foes. When shall we see thee again?' `In three days at the farthest, father,' answered Alfonzo; `I shall see who will be with us there, and then return to learn how the people of the Sierras look upon the effort about to be made to throw off the yoke of the Moor.' `I will soon after that be with thee.--- Fear not---doubt not, my son! Spain only wants a leader, and thou art he whom God has given to it. Now fare thee well, and the blessing of Heaven go with thee and prosper thee, my son!' The hermit now pressed the hand of his young friend, turned silently away, and with his staff in his hand walked rapidly into the forest northward. Alfonzo looked after him for a moment with a longing farewell glance; and then said with a kindling eye, as he pressed his horse forward,--- `Now for Cordova, to plot its down fall! Xariffa, thou shalt be avenged! Spain, thou shalt yet be free!' THE YOUNG VINE-DRESSER. The route of our youthful chief lay, for a mile and a half, directly through the heart of a dark forest, crossed in every direction, by paths worn by muleteers and woodmen. There was one tolerably straight path, but narrow, which led from the foot of the mountain, near the hamlet, in the direction of the Guadelquiver. Alfonzo galloped forward, for about a mile, without drawing rein. He was surprised to see two wood-gatherers suddenly fly from the road on seeing him; but, when he recollected that he wore the Moorish attire, he saw the reason of their flight, and sighed at the new proof of the degradation of his countrymen. `It is time Spain rose and asserted her right to be a nation of freemen. We have been slaves so long, we tremble at the sight of a turban. But there shall be a change soon, if my countrymen are true to themselves. It may be that they will refuse to recognise my claim to be their leader. But if one among them will stand up and raise the standard of the cross, I will follow him. But there seems no one ready; all my friends look to me. Even my father turns to me and bids me take the lead. It is true I have done something to aid my countrymen; and it is true that in Xariffa's capture, I have endured an outrage, that seems to call on me to act whether others move or not and this I will do. I know not what the holy hermit meant by pouring that cruice of fragrant oil upon my head. How solemnly it was done. There seemed to be a deep meaning in it: gladly would I have asked him, but I feared he would think I thought too much upon the circumstance. There was, doubtless, some sacred virtue in the ointment. I do, [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-125.jpg) \- external link  - Page 039. ] indeed, feel that I am set apart for this great work: and will the thousands of Spain, now in bondage, rise at my call upon them? Will Spain consent to be made free by the hands of a peasant? The nobles may mock, but the peasantry will follow me, and so if I achieve liberty for these I am content. There is the road which turns off towards the Emir's tower. I will take it on my way, and know what hath become of Genilla. Her nation will protect her from the outrages which Christian maidens suffer. But I would know if she is returned in safety from Cordova.' He had ridden but a few rods in the new path he had taken, when he beheld before him two Moorish vine-dressers, driving an ass laden with grapes in panniers. He felt that now his disguise would have a fair test, without much danger, even should it fail, as he was well armed with daggers and a scymetar, while they carried only their staves sharpened with an iron pike, the usual arms of both the Moorish and Spanish peasantry. As he rode towards them, he saw them commence driving and pushing the ass out to one side of the path, to give room for him to ride by, their harsh cries and blows making the forest echo again. His costume was that of a Moorish officer, of the rank of a captain, and as to it he had added a green silk turban---the sacred color of the Prophet---taken from one of his former Moorish prisoners, he carried with him authority and power. The two men got their ass to one side of the way, and there held him, as Alfonzo rode by. They both made a profound salaam with their faces to the ground as he passed. To be sure that they saw him well, he reined up, and asked in good Arabic, for the language of their conquerors was mostly spoken by the men of Spain, their proud conquerors disdaining to learn the tongue of the vanquished. `Hast thou seen a party of Zenetan horse pass through the forest?' `Three hours ago, most noble Effendi, ' answered one of the Moors. `Hah! How large a force?' `About sixty horsemen; and they had a captive Christian lady with them!' `Did they ride on to Cordova?' `Yes, most excellent Effendi; but it was not on this road, but by the one to the West.' Satisfied that he might now safely venture into Cordova, Alfonzo left them with the indifference of manner characteristic of the Moor, who never thanks an inferior, and galloped rapidly forward in the direction of the Emir's tower. He soon came in sight of its lofty, ruinous hattlements over-topping the trees, and in a few minutes afterwards reined cautiously up under the wall; for he did not care to come suddenly or unnecessarily upon any Moors, who might chance to be about the tower, or upon Ben Osmin himself, if he should be at home.--- The tower, as we have said, stood upon a shoulder of a low projecting point of the Sierra, and covered the whole rock, save a narrow path-way around the base, which led to a level, green platform in the rear, half an acre in extent, and overhung by the mountain. In this sheltered elevation, upon a level with the wall of the tower, stood, with its front to the latter, the little vine-trellised cottage of Ben Osmin, the retired Moorish captain of the sea. Up this path, just described, Alfonzo slowly rode, carefully watching for the appearance of any one. But he reached the top of the platform and came in sight of the Kasah, without seeing any one. Here he dismounted, and led his horse into the area of the tower, to drink at a pool which he saw there, resolving [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-126.jpg) \- external link  - Page 040. ] afterwards to enter the dwelling; for he knew that there dwelt there with Ben Osmin and his daughter, an old Moorish woman as house-keeper, who was partly blind and a cripple, but nevertheless, as Ben Osmin said of her to his friends, a notable body to take care of a house, and wait on 'nilla. He entered the court of the tower, and dismounted. The day being hot, and all still around, the young chief removed from his head his ample green turban, and laid it upon a stone, displaying upon his brow a sort of low helmet, or coronet of singular beauty, being eight sided, and made of fine steel, inlaid with gold. He then threw aside his long white muslin Moorish robe, and appeared clad in a handsome surcoat of mail, with a crimson sash about his waist, and hanging from a strap across his shoulder, appeared the gigantic scymetar of the Ethiop, whom he had slain in the fortress of El Zegris. This costume had been given him in the hut by the hermit, who had taken it from a box in Xariffa's apartment where he said he had long kept it, for this very purpose, and insisted on his wearing both the helmet and the cuirass, beneath his Moorish robes--- `For,' said he, `thou art a leader, and thou shouldest wear armour becoming a chief; and the armour will protect thy life if thou art assailed. Besides, I have my reasons why thou shouldest wear it when thou comest to lead the Christian host!' `Then I will put it on, not now, father, ' answered Alfenzo. `Now, my son is the time to put it on! Thou mayest be called suddenly from Cordova, and to throw off thy Moorish dress to take the lead in the revolt. I would have thee appear well. Wear these by my command!' `I obey!' answered Alfonzo, and put ting them on he was surprised how well they fitted him, as if made for him!' `Said I not I kept them for thee, my son,' answered the Monk with a proud and gratified smile. `Yet they were not made for thee! But now put on thy Moorish garb. I would not Gaspar should see thee in this guise just now. How noble thy bearing. I love to gaze on thee as thou now appearest! I could almost kneel to thee, my son! But not now, not now! First break in pieces the chains of thy country!' `I must have a sword becoming such brave armour as this, father! I see none that will serve me but this of the Ethiop. It is of Damascus steel, and tempered finely. It is well worthy of a prince, much less a peasant. I will bind it on, for I shall need it, if Spain comes to the rescue of her altars and her homes, as I believe she will!' `Believe it, my son! If the land hears thee not because thou art of humble birth, I will give thee a talisman that will draw every heart unto thee! Quickly on with thy turban and robe, for I hear the footsteps and voice of Gaspar approaching! In a few moments the knightly looking young man was completely transformed into a Saracen, in turban and bernish. `Now, holy father,' said Alfonzo, going out to mount his horse, `I leave with thee my gazelles, and especially this kid of Xariffa, who so plaintively misses his mistress. The herd-boy will look to them, but while thou art here see to him that he neglects them not; for this is to be thy home!' The next instant he was in his saddle, and met Gaspar and his friends, as we have seen. Having now laid aside his warm Moorish costume in the lonely court of the tower, to resume again when he should remount his horse, he led the noble animal towards the pool to let him drink, [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-127.jpg) \- external link  - Page 041. ] and at the same time to cool his own brow and hands. He came to the pool which was at the end of a low wall that intersected the tower, and was about to let him drink, when a young man, habited in the ordinary garb of a Moorish mountaineer, with a short wolf-knife in his belt, came suddenly out from the wall and stood before him, gazing into his face with curiosity and fearless surprise. Alfonzo instantly recognised him and called him by his name. `What, art thou here, Athir?' `And am I not then mistaken?' cried the young man, with a countenance brightening with pleasure. `I knew that I could not be deceived in my benefactor's face, even under a knight's helm!' `What art thou doing here? And lo! this water in the pool is crimson! My horse snuffs it and revolts at it!' cried Alfonzo, in the same breath in which he questioned him; and pointing to the pool, he looked steadily in his face, and asked, `Hast thou slain any man? Hast thou cast a Christian in here to conceal the deed of blood, Moor? Speak!' The youth stood up and looked him firmly and unwaveringly in the face, and with a noble air of innocence answered, `No, I have not slain a Christian. For thy sake, I am their friend! The body that lies there is the body of a Moslem!' `And wherefore did you quarrel?' `He was a Moor who had followed El Zegris when thou didst save my life and gave it to me when I looked only for death at thy hands!' `I pitled thy youth, Athir. I warred only with El Zegris and his hardy men of war!' `I have not forgotten thy mercy.--- How thou didst take me to the good hermit's cave, give him charge to heal my wound; and then, when I recovered, you suffered me to depart in peace. For this thy image has been daily before me; and for this I would lose my life to serve thee. This robber Moor came hither, for I have of late been hired by Ben Osmin to help him in his vineyard, and would have got me to join him by threats to show him the cave of the hermit; for he said men had told him that there was much Christian gold concealed in the cell of the hermit, and he meant to plunder it and carry it away!' `The father hath but a cross and a cup of silver! He is poor, save in the riches of virtue, Athir!' `So I told the Moor; but he would not believe me. He said he would go alone and would rob the hermit though he had to slay him. So he would have left me; but I held him, when he aimed a stroke at me with his scymetar. I wrested it from him and slew him and cast his body into the pool. Thus have I saved the life of the venerable Christian who healed me and sent me away in peace, though an enemy to his race!' `Thou hast done a good deed, Athir,' said Alfonzo to the youth, who had been a page to El Zegris and whose life he had spared when he first attacked and drove the robber-chief from the mountains. Athir had received a wound in the conflict and would have been slain by one of Alfonzo's band but for his interposition. He took him with him to the cell of father Godfrey, and when he was healed sent him home to Cordova, where Athir told him he had a mother and sister living. But there he met again with El Zegris, who would have forced him into his service, but Athir fled and became a vine-dresser in the valley, and finally had been hired by Ben Osmin to aid him in dressing his vineyard. THE YOUTHFUL MOOR. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-128.jpg) \- external link  - Page 042. ] The young Moor having related to Alfonzo the events as they have just been given, and received his commendation for what he had done in thus destroying a dangerous enemy of the father Godfrey, said, `Though the pool is crimsoned with the robber's blood, I will lead the horse where he can find water. There is a fountain behind the kasah that flows from the rock.' Alfonzo knew well the fountain. It was there he had his last meeting with Genilla the evening previous to her departure for Cordova with her father, contrary to her lover's wishes; for Alfonzo had no wish to place her in the way of the lawless young Saracen cavaliers, and so let her see that there were good looking young men in the world besides himself. `You may take him there, Athir.--- Does Ben Osmin yet linger in the city?' `Yes, Effendi. He left, it is now the third day, with the fair Genilla his daughter, the captain riding his brown ass gaily caparisoned, and Genilla mounted behind him upon a pillion. They went with the sun-rising.' `And have you heard from them?' asked Alfonzo, as he walked with him towards the trough, which was a hollow stone beneath the fountain. `Not a word. They were to go to the house of Ben Habib, the turban-maker, who I believe is a cousin of Ben Osmin; at least they are great friends.' `Dost thou know on what street in Cordova this Ben Habib lives?' inquired Alfonzo, as they stopped at the fountain and let the horse drink of the refreshing water as it gushed alive from the rock. `It is the street known as the street of the gate of Mecca. Thou wilt know the place by the sign of a red turban.' `I thank thee---I will find it.' `Thou art not going into Cordova?' exclaimed Athir with surprise. `Yes.' `Thou wilt be slain---Cordova is filled with thy enemies!' `I know it.' `Go not, my lord; do not put thyself in the way of death! For my sake remain, and rush not upon the scymetars of my countrymen!' `Dost thou then feel such interest in me, Athir?' said Alfonzo, regarding him keenly. `Do I?---Thou art dearer to me than any one! Art thou not the saviour of my life?---do I not live by thee?---do I not stand here for thee? I am thine--- not my own; and dost thou ask me if I love thee?' `This is gratitude, indeed!' exclaimed Alfonzo, as he raised the youth from his knees, upon which he had fallen as he spoke, bowing his head upon his hand, as if grieved that his grateful affection for the preserver of his life should for a moment be questioned. `I will trust thee!' `Thou shouldst do it, my lord; I slew a Moor, my own countryman, because he would have wronged the hermit, thy friend! I would slay myself if I thought that one throb of my heart could beat false to thee. Go not to Cordova!' `Wilt thou go with me?' `I will if thou wilt let me---I will be thy faithful shadow. If thou goest to Cordova, I will be by thy side to protect thee---to die with thee! But go not thither, my lord!' `I must;---thou shalt go also.' `Allah be praised!' `Listen, Athir: I believe that you love me, and can be trusted.' `Thou shalt prove me!' answered the youth with enthusiasm. `But thou art a Moslem---I a [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-129.jpg) \- external link  - Page 043. ] Christian,---canst thou serve me, and forget both?' `I can.' `Then listen: my sister Xariffa, as beautiful and good as an angel of Paradise, and whom you saw once with me in the hermit's cell, has this day been torn from my home by a party of sixty Zenetan horse, the household cavalry of Abdelasis.' `May Allah curse them!' cried the Moor with flashing eyes. `I remember her, my lord: fair as a houri. Her gentle smile warmed my breast. Has the Zenetan horse become banditti?' `I know not, unless they were sent by Abdelasis for this special capture.' This indeed had at last come to be Alfonzo's opinion, the more his mind dwelt upon the subject. In the first place, the Zenetan cavalry, which were the finest horsemen and best soldiers in Barbary, and had always constituted the royal body-guard of Emir and Caliph, had made this capture. They had no sooner accomplished it than they galloped back to Cordova with their prize. He recollected, too, that his sister had said that she had seen him asleep: and, recalling the words he had heard fall from his lips when he waked, he believed that he had seen her. This belief now led him to suspect his agency in her capture. `I am going into the city in hopes to find my sister,' added Alfonzo, who did not see fit to unfold to him all his motives in visiting Cordova. `I am willing to confide in thee for a companion, knowing well that I may trust my life in thy hands.' `My lord, thou knowest that I would die to save thine.' `Thou shalt then go with me, and perhaps thou mayest serve me. Ben Osmin's vineyard will not suffer for thy absence a day or two, and doubtless he will be at home to-night or to-morrow.' `I will send a man who dwells in the valley a mile hence to look after it,' answered Athir with enthusiasm. `I am happy to know thou wilt let me go with thee. I will serve thee. I will try and rescue Xariffa for thee. I will do whatsoever thou biddest me do---only that I may be with thee.' `Wilt thou keep sacredly the secret that I am a Christian?' `I will, my lord. But men will see that thou art one.' `True, if I wear this garb; but I am not going into Cordova in this costume. Come with me, Athir, and I will show thee what I shall wear as a protection against discovery.' Thus speaking, Alfonzo led his horse, and conducted the Moorish youth back to the ruin, within which he pointed out to him, lying upon a rock, the Moslem turban and bernish which he had left there. He put them on, and then, turning to the surprised youth, said, `Am I not safe under this disguise, even in Cordova?' `Thou art, my lord. I should believe thee none other than a Moorish officer of one of the Emir's household.' `So I would be considered. Thou must address me as Ali Ahmet.' `I will not forget it, my lord.' `Then thou shalt go with me; but I ride. Thou canst not keep up with me. But I can adapt the pace of my horse to thine.' `I am swift of foot as a deer, my lord. I will run by thy side.' `It is, then, that I go into Cordova as a Moorish officer, Ali Ahmet, and thou my---my---what shall I say---companion?--- lieutenant?---' `Servant, my lord.' `Nay, I am but a peasant. I know no slaves. Yet be it so for the present.' Alfonzo now glanced at the sun, and seeing that it was but an hour high, he [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-130.jpg) \- external link  - Page 044. ] resolved to proceed without delay to Cordova, as he knew the gates would be shut at sun-down. He therefore bade Athir take his staff and come with him. `I must go in and get my kaftan and turban, my lord,' answered the young man; and, going into the house, after a few minutes' absence, he returned with a white lawn turban folded about his brows, and a dark brown kaftan that reached to his knees, and at the waist was confined by a leathern belt, in which was stuck a pruning-knife. Sandals were bound upon his feet, and in his hand he grasped a stout staff, shod with sharp-pointed steel. `I am ready, my lord,' he said, in a frank, cheerful tone, as if he was happy to be in the way of showing his gratitude to his benefactor. `There is yet one good hour left for us to reach the gates before they close. The distance is still more than two leagues. Canst thou go so fast?' `I could run it in much less time, my lord,' answered the youth with animation, as together they descended the steep path which wound round the front of the tower. At length they found themselves in the open road that crossed the valley of the Guadalquivir. For the first mile their path lay through the bosom of the forest that everywhere belted the region where the sierra fell into the plain. Alfonzo rode at an easy pace through the wood, the youthful Moor striding at his horse's head with an agile and easy air. `Thou art used to exercising thy limbs, Athir. One would take thee for a Christian mountaineer. It would put me to task to keep pace with thee.' `I have been a mountaineer, senor,' answered the Moor. `In Barbary, where I was born, are ranges of lofty mountains; and on one of these, for centuries, lived my fathers, who were herdsmen and hunters. From a boy, till I could draw a bow, I was reared among the hills. But four years ago I left Barbary in the train of Algezir the Emir, to seek my fortune in this fair land, which our songs said flowed with golden rivers, and over which arched skies of sapphire. `But friendly I was hardly served in the Emir's household, who had made me his page, and one day being struck by a Eunuch, I slew him and fled to the mountains here. El Zegris was then in the height of his power as a robber chief, and in my wanderings I came upon his strong-hold. He made me a prisoner, but afterwards took me into his service. When, at length, he was driven from his fortresses by you, my brave lord, I fell into your hands, and you spared my life, which life is now yours!' `How came you to leave Barbary, Athir? Why not remain in your mountains of the Moor, as I think they are called, with thy fathers?' `Thou shalt know, senor,' answered Athir, after a moment's hesitation, and colouring deeply. `I will speak of it to thee, my lord. My father was poor, but still he had in his veins princely blood. Still we were very poor and I tended my father's goats, our only subsistence! ' `Then we are brethren in occupation, Athir!' `I shall never be higher than I am--- thou wilt be great, and men will yet honor thee greatly, signor! The chief of our tribe had a fair daughter, Nube, sixteen years of age, with eyes like twin stars shining at midnight, and a face as beautiful as an angel's. I loved her afar off, and worshipped her in my heart.--- She discovered, I know not how, that I loved her, and we met, and together wandering by the soft moonlight, told our loves and were happy. But, at length, the proud chief was told that his beautiful daughter was loved by the son of [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-131.jpg) \- external link  - Page 045. ] one of his herdsmen. He called her, and she confessed it; and by a faithful slave sent me word to fly. I obeyed, though with a sad heart at leaving her forever! It was thus that I came to Spain!' `And hast thou not heard from the fair Arabian girl? Art thou ignorant of her fate?' asked Alfonzo with deep interest in his simple story. `I know nothing, senor,' answered the youth, sadly. `I am ignorant whether she lives or fell a victim to her father's anger!' `I sympathise with thee, Athir! But see! what comes here?' he suddenly exclaimed, as a cloud of dust rose in the valley before them along a cross road that led from the upper or western extremity of the valley. It rolled along the line of the road which intersected theirs, but the persons were concealed by the hedge rows and gardens between; for our two travellers were now riding in the open valley, having left the forest some distance behind them. About their road, as they went, the country was beautiful with cottages, villages with white towers, or here and there a minaret peeping out above the trees; with gardens and vineyards, and pleasant meadows chequered with groves. There were two principal roads which wound through the valley, one of which they were now on, and which led directly to Cordova, and the other intersected it from the east, and was that along which rolled the cloud of dust which had called Alfonzo's attention. It is a troop, my lord, I see the tops of their lances glancing above the hedges and dust,' said Athir. `Let us turn aside.' `No, we are too nigh them now. If I expect to be admitted into Cordova as a Moor, I must not fear a party of Moorish horse in the high way. I will keep on, trusting in my disguise. Walk with thy hand upon my horse, Athir, as if thou wert a slave.' `My lord, feign thyself deaf, and let me answer for thee, if thou art questioned. ' `If it will please thee, Athir, I will do so; for I have too much at stake to risk my liberty lightly.' THE SARACEN CAVALRY. The cloud of moving dust now suddenly resolved itself, as they entered the road in which Alfonzo travelled, into a brilliant corps of cavalry, crossing the valley at full speed. Their number was not less than eighty. Upon entering the road they wheeled to the left and advanced at the same pace towards Cordova, as Athir thought, without seeing him or his master, as he chose to term Alfonzo. `This is a good oversight for us, my lord. They might have been too inquisitive had they discovered you and chose to wait for us to join them.' `See! Three of them in the rear have suddenly turned their horses' heads and gallop back. They have seen us. They wave their scymetars as they spur on.' `Now, my lord, may Allah keep thee,' said Athir, with much alarm. `Fear not, Athir. I will manage them. They come in hostile attitudes; but they know not whether I am foe or friend.--- Even the Moors fear each other since this revolution, which has broken up so many factions. Now keep thee quiet, and let us move gently on and meet them.' The three horsemen, glittering in silks and polished steel harness, with gleaming scymetars, came up like the wind, abreast; but as they came nigh Alfonzo, seeing that he betrayed neither fear nor hostility, they reined up, and trotting gently along, met him and saluted him. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-132.jpg) \- external link  - Page 046. ] `Allah be with thee, brother,' said the foremost. `Allah be thy guide also, brother,' answered Alfonzo, in spite of the appealing glance of the faithful Athir, who would have replied in his stead. `Comest thou far on this road?' asked the Saracen cavalier. `Not many miles, brother. What band is this before me?' `It is a party of the Caliph's guard, as thou seest I am by my apparel and turban. We have been to the mountains on the east of the valley to attack a party of Algezir's men, who had thrown themselves into a castle there.' `I thought all the true followers had submitted to Abdelasis,' said Alfonzo. `All but these men. They hoped, by fortifying themselves there, to defy the Caliph, and by and by getting the disaffected, the robbers and renegades to their standard, avenge one day their chief's death.' `What leader had they?' `Who but El Zegris, the Eblis of all mischief in Andalusia,' answered the officer with a frown. `El Zegris!' exclaimed Alfonzo and Athir in the same breath. `Yes. Your slave seems to speak as if he knew him.' `He was once his prisoner,' answered Alfonzo. `And did you attack the castle? ' `Yes; but without success. The one-handed chief was everywhere inspiring his men, and we had to retire; but we are only returning to Cordova for a reinforcement. If that brave Christian, Alfonzo the mountaineer, had slain this great robber instead of only cutting off his hand, he would have done us and all Spain good service.' `He spared him, because he thought it would be a greater punishment to such a man---so men say,' answered Alfonzo. `Punishment, indeed! It has been but little to him; for he lashes his sword to his club-wrist as if with bonds of iron, and thus wields it with a power that no man can withstand. It is a terrible steel arm and fatal to all that come within its sweep.' `It is to be regretted, since this is so, that he was not killed out-right. `Allah be praised! we shall not want a force to send against him; now Abdelasis reigns. He hates El Zegris, for some early encounter they have had: and he will give us troops enough to destroy him.' `Who is chief of this party to which you belong?' asked Alfonzo. `It is Aben Haphel, a nephew, thou knowest, of Taric. Wilt thou ride on?' `I ride slow to accommodate my slave,' answed Anfonzo; for while they had been conversing they had been riding along, the horseman being on Alfonzo's right, while his two companions, who were inferior in rank, rode in the rear. `There are three empty saddles in the party, their riders having been slain. Thy slave shall ride one, and so make it easier for him and the soldiers who are leading them. Go forward, Hammel, and bring hither from the troop one of the led horses.' The soldier gallopped on ahead after the body of cavalry, and soon coming up with them, took a richly caparisoned steed by the bridle, with which a Moor was leading him, and returning, met the officer and Alfonzo. Athir leapt lightly into the saddle, and falling back in the rear of all, as he knew it became him to do, as a `slave,' he saw, not without alarm, Alfonzo and the officer prepare to gallop on and overtake the troop. `You had better,' said the officer, `enter the gates with us, for they will without doubt be closed when we get to them; and to you alone they would not be opened. ' [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-133.jpg) \- external link  - Page 047. ] `You are very courteous, Effendi,' answered Alfonzo. `I will avail myself of the privilege.' `Come you from the north, brother?' asked the officer. `As I said, not far. But a few miles.' `How do the Christians, if thou hast spoken with any, like the accession of Abdelasis?' `They little heed the changes in our government, brother. It is the same to them who rules: a slave, you know has no choice in masters.' `True. But they should see in this new government of Abdelasis that the power of our people is to increase and become greater than before; and with our greatness they must see that they will fall lower still.' `They see it. But they have been broken down by a score of years of slavery to the---to us , and have little heed how things now go. May I ask who thou art brother?' `I am Ali Ben Sarac, brother to Ibrahim, who is the Reis Effendi under the new Caliph,' answered the youthful officer; and I am second in command of the troops to which we are now so near. Thy name and rank?' `Ali Ahmet, a captain, but not in service now.' `Dost thou go to Cordova to seek service with Abdelasis?' `I may see the Prince; but I fear he would not grant me a place, such as would please me!' `Fear not. He means to call around his person all the bravest men in Spain. Ibrahim told me that he would not hesitate to make an officer of rank even of the valiant Christian Alfonzo, if he could induce him to take service with him. But they say this Chief is as proud as he is poor; and there is little hope that Abdelasis will ever get his services otherwise than by making him his slave.' `The Christians have little reason to love their conquerors.' `That is true, brother. But we shall have them all good Mussulmen soon. Thou hast heard of the great Decree of the new Caliph? which calls on Christians to register their names before him ere thirty days expire.' `Yes, I have heard it.' `Those who, after registering their names, shall refuse to worship in the Mosque Omar, are to have their left ear clipped, the forefinger of the right hand cut off, and to be sold in the bazanrs to the highest bidder. By Allah, these Christians are so stubborn that I see we shall be overrun with slaves; every artisan will be as rich as an Emir.' `Think you the Christians will come in to undergo this degradation?' asked Alfonzo, with an effort repressing the exhibition of the emotions to which this conversation gave rise. `What help have they? Abdelasis has all the power in the land. He has consolidated the empire. He has no rivals--- no factions to contend with---when this El Zegris is slain or taken, as he will soon be. The Caliph can, therefore, fill the mountains and valleys of Spain with his soldiers. With sword and fire they can kill and destroy all who resist. Unless the Christians wish to be exterminated, they will not resist the decree!' `You believe, then, that they will come in to be registered?' `To a man.' `Think you Alfonzo the mountaineer will come too?' `No, he will stay away! If he comes, he is not the man that I suppose him to be. He will no doubt fly to the fortresses of the mountains with others as bold as himself, and there defy the soldiers of the Caliph. I would give the richest diamond on the crescent of the Caliph, were it mine, to see this Alfonzo!' [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-134.jpg) \- external link  - Page 048. ] `Possibly he may come into Cordova and be registered!' `Should he do so, he will hardly leave it again. Abdelasis would give much to hold him in his hands.' `Think you he will go so far as to slit the ears and cut off the fingers of all who, after having registered their names, shall refuse to offer sacrifice in the Mosque?' `There is no doubt of it. He means to make Spain a Moslem Empire. There shall not, he says, exist in Spain two nations, and one of these Christians. The only distinction shall be master and slave; and the Christian, if he refuses to become a follower of the Prophet, shall be made a bondman. But here we are up with my troop!' `It is a gallant company. Some of your people, I see, are wounded, by the blood-stained bandages they wear?' `Yes; we lost four killed, and have seven wounded, but not badly. The Zegris defended his castle bravely. To-morrow, ere the sun-set, we shall once more storm his defences. It will take four hundred men to do it. I shall ask Abdelasis to give me command of the division; and if thou choosest to give thy scymetar something to do, thou shalt have an honorable place in my troop!' `Thanks, Effendi. I go to Cordova only on matter of business, and for the present care not to engage in any expeditions of warfare. I thank thee, nevertheless, for thy courteous offer. You said right that I should hardly get to the gate before sun-set. The sun is now close to the horizon, and we are yet full two miles distant from the walls. To go in with thy company will be a privilege; for, not having any friends in the valley, I should not care to lodge in the caravansera outside the gate, when, at such a stirring time as this, many lawless bands must be strolling about the suburbs!' The Moorish cavalry to which Alfonzo had now attached himself, and very gladly too, as affording him a way of entering the city unquestioned, had now got within full view of the city, which stood in all its oriental splendor upon the banks of the Guadalquivir---a pile of palaces, mosques, domes and crowning minarets, which reflected back with the brilliancy of needles of polished gold, the setting sun. The groves of palm that grew near the walls, the lofty walls themselves, with their bastions and towers, the noble river flowing around and half-embracing them, with the soft, mellow, roseate tint of the atmosphere, hanging like a veil over all, presented to the eye of the young gazelle-keeper, as he rode along the road by the side of the Moorish lieutenant, a scene that delighted and enchanted him. As they drew nearer, their road lay amid a vale of gardens, the fragrance from which loaded the air, and almost oppressed the senses, Birds sang in the orange groves, and flew from spray to spray above the heads of the prancing horsemen, like brilliant flowers on the wing. They passed the open gates of Moorish villas, where, upon rich mats, sat the master of the house, surrounded by his family, listening to music, or being entertained with the graceful motions of the Xeri, or Arabian dancing-girls.--- They passed horsemen and mulattoes, and labourers, hurrying homeward, ere night should set in, and were passed by riders at full speed, who feared they should not reach the city in time, before the closing of the gates: but the commander of the troop neither mended his pace, nor betrayed anxiety; as he knew that the gates, though shut, would be thrown open to him, as soon as he should appear before them. THE STREETS OF CORDOVA. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-135.jpg) \- external link  - Page 049. ] About half a mile from the walls, the road along which the party of horsemen was in motion struck the broad river, and turned city-ward along its banks.--- The shades of evening were already deepening the hue of the heavens, when they came te the foot of the slight ascent, which led up to the principal gate. It was already closed, and about it was gathered some score of travellers of all ranks and pursuits, who had been shut out for the night. Among them were two Hadji or pilgrims, as their garb showed. One of them was a man of tall appearance, with an air that was singularly noble, though his dress was coarse, and his feet were bare. The other was more youthful, slighter in person, and seemed to retire from the observation of the Moorish captain, as the elder Hadji stepped forth and saluted him. `My lord,' said the Hedji, extending his arm towards the leader of the corps, as he rode up and waved his hand to the officer of the gate, who stood upon its summit, to admit him and his troop. `Well, holy pilgrim from the tomb of the prophet, what wouldst thou?' `Permission to enter under thy protection. We have travelled far a-foot, and need repose, and were but a minute too late.' `Thou hast asked what I will gladly grant thee, pilgrim. Touch my scyme-tar, and give it power against the Infidel! ' The pilgrim laid his hand upon the naked blade for a moment and murmured a few words, kissed it, and then stood back. `My lord, wilt thou permit me also to go in?' cried a merchant of Catalan, holding the bridle of his laden mule as he humbly approached the chief. `I have rich wares in my packs, and I am told robbers are abroad.' `What wilt thou pay me, merchant?' asked the haughty Moslem officer, extending his open palm. `I am very poor, my lord---I can give thee but little.' `Poor! didst thou not but now say thy packs were filled with rich goods. Thou art a liar, and deservest the bastinado. Give me a gold moid for suffering thee to go in with me.' `There it is, my lord Effendi,' answered the merchant, cheerfully taking the coin from his pouch, and laying it upon the palm of the officer's hand. `Good! Now pay me two gold sheken for thy lie!' `Oh, my lord!' `Not a word!---Be quick, for you delay the captain of the gate, who waits for me to go through.' `There it is, my lord.' ` Two! I said not one,' `There, my lord.' `Hold: I have not done with thee yet. Pay me three golden tekel for not taking thy goods from thee, for lying to an officer of the Caliph!' `Allah be merciful!' ejaculated the poor merchant; `I shall be robbed!' and he began to count the gold with trembling fingers. `Dost thou call me a robber?' Make it five tekel, rogue of a merchant.--- Hesitate, and I will take off thy head!' The merchant paid the gold, and then with misgiving stepped back:---but the commander had done with him. Two or three others, who had pressed forward for permission to enter, on seeing these proceedings, drew back in silence, preferring to run the risk of being plundered by the robbers without, than the certainty of being robbed at the gate. The Moorish officer now spurred forward and galloped through the arch gate-way between files of soldiers, who saluted him as he went by. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-136.jpg) \- external link  - Page 050. ] Alfonzo passed in with Ali-ben-Sarac, the friendly lieutenant who rode in the rear of the troop; and close behind him galloped Athir; after these came the Catalan merchant, and the two Hadjii, and one or two others. The gates were then closed by a loud command from the captain of the guard, and Alfonzo found himself within the city of his foes, without hope of escape, save by his address, courage, and the excellency of his disguise. `Which way do you ride?' asked Aliben-Sarac, as they rode swiftly up the main street which led from the gate to the great square of the Mosque of Omar. `I shall go to some caravansera,' answered Alfonzo. `I thank thee for thy courtesy to me, a stranger.' `No Moor who wears the green turban is a stranger to a true follower of the Prophet, brother. Besides, did I not see by thy air and bearing that thou wert of good birth and rank. If thou wilt ride to the Caliph's palace I will insure thee a good reception from Abdelasis, if thou wilt take service with him. Under what Emir hast thou served as captain?' `Under none of late;---as I said, I am now a private citizen. I must, therefore, beg leave to decline your kind invitation. I will now bid thee good night, and pray that to-morrow El Zegris may fall into thy hands. Athir, dismount and give the soldier by thee the horse he has given thee to ride so long.' Athir obeyed, throwing the rein to the Moor and taking Alfonzo's horse by the bit; for he had reined up, seeing that they had come to a cross street, down which he thought it best to turn to get rid of going to the palace with the kindly-disposed Ali Sarac. `Then if thou goest no farther, Allah take thee in his keeping, noble brother!' answered Ali Sarac, bowing with courtesy, and laying his hand upon his heart. The next moment he was dashing after his troop at full speed, followed by his two attendants, one of whom led the horse which had so well accommodated Athir. Alfonzo turned aside from the street of the gate into another narrower and obscure, bordered by low stone houses with here and there an arch over-topped by a palm, leading into the court-yard of some secluded mansion. There were but few persons in the streets, and these standing about the door-ways. Now and then two or three of the Moorish soldiers were met lounging along, but they paid no heed to the rider and his slave. The twilight was already deepening into night, and Alfonzo saw that it would be necessary for him to find the house of Senor Velez to whom the hermit had recommended him. `Dost thou know this street we are in, Athir?' he asked of the young Moor who walked at his horse's head. `It is the street El Tarif, my lord! It leads in the direction of the old palace of Algezir!' `I would seek the street which leads past the Mosque of Omar, the fourth door therefrom.' `We shall have then to leave this one and go to the left, my lord, and take three turnings to bring us to the Mosque, unless we turn back and approach it by the street of the gate.' `No, we will go this way, if it be the safest.' `There is less danger of meeting a guard here. If you cross the great square you will be challenged, now that it is dark.' `Then let us go on and at good speed, Athir! I leave my guidance to thee, for I am not familiar with the city.' `I know it well, my lord. I lived here in service with Algezir many months ere I slew the Eunuch and fled to the [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-137.jpg) \- external link  - Page 051. ] mountains. Dost thou see this high wall which we are passing on our left, with the trees over-topping it and loading the air with the perfume of their flowers?' `I see it, and the top of a noble edifice within the garden.' `This palace was the favorite residence of the Caliph Musa, whose assassination brought all the evils upon Cordova that have since befallen it. It is still a fair palace.' `And what lofty tower is this on the corner beyond, rising side by side with that lofty palm, which seems to wish to rival its height?' `That is called the Vizier's tower. From it the conqueror Taric received his conquest and hung the severed banner of the prophet. It is now used as a prison, my lord. Thou, seest that a guard is pacing to and fro before it now. Let us pass rapidly by!' `Not so, Athir. It were safer to be unconcerned,' answered Alfonzo. As he rode past the Moorish sentinel gazed at them fixedly, but remained [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-138.jpg) \- external link  - Page 052. ] silent and let them move on without hinderance. They now came to the corner or another street, broader and handsomer, with stately edifices on either side and shaded with rows of lime trees. Minarets pierced the sky above their heads, and a vast dome lifted its huge bulk like a mountain into the air. `That is the Mosque of Omar,' said Athir. `We will go down this narrow street and come to it on the west side; by this means we shall avoid the public square in front of it, where, from the sounds of trumpets and martial music which we hear, we shall be likely to fall in with the body guard of the Caliph. Safe as your disguise is, my lord, you cannot be too cautious.' `I will be as careful, my brave and faithful friend, as thou couldst wish to have me; for more than my own life and liberty hangs upon my safety. Ha, here seems to be a broil in the street before us.' `I hear the shouts. They are beating a Christian slave!' `Yes, I now hear their epithets of `Christian dog' and `accursed Nazarine.' And I hear the lashes, too, upon the poor slaves back!' said Alfonzo, who could scarcely restrain the impulse to gallop forward and interpose to save the victim of oppression whom he heard pleading piteously in the name of the Virgin for life! But he felt that he owed as much to his own self-preservation as he did to humanity. `My poor countryman!' he sighed. `Let us pass another way, my lord,' said Athir, who found that Alfonzo would be tempted to expose himself in an effort to rescue the Christian. `No. Thou canst trust me, Athir. I will not interpose. Heaven, in its grace, soon vouchsafe to me the time when I may!' he added fervently. They now came up with the scene of cruelty and suffering. `What is this?' asken Athir of a man who stood by with a trowel in his hand, and in the garb of a mason. `It is a Christian slave being bastinadoed, as thou seest,' answered the Moor, pointing to a man half naked, kneeling, with his arms bound around a post, while the soles of his feet were held up-turned by a cord fastened to them, and grasped by two Moslem boys. A man, with the sleeves of his bernish rolled back to his shoulder, was armed with a nine-lashed whip, with which, at intervals of about a quarter of a minute, he would inflict severe blows upon the exposed soles. At every stroke of the cutting thongs the man would utter a piercing shriek, which would be mocked by the jeering Infidels around. The sight made the bosom of Alfonzo burn. `What has he done?' demanded Athir of the man with the trowel. `He is the slave of the man who is punishing him---that is enough, Allah be praised,' answered the man; and he turned away and imitated with cruel precision another of the piercing cries which the sufferer uttered. `Save me, for Jesu's sake,' cried the poor man. `Call on Allah!' shouted the crowd. `Yes, call on Allah, slave, and say that God is God, and Mahomet is his Prophet.' `Never! Oh, Lord Jesu, save my soul!' was the firm but agonizing response of the Christian. It was with difficulty that Alfonzo could recollect his own danger and restrain the impulse to rush forward to savo him; for he was touched to the heart with admiration by his noble firmness in such an hour of suffering. `Let us pass on, my lord,' said Athir. `You can do nothing. If you speak in [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-139.jpg) \- external link  - Page 053. ] his behalf, you will subject yourself to suspicion.' `I will go on, Athir. It would do no good for me to speak. This is but one in a thousand cases that occur each day. To rescue him would be but as a drop taken from the fountain of our sorrows,' he said, riding forward, the crowd making way for him to pass. `The master has powerover his slave, and can do what he will, my lord. The Caliph could not forbid the punishment we have now witnessed. Here we are, my lord, in the street which passes to the morgue. We are at the lower end and will have to pass up towards the morgue. Thou didst say the fourth gate this side?' `Yes, such were my directions.' `Who is it thou wouldst see?' `It is a man who, though a Christian, still lives in Cordova free, though he had to pay large sums for the privilege until he became a Moslem.' `A Moslem?' `Thou shalt see him for thyself, Athir,' answered Alfonzo, who felt that he ought not to betray, even to Athir, that Senor Velez was only outwardly a Mussulman, being at heart a true Christian Spaniard. THE MOORISH SPANIARD. The street through which they now were riding, was somewhat obscure in appearance, and quite narrow. It extended from the rear of the city to the grand central square, and passed close by the mosque, the lofty dark walls of which lined it for some distance. It was now nearly dark. The stars shone down between the branches of the trees that grew within the gardens on either side of the way, and the features of the Moors that passed them were undistinguishable. There were but few persons visible, as after eight o'clock no one was suffered to appear in the streets without permission from the commander of the city guard, and then only with a lantern. They now came near the beginning of the mosque walls. Alfonzo looked sharply for the house of the Signor Velez. They at length came opposite a low gate-way, placed in a wall not more than twelve feet high, but which, by counting the doors, answered to the direction given by the hermit, being the fourth from the mosque, which towered in majestic and gloomy grandeur, far above their heads. `This is the place, my lord,' said Athir, with confidence. `Let us wait and ask this Moor who comes along. Brother, dost thou know if this be the dwelling of Velez, the Moslem Spaniard?' `By the beard of Allah, brother, thou art asking one who hath more need to ask than answer,' responded the well-known voice of Ben Osmin. `I have been up to the grand square, to hear the music, and being of late a stranger in Cordova, I have lost my way and know not where to go. I was about to ask thee, but thou art strangers also!' `We are,' answered Alfonzo, who, as well as the astonished Athir, had quickly discovered who the speaker was; but both commanded their surprise. To Alfonzo the meeting was a glad one; but Athir trembled lest he should be recognized, and reclaimed by the Moor, his late master. So he stepped back in a way to place the horse between them.--- `What place do you seek, brother?' asked Alfonzo, before whose mental eyes, Genilla now appeared vividly. `The street of Mecca, and the house of Ben Habib, or as some call him Yassef, the turban maker. It is there that I lodge.' `I am sorry I cannot inform thee?' answered Alfonzo. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-140.jpg) \- external link  - Page 054. ] `Tell him to go back, and take the first turn to the right, and the next to the left. It is the street east of this, running the same way,' whispered Athir. Alfonzo gave this information, and received the warm thanks of Ben Osmin, who added, just as Alfonzo was trying to conceive some mode of ascertaining the safety of Genilla--- `And I not only thank thee, but I have a fair daughter who would thank thee also, for this service, brother; for she hath cried her eyes out by this time, lest I should have fallen into evil hands.' `Then thou hast a daughter, brother?' `A daughter, whose eyes are brighter than diamonds, and who is as good and virtuous as she is fair. I have been but three days in Cordova, and half the gallants in the suite of the new Caliph, have rode by Ben Habib's door, prancing and caracolling to show their bravery and handsome appearance. But she is not a maiden to be caught with glitter, or good horsemanship.' `Then she hath escaped all the snares set for her beauty,' said Alfonzo, not a little relieved by his last words, and in his heart blessing the faithfulness of Genilla. To hear from her, too, and to know that she was well and in safety, filled his bosom with joy. But he sighed that Xariffa was not also as safe. The news which Ben Osmin had thus unconsciously conveyed to him, relieved his mind from a great weight of anxiety, which had oppressed him, in relation to her; for he knew that she had been in Cordova through all the revolutions, and was now there exposed to the lawless pleasure of Abdelasis, who if he beheld her, had only to command her to be brought to his presence, who had but to speak to make her his slave. `I am glad to know, brother, thou art so happy as to be blessed with such a daughter,' he answered. `Dost thou make a long stay in Cordova; if so, I should like to know thee, and see this beautiful maiden, though I am no wooer like these young knights you speak of.' `I shall be here for two days more. If thou wouldst come and take coffee with me, brother, I will gladly see thee. Thou wilt find me at the sign of the scarlet turban, in the street of Mecca, at the house of Ben Habib. His abode is lowly, but he is an honest man; and a good name is better than gold. Allah be with thee, brother, and in thy old age may men honor thee!' `May Allah keep thee a thousand years, brother, and may thy children rise up and call thee blessed!' With these words, Alfonzo dismounted, while Ben Osmin hurried away in search of the dwelling of Ben Habib.--- Afonzo congratulated himself at this meeting; and he would have been perfectly happy if the thoughts of Xariffa did not so forcibly press upon his mind. Of her fate he was wholly ignorant.--- That she had been brought into Cordova and was in the seraglio of Abdelasis, he sadly believed. But he had no time now to dwell upon a subject so painful. He resolved to see Senor Velez, and be governed by his advice touching any efforts to rescue her. `Shall I knock at the gate, my lord?' `Yes, but not noisely.' `Who would enter here?' asked a voice from within, a moment after Athir had struck upon the door. `A friend. Open in the name of Allah, brother?' said Athir. `I can admit no one after night, without a command from the Caliph or the Captain of the city,' answered the person in a firm voice, but pleasing to the ear. `We shall not get in, my master!' responded Athir in a tone of disappointment. `Doubtless there are robbers about, and he mistakes us for such!' [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-141.jpg) \- external link  - Page 055. ] `Hold the bridle, Athir. I will speak to him,' answered Alfonzo, approaching the gate, which was cast into deep shadow by the projecting Moorish arch over it. `Art thou not the Senor Velez?' he asked, in Spanish. `Yes,' responded the Spaniard, in a tone evidently of surprise at being addressed in his own tongue, by men in Moorish costume; for he could see, through a little window at the side gate, the figures of his visitors. `I am a friend to thee. I am sent by one who gave me this little token, which I place in thy hands. If it satisfies thee, admit me, my horse and servant; for there is a party of cavalry coming down the street, and I would rather be under cover when they came by.' With these words, Alfonzo drew from his bosom the little silver cross which the hermit had given him, and handed it to the Senor Velez through the little opening by the post of the gate. There was a moment's suspense while the Spaniard took the cross to a light to examine it, and the removal of the bars of the gate with a clanking of heavy chains was heard by them, and the door slowly swung open to admit them. `Welcome, Senor, and quickly, thou and thy steed. It is not safe to keep one's gate open long, in such times as these, after dark. Lead the horse through into the court, slave. Thy hand, Senor. Welcome to my home. I know, Moor as thy garb would make thee to be, that thou art a Spaniard, and a friend to the abbot Godfrey. Who thou art, thou wilt, doubtless, by and by, inform me!' With these words, he drew him into the court, and Athir followed, leading the horse, whom he conducted to the stalls on the opposite side of the walled court-yard, which Senor Velez pointed out to him. He then secured the gate, and by a flight of steps led Alfonzo into a handsome room, at the extremity of which was a raised floor, carpeted and surrounded with divans, in Moorish style of furnishing houses. The Spaniard himself was habited as a Moslem, and with his mixed white and black beard, his noble forehead and fine eyes, his lofty figure and air of quiet dignity, he might have been taken for a Sultan. He wore a white muslin turban, clasped by a diamond in front; a long crimson sash bound together at his waist the folds of his white bermish. His vest, which was visible through the opening in his robe, was of yellow, worked with gold. He wore red morocco slippers, turned up in a half-moon at the toes, and gilded with a border of flowers. His appearance, with that of the apartment, was strictly Moorish. For a moment Alfonzo believed that he was in the dwelling of a Mussulman, rather than that of a native Spaniard, who still held to the faith of the cross. The Senor Velez led his guest to the dais, or raised floor, at the extremity of the apartment, and seated him upon a divan, above which was suspended a silver lamp filled with burning olive oil, that shed a soft clear radiance around. `Thou hast seen the Abbot Godfrey, lately,' said the host, clasping together his hands as he spoke, a signal for the appearance of a Nubian slave in a pink turban and flowing white muslin trowers. `Elec, coffee.' The slave bowed profoundly and retired. `I saw the holy father at noon-tide.' `So lately. He then reached the mountains safely. I rejoice at this. Pardon my close scrutiny, Senor, but I would like to know why thou art here, and in this guise? and why this silver cross was given to thee for me? I expected it to have been brought by some one else than such as thou seemest to be? [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-142.jpg) \- external link  - Page 056. ] `Who did you expect would bring it, Senor?' `I may not say. Reveal thyself and there shall be confidence between us.' `I am the pupil of father Godfrey This he bade me say to you.' `His pupil! He was a peasant youth,' said the Spaniard with surprise, gazing upon the noble aspect and commanding air of the young man before him. `So am I, Senor. I am Alfonzo.' `Thou the Destroyer?' `The Moors have called me so, Senor.' `Then, welcome: thrice welcome. Forgive my coldness and suspicion, noble Alfonzo. Do I indeed behold thee of whom I have heard so much!' he cried, surveying him with emotion and admiration. `Let me embrace thee! I dared not hope so much when the abbot bade me be ready to see thee beneath my roof ere many days passed! Welcome to my house and to my heart.' Alfonzo was not a little gratified to meet with such a reception in the very heart of the city of his foes. `I feel happy, noble Velez,' he said, on beholding one whom Spain has honored, and who sat at the right hand of two of her princes. But I am sorry that I find thee an exile under the very shadow of the palace of the Spanish Kings, and doomed to wear the turban of the conqueror to purchase life.' `I wear it not to buy my life, Alfonzo, but to watch my foes, the enemies of Spain and of God.' `I know it, noble Senor. The holy hermit hath unfolded to me all this. He hath sent me to thee to learn how Spain stands in the scale with her opponent.' `I am glad to see thee, Alfonzo. I am glad to hold converse with one man who feels for, and loves Spain, and seeks her glory again. The abbot hath told me how thou lovest thy country. He hath old me how thou mournest over her downfall, and art ready to draw the sword of liberty to redeem her.' `He hath told thee truly, Senor. But what can I do? Thou knowest that I am but a peasant.' `Thou art more! Thou hast, by thy courage and example raised and led to vicry to over banditti a handfull of thy mountaineers. A man who can do this, and who will do this, can make that handfull of men a thousand, and that thousand ten thousand.' `Would to God, Senor, thy words were prophetic!' exclaimed Alfonzo. `But I feel my weakness. I am ready to do all than man can do for my bleeding, enslaved country; but there are many nobles, many of the ranks far above me, who would mock my pretensions, and scorn to be led by a herdsman.' `Then let them find a leader among themselves, if they can. They will find no one;---they are all cowards, made so by bondage. Mark me, Alfonzo: they will hail with joy the man who lifts the Standard of the Cross again in the land, and unsheathes his sword to defend it. The Abbot Godfrey and I have discoursed this matter well. We have talked of you and your influence among the hardy mountaineers. He tells me that they all love you, and that you have only to stand up and say that Spain shall be free---your arm will free her. It is an example---a leader that men want.' `Senor, I have given myself to this work; I am conscious of the difflculties; I may fail---I may perish; but I shall do all that I can do for my poor country. I will act as if I had authority: for I see no other man who will stand in my place and lift the standard of liberty. I will do it, and trust in God, who caused David with a sling to overthrow Goliah, and give victory to Israel.' `That is the true spirit, my brave son,' said the Spaniard, as the Nubian [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-143.jpg) \- external link  - Page 057. ] re-entered and served coffee to them, in silver cups of exquisite workmanship. THE YOUTHFUL CHIEF. The coffee which the slave served up was accompanied by dried fruits and other refreshments, to which was added the rich wine of Xeres, nectar delicious enough to tempt the Moslem to break the laws of his Prophet. While Alfonzo was engaged in doing justice to the hospitable repast set before him after his fatigues of the day, Athir entered, and standing silently, waited to be noticed by his master, as if he were indeed Alfonso's slave. The keen glance of the Spaniard rested on him steadfastly for a moment, and then turning quickly to his guest, he said with surprise, not untinged with something like rising suspicion,--- `Thy servant is a Moor! There is no deception in that eye and brow. He is a Moor---how is this?' `He is a Moor, Senor,' answered Alfonzo; `but he can be trusted. He is faithful to me, and will be to thee.' `I never yet knew one I could trust,' answered Velez. `How! Is he thy slave? I have never yet known a Moor the slave of a Christian.' `I will tell thee about it, Senor,' answered Alfonzo; and he then proceeded to relate to him the facts touching his history, which have already been repeated to the reader. When he had done, the Spanish noble called to Athir, and gave him his hand. `Young man, I honor thy fidelity! I will also trust thee, if Alfonzo hath done so. Thou mayest be of service to us. Elec,' he added, after clapping his hands and bringing in the Nubian slave, `see that thou givest refreshment to this youth, and that he has a mat spread down in the room of the fountain, where thou wilt also prepare a couch for his master.--- See, too, that his horse wants nothing.' The Nubian clasped his hands above his head, and bowed to the ground in token of obedience, and departed, followed by Athir. `Now, my brave friend,' said the Spanish noble, turning to his guest, `let us talk over the wrongs of Spain, and let us see what can be done to redress them. I converse with thee with full confidence. I know thy courage and influence well with the mountaineers; and when news reached me three years ago that a young mountaineer had armed and led on his neighbours, and driven the banditti from the Sierras, I blessed God that there was yet one stout arm and brave heart left in Spain, though it were but a mountain youth's. And when a few month's later the rumor came that this same youth had stormed a castle, and driven El Zegris forth a fugitive, I again blessed God, and began to believe that there were yet good men left in Spain, who feared not the Moor. When more recently came the intelligence that El Zegris had again been attacked and overthrown by thee, his person made captive, and his right hand struck off by thy scymetar, I said in my heart--- `If Spain shall ever call for a champion, that youth, whose prowess is in all men's mouths, is the man to lead her to victory. But then I knew no more than this, that thou werest a humble herdsman. Since, the holy Abbot Godfrey, hath given me the outline of thy history, and his opinion did but confirm my own, that thou shouldst one day be the mover of a revolt agaiust our masters. He said that you were a lover of your country, and mourned her wrongs, but that you were doubtful of your influence, and too modest to know its wide extent. He felt sure, however, that you would one day rouse up, and stand in your native power, and call on your countrymen to arm for [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-144.jpg) \- external link  - Page 058. ] God and Spain. To this end, he said, he had been watching over your mind and heart, and so training thee to be one day the saviour of thy country.' `What I am, I owe to my excellent friend,' answered Alfonzo, who had sat quietly under the high language of eulogium, that flowed from the lips of Senor Velez. `What he has made me, that my country shall have the benefit of.--- But, Senor, I never looked to so wide a feld of action as opens so unexpectedly before me, and which I seem to be irresistibly thrust upon. I looked only to be the leader of a small band of my fellow herdsmen, to hold the Sierras free from step of the Moslem, whether soldier or bandit. Beyond this, I dare not aspire, though my heart has secretly burned at the thought, that I should like to be the saviour of my country. I have wished that my voice might rouse all the men in Spain, as it hath stirred the breasts of my fellow peasants when I have called upon them to rally around me, to drive the robber from his fastnesses, or attack a horde of wolves in their lair.' `Do not shrink. Heaven will gird thee with strength. We want a man whom Spain has heard of, and the Moors too!" `I shall not shrink. I have a motive that urges me onward side by side with the desire I have to see Spain free. It is revenge for my sister's wrongs. Within the last twelve hours, Senor Velez, my only sister, loved and lovely beyond compare, has been stolen by the troops of Abdelasis from her pure home, and carried away to his harem.' `Is this so? Alas, I pity thee. Thou hast reason to take arms, young man.--- But this is no new thing that it should be made a reason.' `No---but to me it is. I should have moved ere this to avenge others. But I lingered ignobly, timid and hesitatingly, till the blow came home to me. Then I became earnest. Then, and only till then, I am ashamed to acknowledge, did I resolve that I would not rest till I had roused a spirit of resistance in the length and breadth of the land!' `This decision must have filled the holy Abbot's heart with joy; for the weal of Christian Spain is the theme of his daily prayer. For this he only lived.' `His joy I cannot describe! So often had he talked to me of the glory that should fall upon him who should, whether prince or peasant, lead Spain against the Moslem once more; so often had he implored me to take a bold stand, humble as I was, for God and liberty; so often had he told me that I owed to Spain what influence I procured over my friends about me; that when I told him I had at length got awake and had resolved to kindle the flames of revolt, and I could almost have believed that he had been instrumental in the abduction of my sister, that my heart might thereby be roused; for it seems it wanted this to move me, Senor,' he added, bitterly smiling. `I can imagine his joy. My own heart is young again when I look upon thy noble form and think that Christian Spain, in Alfonzo the Destroyer has once more a Champion!' `But how will Spain receive me, Senor? ' `With open arms!' `I do not doubt but that among the Sierras I shall be able to assemble at least two thousand brave men. Not that I am known to one third of this number, but those I do know are acquainted with others, and will influence them. This day I was one of an assembly of fifty in the cork forest of Debal; fifty brave men, including my father, Gaspar. Hast thou heard of him?' `I knew him, when he was one of the bravest nobles in Spain. He has had a [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-145.jpg) \- external link  - Page 059. ] hard fate. From father Godfrey I have from time to time heard of him and of his great prowess. As Gaspar, the WolfSlayer, his name is celebrated even among the Moors.' `When didst thou see the Abbot last?' `He left here this morning, disguised as a Hadji, and when he parted from me he promised me that ere many days he should send to me the Deliverer of Spain. `And,' he added, `whomsoever comes to thee bringing this cross, receive him as a friend. It may possibly be my Alfonzo, if not some other who will give the tidings of things in the Sierras!' These were the Abbot's words to me; and little did I expect to embrace thee so soon!' `Nor wouldst thou have seen me to-night, but for the outrage put upon me in taking my beloved sister away by force. I could almost be persuaded to believe that father Godfrey had an agency in sending the troop to capture her; for he knew I needed this to move me to my duty!' `Art thou in earnest in this suspicon?' `God forbid. I did but speak of the coincidence between the fact and the result. He loves me, and is too good for this, even though he thought he could free Spain thereby.' `If ever father loved a son, the Abbot loves thee. I know not what there is that hath, for years, as I know, bound him to thee, beyond thy good qualities and noble countenance, which no man would look upon without feeling an interest in thee. But for what didst thou get these fifty brave mountaineers together in the forest?' `They assembled at the cry that the Moors had poured upon our hamlet and borne away the Star of the Sierras, as they loved to call Xariffa. But pursuit was in vain. I then swore solemnly before my maker that I would never rest till I had rescued her, or driven the Spoiler out of Spain, if men would arm and follow me!' `Brave words. St. Diego be thanked! This sounds like steel ringing on steel. What said they?' `They received my words with acclamations. It inspired me. I saw in their readiness the spirit of all others. The Abbot came suddenly upon us, and when he knew what had been determined on, tears of joy came into his eyes. He would have embraced my knees. He clasped me to his heart, saying, `For this hour have I watched over thee---for this hour have I lived!' `Thou must have felt rewarded already at witnessing the happiness he felt.' `I was, Senor. But you will be surprised to know that he made me kneel, and did there in a most solemn manner consecrate me by prayer and anointing with holy oil, to the service of my country. I would have resisted, but he held me down; and I submitted, though I trembled, at the awful ceremony;---for I did not feel equal to what men seemed to call upon me to perform.' `I tell thee, son, God will give thee strength. Thou art raised up his servant and Captain; of this be assured, and go forward with courage to thy duty. But this is singular indeed!---kings only are anointed; and what is more extraordinary, the Abbot himself anointed Amalaric, our last Christian Gothic king, whom Taric the conqueror slew, with the royal Princes of his house.' `Were but one of those young Princes alive now, Senor, and proclaiming himself such, should raise the standard of the cross, all Spain would rise as one man to rally around him. But for me, I have no more than the wrongs of Spain, the oppression of the Moor, to appeal to.' `And what more do you ask? all men in Spain will respond to the appeal.' [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-146.jpg) \- external link  - Page 060. ] `I will point heavenward to God, and tell them that He is their Prince and King---that I am but a servant in his hand!' `Thou art too modest---but I like it in thee. It shows me that thou art the person to be trusted. Fifty men, saidst thou? What became of them?' `I sent them two by two up the valleys, and over the Sierras, to penetrate every where a Christian dwelt and walked, and call on them to up and arm for their country, and on the eve of St. James be found at the Rock of St. Paul.' `This is indeed news---great news! And did you see them depart?' `Filled with zeal. By this time two thousand men have been told the tale, that on the eve of St. James the standard of the cross will be raised on the sacred Rock over against Cordova.' `Heaven prosper the cause! Thou hast began well; the Sierras will soon be alive! But what can be done here? for I know thou art in Cordova to ask that very question,' `I have come to see if there are any left here who remember Spain under its Christian King, and who in their bondage sigh again for those days to return. I have left Gaspar to act as my lieutenant till I return. The news of the revolt will reach only Christian ears till the hour to strike arrives.' `If fifty thousand Christians were entrusted with the secret, not one Moor could get possession of it. Now we will see what can be done here. In the valleys and mountains there are one hundred thousand Spaniards. If this news flies fast, and secretly as fast, it will be easy to bring to your standard twenty thousand men by the eve of St. Diego.' `Not my standard, Senor, but Christ's,' answered Alfonzo, with his characteristic modesty. `I see thou art well-fitted for the place that Heaven hath put thee in,' said the Spaniard impressively. `Thou wilt become a popular leader. I will give thee twenty thousand men from the valleys and the hills, noble chief: but in Cordova I know not how many---but we will soon see.' THE TWO CONSPIRATORS. The Spaniard now produced a roll of parchment, and unfolding it, laid it upon the divan between them, and said, as he ran his finger over the columns of names and trades and conditions: `Here is a register which I have kept, so far as I could make it accurate of the number of Spanish Christians in Cordova. The aggregate at which I see your eye glances, makes them sixty-six thousand, old and young, male and female.' `It is a larger number than I had supposed, ' answered Alfonzo. `Yes, our people seem to live wonderfully long under this servitude. Here you see are about sixteen thousand ablebodied men, capable of bearing arms, in these sixty-six thousand; the balance being old, or women and children. Of these sixteen thousand, many of them are of the best blood of Spain---and now they are hewers of wood and drawers of water to the Moor. There is not an Infidel in Cordova, however low his degree or mean his trade, who has not one or more of these, our Christian brethren, as slaves. You of the mountains have fared better and kept your freedom!' `But it will not be much longer, I hear, if we are supine. I allude, Senor, to the decree of Abdelasis!' `It is a base and cruel one. It is worthy of himself. When I read it yesterday, I then said, `In this decree, Caliph, unless Spain be utterly lost, you have signed the downfall of Moslem power in the land!' [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-147.jpg) \- external link  - Page 061. ] `I believe so,' answered Alfonzo, with warmth. `There is not fifty men in Spain base enough to come into Cordova and thus register their names, knowing that they are to be afterwards compelled to become Moslem's.' `I trust there are not!' `It was this decree which I heard of, even before I knew of my sister's loss, which kindled the flames of liberty in my bosom. The outrage done me by stealing her away was setting the last torch. I have hopes that the noise of the decree will do more for the cause---do more to bring men to their duty than any influence I can exert. Still a rallying point is needed; and till Heaven gives my country a better leader, I am willing to stand up first and strike for Spain and the Cross!' `The decree of Abdelasis will go before your fifty messengers, and prepare the way for them. Gladly they will listen to tidings that will point them to a chieftain who dares defy Abdelasis, and abide the issue, trusting to God and his cause!' `Your words give me more confidence in myself, noble Velez. How many of these sixteen thousand men will listen to these tidings here in Cordova? Can access be got to their ears? Can they be communicated with, without excting before the time the suspicions of their masters? ' `Yes. I have influence with one hundred men here, of our nation; slaves they are, indeed, but they are well treated and have much leisure; some of them even acting as Secretaries to officers of the State, at least to such as were officers under the Emirs. These men love Spain as I do. They mourn over her degradation and the stain upon the true cross, cast by the shadow of the Crescent. They look, as I have looked, for a Deliverer to arise in the land. Your name they have heard, and repeated it to me. These men know each one or more others whom they talk with upon the wrongs of their land; and these associate with others. `In a word, the whole sixteen thousand are linked together in degrees, like those I have mentioned. An idea communicated to one, reaches every individual, however lowly he may lie in his bonds. One word of hope spoken this night by me to four or five friends, ere morning, would have stirred and warmed a thousand hearts; and in twenty-four hours, not a Christian slave in Cardova would be ignorant of it.' `This is all that could be desired for our cause. I did not know before that the slaves of our people here in Cordova, thus kept alive a love of Spain.--- They have, most of them, seemed sullenly indifferent, or else cowardly contented in their servitude!' `And why should you look for outward signs of freedom among men, who live in bonds---over whose heads hangs the scymetar of the Caliph, or the thonged lash of his master. Who are watched; who are without arms; who have no King nor leader to look up to, to keep alive hope---who are treated as the dogs of the kennel!' `What a picture of degradation. Poor Spain! alas, for my degraded countrymen! ' `It is your sacred duty, Alfonzo, to strike a blow in their behalf! They will hear your name with joy! Alfonzo, our deliverer, will flow like honey from their lips, and they will feel their hearts once more throb with hope. The grey-headed man will lift up his bowed form, and recall again the glories of the past, and hope to behold them once more restored. The youthful will look forward to see, what they have not yet seen, Spain once more a Christian kingdom. Mothers and [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-148.jpg) \- external link  - Page 062. ] maidens will bless thee, and thou wilt have that calm, deep joy in thy bosom, which will flow from the happiness, of which you have been the instrument.' `But much is to be done, Senor.--- There are in Cordova---' `Thirty thousand Moorish citizens and eighteen thousand Moorish soldiers, exclusive of the Zenetan cavalry, one thousand strong, and which now compose the body-guard of the new Caliph, as they have done of the Emir's before him. They are mercenaries, and are paid for their services, and serve him who pays them best.' `There may be then, full twenty five thuusand men to encounter, soldiers and citizens,' said Alfonzo. `To take Cordova will require thirty thousand.' `This number, mark my words, will be raised easily; and if the revolt goes on secretly, so that Abdelasis knows not of the coming storm till it bursts upon him, less than this number will do. But if he should hear of it, he will so prepare for it, that we may need fifty thousand men to take the city, and maintain the ports in the valley.' `The undertaking is a great one, Senor, but I trust we shall have the aid of Heaven, and I feel assured, that if other Christian nations see us make an effort to expel the Moor, we shall have the aid of their swords.' `I foresee this, Alfonzo. Now I think we understand each other, and know our duties in the task before us. Mine is to call on the influential Christians in the city, and make known to them our contemplated movement. I will confide the secret to a few confidential men, who will spread it from lip to ear, till all who hate the Moors in Cordova, shall know that a Deliverer is raised up in Cordova, and they will be ready to act with us as one man!' `When will you see these friends?' asked Alfonzo, rising. `At once. I will go forth at once with Elic to bear a lantern before me, and visit a few of the principal persons I have in my mind. I shall find them easily, and can see them without suspicion, as among the Moors I am taken for a Moor; and I have business with their masters almost daily in the way of my traffic, for I am a dealer in silks, as you shall see in the marning, when I shall show you my goods, Will you remain here, my chief?' `Call me Alfonzo, Senor.' `Nay, thou art our chief, and must submit to be addressed as such. I feel that God has given the deliverance of Spain, and the restoration of the cross to thee to perform. To thy power and guidance I bow, and so will all men who hear thy name. It is now eight o'clock. I shall return by ten, and you can repose here on this divan, for you must needs be weary.' Thus speaking, Senor Velez threw on a long brown cloak which he wore abroad, and girding it at the waist by a sash, he covered his head with a scarlet turban of many voluminous folds, and took a staff in his hand. `Elec,' he said to the Nubian, who entered at his call, take your lantern and go forth with me.' The slave, after a moment's absence, returned with a large, richly painted lantern, and preceding his master undid the gate, and waited for him to pass. `I shall return in two hours, I trust, able to say to thee, Alfonzo, that the ball has been set in motion, which shall not cease to roll till it has thrown down Mosque and minaret. You will not venture forth till I return, for it would peril your life unnecessarily. ' `I will await you here, Senor, though I feel little disposed to repose,' answered [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-149.jpg) \- external link  - Page 063. ] the young chief. `Say to these Christian bondmen that they must make no movement, but only wait and stand prepared to strike when they hear the war cry of Spain breaking on their ears on the eve of San Diego.' The rich Spanish merchant then folded his cloak about him, and departed up the street, giving Alfonzo particular directions to secure the gate and to admit no one. Alfonzo followed, with his eye, the dark forms, with their flickering lantern, till they disappeared up the street, and then turned to secure the gate. Athir was at his shoulder. `My lord,' said the youth, `I will bar the gate. But I expected you would go forth to see what hath become of Xariffa.' `That, Athir, is a mission I shall give to thee,' he said, smiling. `To me?' cried the youth with sparkling eyes. `Yes, to you, Athir. I want you to go and ascertain where she is. You will proceed at once to the palace of Abdelasis, and I will leave to your address and courage to get the intelligence I desire. It will be easier for you, being a Moor, than for me, and besides, I am known to Abdelasis, and I should not wish to be discovered.' `I will go, my lord. I know I can hear something from her if she is at the palace. I would disguise myself as a page and go boldly into the palace if I had the dress.' `If you had gold could you purchase such a costume? Are not the bazaars closed?' `Not till nine o'clock, my lord.' `Then here are five pieces which the holy father put into my hand, saying I should want money in Cordova, and I find he spoke truly.' `I can get all I want for two of the gold pieces, my lord. I know well where the bazaar is, in which I used to purchase my suits when I was a page. I will go there; and, habited as a page of the palace, I will discover if Xariffa is in the power of Abdelasis; and I will return ere breakfast to-morrow, perhaps earlier, and let you know what I hear.' `You can inquire of those about, what Christian maiden it was that a party of Zenetan horse captured to-day, and if she were sold. This question will open a way to my poor sister's discovery.' `Trust to me, my lord! I will proceed to my task with courage and love for thee!' answered the youth. Alfonzo grasped him by the hand, warmly, and then set him forth. `Thou must have a lantern?' `No. I will glide along by the shad ows. Thou shalt soon hear of thy sister's fate, my lord!' Thus speaking, he glided away up the street in the direction taken by Signor Velez and his Nubian slave; and was soon lost in the darkness that enveloped the street. `Now,' said Alfonzo as he lingered at the open gate, `now have I done all that is in my power to do in behalf of my sister. Once let me know her fate and I shall know how to act in her behalf. That she is in the power of Abdelases, I have now no doubt: for the party was composed of the Zeretan horse, who, says Signor Velez, are taken into the Caliph's service. I begin to fear he may have seen my sister, and been inspired with passion for her, and so has done this deed! But I shall learn when the faithful Athir returns!' THE SERENADER. Alfonzo had not been long alone after the departure of Athir when he began to experience restless desire to see Genilla, and ascertain if she were in safety. `Duty and religion,' he said within [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-150.jpg) \- external link  - Page 064. ] himself, `would teach me to forget her now that I have given myself to the overthrow of her people's power and the upraising of the cross where the crescent now stands! But my heart is more powerful with its arguments than my head. I must see! I cannot cease loving her. I hope yet to make her a christian!' He was pacing up and down the paved court within the house of Signor Velez as he thus mused. It was overhung with trees on two sides that grew in a garden, to which a gate in the wall led. The moon was just rising and silvering the tops of the palms and shedding its lustre upon the minarets. The dwee-loo or Andalusian nightingale was singing in the branches of an orange tree above his head, and the air was laden with fragrance. He examined the little gate which was set in the wall and found that by drawing a bolt on the innerside it came open. He passed through it and found himself in a spacious garden of shady walks, fountains and terraces. It was a scene of wonderful beauty to be thus hidden in the heart of the city. In the centre of the garden, were two lofty palms that waved their tall capitals in the soft winds and cast an ever moving shade upon the sward at his feet. He was charmed with the loveliness and quiet of the place. He rambled on, and passing a marble fountain, ascended a flight of steps, which led him to a higher terrace of the garden. He saw in the distance the walls of a villa, on the remote extremity of the garden overlooking it. He moved slowly in the direction of it, and as he came in sight of a lattice he thought he heard voices. He drew his scymetar, and threw back the folds of his bernish, so as to free his right arm, and taking off his turban, he cautiously went forward. But instead of an enemy or foes seeking to attack him, he saw, as he passed round the trunk of a large cypress, with his sword in his grasp, ready to defend himself should he come suddenly upon foes,---leaning in an easy attitude against a palm-tree, a man playing upon a guitar, and singing as he played with a fine rich voice. He could not be deceived!---the voice was that of Abdelasis; and as the moonlight fell full upon his figure, revealing his features, he clearly recognised the Caliph. He stood transfixed at the discovery; his first impulse was to rush forward and attack him upon the spot, and if possible take him prisoner. But he reflected that aid might be nigh---that he knew not where he was, having wandered through the gardens some distance from the merchant's house, and that his retreat might be cut off. Besides, Abdelasis---though he deserved punishment for his treachery to him---might be innocent of the abduction or of the fate of Xariffa. He was not a little surprised to meet the Caliph in these gardens, and especially thus sentimentally playing the lover. He bent his eyes keenly to see if he could discern any one at the lattice; but all was quiet there, and no sign even of a fair hand upon the casement. He remained for a few moments, concealed by the trunk of the cypress from the view of Abdelasis, whose face was upturned to the lattice. He could not catch but here and there a word of what he sang, but it was enough to show him that it was a song of love. At length he ceased, and looked up to the lattice intently, and then waved his guitar towards it, saying--- `Cruel fair one! He who woos thee might command thee. It is I, not thou, who am bound a prisoner;---my heart is in chains, and I sigh in bondage! Wilt thou not appear, lady?' There was no reply; the lattice betrayed no presence; and the Prince [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-151.jpg) \- external link  - Page 065. ] slowly moved away, stealthily followed by Alfonzo. The latter pressed rapidly forward, but suddenly drew back on seeing four Moorish soldiers standing in the path waiting for the Caliph, who joined them and disappeared in a dark alcove of foliage that overhung the wall. Alfonzo went onward, and coming to the place, found that a gate had let them forth; but whether into a street or another garden adjoining he could not tell, as the wall was so high. `This is a wilderness of gardens,' said he, as he looked about him. `Can it be possible I am in the royal gardens of the palace? How singular that I should have beheld Abdelasis, and in such an occupation! He may well say, he who wooes may command. And what maiden is it who dares dispute his power and scorn his love? Who can it be who has so won his heart that he dare not command, but is compelled to sue; and even puts up with silence and indifference? Whoever she is who rules the proud Prince thus by love, rules Spain! I will return and watch this lattice well; it may be that I may see her. Were it not that he sued so humbly for her favor, I should believe that it was Xariffa. I will at least endeavor to ascertain who it is. It is well that I did not attack the Caliph as my first impulse prompted me to do. I should have been overpowered or slain; and I have given my life to Spain not to be cast away in a broil even with Abdelasis for my antagonist. If I had slain him now Spain would have been no less in bondage. Others would have risen, and anarchy and discord would have filled Cordova. It is better for our conspiracy that the Moslem power be consolidate and united under him that we may know where to strike, and know that when we strike we strike off the head. Let Abdelasis live till we are ready to meet and overthrow him with all who belong to him.' He now came in front of the lattice and looked up with caution. There was no one visible. He was in shadow and yet commanded a full and near view of the casement. He saw that it had been opened since the Caliph left, for it was now ajar, and when he was before it, it was closely shut. This fact as well as the earnest manner of the Prince in his moonlight serenade led him to feel confident that some one was there. He resolved to ascertain whether it were Xariffa or not by singing a few notes of a Spanish ballad that she well knew and which they had often sung together. He began at first in a low tone and then raising his voice till it fully reached the casement he sang one verse of the ballad, his eye, from his covert, full upon the lattice. It was suddenly thrown open---a white arm glowed in the moonlight and Xariffa looked eagerly forth. The heart of Alfonzo bounded with joy. He lifted up his heart in gratitude to God that he had found his lost sister. But he did not at once show himself. He was apprehensive: he might have attracted attention by his singing from some other ears than hers. He therefore remained silent and immoveable watching her, his heart throbbing with joy. She looked eagerly out and bending far forward listened. She closely surveyed the ground beneath the lofty casement, and seemed loth to give up the search. He could see that her face was pale and anxious. He knew that she was a prisoner; but why Abdelasis should thus humbly woo amazed him. But he had not been cognizant of their former interview in the cabin. He was ignorant of the sudden passion which his guest had entertained for his sister, and how completely enthralled by her charms was his haughty spirit. Finding all was still in the garden, [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-152.jpg) \- external link  - Page 066. ] Alfonzo thought he could safely make himself known, and advancing from the shadow of the wall he suddenly appeared before her, forgetting his Moorish costume, supposing she would instantly recognise him as he had done her.--- But when seeing him she stepped back from the casement with a slight exclamation. He then removed his turban and called to her: `Xariffa! Sister! It is I!' Instantly the maiden reappeared at the window, and uttered an exclamation of delight as she gazed down upon the noble brow of her brother on which the moonlight broadly lay. `Oh, Alfonzo, God bless you for seeking me out! But fly at once! You cannot save me. You will perish! You know not in whose power I am.' `I know well, Xariffa. I saw the Caliph leave this place. You are in his power. I will save you. `You can do nothing. This window is too lofty for me to descend to you, and if you should reach the casement you would only rush upon death. This palace is closely guarded. I am a prisoner! and I would not have you share my fate! Fly! Think not of me but fly!' `I am secure in my disguise, Xariffa. I have found you and I will not go away and have you in the hands of Abdelasis. Was it not by his order you were taken captive?' `Yes. I was brought to the city and to this tower, where he came to see me; but I rejected his suit with scorn?' `And yet he loves thee! Did he see thee, Xariffa?' asked Alfonzo earnestly, coming still nearer to the window, `did he see you at the hamlet?' `Alas! he did. He came to my room unexpectedly. He talked long with me. He offered me his heart, but I refused to listen to him. He left me, but in anger. I should have told this to you, and you would have guarded me more securely. I owe my present situation to my silence.' `It cannot now be helped, sister! I know that it was not your fault. But the Prince loves you! You have powerover him that no one in Spain possesses. He will be goaded to madness by your indifference, and destroy you, a sacrifice to his pride and passion. I will aid you to escape. Can you throw me a cord?' `There is none. I cannot escape, save by the gates, and these are guarded by armed men. I do not fear the Prince. If he persists, I have a dagger, and will die, ere I become his slave!' `Nay, Xariffa, I am glad to see thee show thyself so resolute. But this must not be. Thou must be rescued. Who else hast thou in the palace with thee?' `There are slaves to do my bidding. The apartments are sumptuous. I am surrounded with every luxury. Abdelasis has twice been here and knelt at my feet. He said he disdained to make me a slave by his power, he sued for the free gift of my heart. To-night he has sought to win me with songs of love. He is very kind!' `Couldst thou love him, Xariffa?' asked Alfonzo, struck with her last words, and beginning to suspect that her heart might be secretly interested and moved by his flattering homage and profound attentions. `Love a moslem?' she repeated with amazement. `Suppose he were a christian, sister?' `Then I could, indeed love him! He is very noble and tender in his speech, and has every grace to win a maiden's love! But I do not forget that he is an unbeliever!' `And thou wilt not forget even this, long, my sister, I see,' answered Alfonzo, bitterly, who, with grief perceived that she was inclined with all her [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-153.jpg) \- external link  - Page 067. ] resistance to regard the prince with favor rather than with anger and detestation. But he had not seen Abdelases in her presence after she was brought into the city, for it was by his order that the captain of the Zenetan horsemen took her captive. Instead of bringing her to his Seraglio he had ordered the captain to take her to his former palace, that in which Alfonzo now discovered her. Here she was delivered to the charge of female slaves, and after a bath was robed by them in magnificent apparel and conducted to the sumptuous apartments in the casement of which she was now conversing with Alfonzo. THE CALIPH AND HIS CAPTIVE. After the fair captive had recovered a little from her surprise on finding herself thus treated, rather as if she were a princess than a mountain maiden, and her alarm at finding herself in the power of Abdelases (for the captain had told her it was by his order he had acted) had subsided, she began to contemplate her condition. It was no new thing to her to [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-154.jpg) \- external link  - Page 068. ] know that the Moorish chief stole fair christian girls from their homes to make them slaves in Cordova. She knew that such was to be her condition. She was not so miserable as she would have been had her heart been interested in any youth of her native Scerias; but she was heart-free. She had no one to think of, therefore, but herself and her brother and Gaspar, her father. For these she shed tears. The Moorish captain had told her that she was not to be sold like other maidens in the lagoon, but that the prince would himself honor her by making her his slave. She paced up and down the gorgeous apartments, now melted to tears, now burning with anger, now tortured with fear. She had heard that Abdelases was cruel, and she knew that she must prepare to die; for she resolved to treat him with scorn and defiance, and thus by her coldness so enrage him as to induce him to command her execution. She knew that he would visit her. The principal slave of the palace had told her the prince would visit her. She would have torn off the jewels and rich robes and trampled upon them, but she caught sight of herself in a mirror, and let them remain. Suddenly a door opened, and a young man entered with a princely air. She uttered an exclamation of mingled surprise and pleasure. She recognised the guest at the hamlet, of whom she had thought with more kindness and leniency since his departure, than she had felt while he was present. Indeed he had been very much in her thoughts, considering that he was an Infidel. Upon now recognising him, she was moved with surprise, pleasure, and not a little with fear. He approached. She shrunk back, and as he advanced, she retreated. The casement arrested her receding steps. She still regarded him as he ap proached with curiosity and alarm, yet the former emotion seemed strongest. `Fair Xariffa,' he said, `why do you fly me?' `Why am I here? Tell Abdelasis if he sent thee, that I am his prisoner, but I will never be his slave. Did he fear to behold one whom he had wronged, that he sent thee? Was it by thy report that he heard of me? If so, let what little kindness in my heart there remains for thee, turn to hatred and scorn.' `Maiden,' said the youthful Caliph, approaching her with a smile, yet with an air of deference, `in me you behold Abdelasis. It was Abdelasis who was your guest.' At hearing these words, she stood gazing upon him with amazement, and not without a beam of gratification lighting up the cloud which had been gathering upon her brow. She saw that the worst was now made known, that the Abdelasis she had trembled to think upon, was before her, and in the person of the handsome stranger who had declared at her feet his deep passion for her.--- She knew not which most to fear, the young Moor as a supposed Saracen cavalier, or Abdelasis, the powerful. `You tremble, maiden. You need not fear me,' he said, kindly. `By Allah, I swear to thee that thou art as free as air, and that I will not harm thee!' `Then if I am free, send me back to my father's roof, to the protection of my brother!' she said, with spirit. `Do not scorn my love, Christian maiden, ' said the prince, kneeling at her feet. `I am your captive---not you mine.--- This heart is yours, sacredly and faithfully yours,' he added, placing his hand with graceful earnestness upon his heart, and looking up into her face with eyes that beamed with love and adoration.--- She would have fled between fear of him and fear of herself, for she felt that her [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-155.jpg) \- external link  - Page 069. ] bosom was relenting. But the casement towards which she had retreated, was too high, and she could not escape from listening to the ardent eloquent out-pouring of his passion. It was impossible that she should listen without being moved. She felt that if he were a Christian, she should hear him with pleasure, and requite with gratitude love so profound and sincere as his seemed to be. `Xariffa, thou art ice,' he at length said, as she remained immoveable. `I know not what to say. I am a Christian, thou a Moor. I am a Spanish woman, thou art a Saracen, and my country's foe and oppressor. I cannot listen to thee. I cannot love thee. Do not talk to me of love, noble Prince. If I am free as thou hast said, send me at once freely away. Thou knowest, Prince, a Christian maiden may not give her love to a Moslem!' `I would almost become a Christian for thy sake, sweet Xariffa.' `You mock me. I know that thou and thine are so wedded to thy faith that you never change.' `I have known Christians to change, why wilt not thou?' `Thou hast known only base renegades to become Mussulmen.' `Why, there is the nobleman, Senor Velez, in this city, who is a follower of the true Prophet, and worships in the Mosques.' `I am ashamed for him, and for Spain that has such nobles, Prince,' she answered with spirit. `I will, weak woman as I am, try to atone for his treachery to his country and to his Redeemer, by being steadfast.' `Then you will not pity my great love for thee.' `No, Caliph, I can never consent to give my heart to one who hates the cross and Him crucified thereon. So, if I am at liberty, as thou hast first said, suffer me to be taken whence I was rudely taken.' `Nay, I cannot let thee go. I will now bid thee good bye, sweet Xariffa, for a time, trusting thou wilt think better of me when you reflect upon my love. So I offer to share with thee my crown and power. Thou shalt reign with Abdelasis. Our union shall be the band to unite Spain and Islam. We will make one nation in the land.' `Christ may not dwell with Belial. There can be no mingling of oil and wine. Either the land must be Moslem or Christian; and what would you have me? Think not, noble Prince, I could for thy sake give up my faith; and I know thou wilt not depart from thine, false though it be.' `By the beard of Mehemet, maiden, thou hast spirit enough for a princess. Thy commanding eye and firmness of bearing are imperial. Thou wouldst grace a throne, were it that of Suliman. Have I thy answer?' `Thou hast.' `Dost thou not fear me?' `Yes, but I fear God more.' `Dost thou not know that I can make thee my slave, and that I am condescending to sue to thee thus?' `I know that I am in thy power, but I do not believe thou wouldst degrade it and thyself, by using it as thou hast intimated. ' `You speak truly, Xariffa. I love thee, too well, to make thee my slave. I again repeat thou art free to---' `To go?' `No---to love me or hate me.' `How can I love my gaoler?' `I am in hopes to tame thee by keeping thee in this pretty cage. I am in hopes that my kindness and my efforts to render thee happy will melt thy heart. Do not reply; I cannot bear to hear thee [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-156.jpg) \- external link  - Page 070. ] say anything that will destroy my hopes. Fare thee well, Xariffa. I will go away but I shall leave behind me all that can make thee truly happy. It is true, I am seated upon the throne of the Emirs, but I feel far from being happy, so long as I am rejected from the throne of thy heart. Think of me, Xariffa. Think of my love, my devotion, my happiness which thou hast in thy keeping. Be pitiful, and forget that I am not a Christian like thyself.' `I can never---' `Not a word, sweet maiden---not another word. Fare well; and perhaps to-morrow I will come and see thee again. In the meantime, think upon me as kindly as thou canst.' With these words, the Prince, with real sadness and disappointment, took a respectful leave of his beautiful captive, and she was once more left alone. She paced the room in troubled thought. she felt that he had a power over her heart, that she dared not contemplate calmly. She felt that his love, so sincere and so respectful, demanded from her a better return than she had met it with. She felt deeply his delicacy and forbearance, when she knew that he might command. She knew that only sincere and sacred love could have dictated such reverence and courtesy. His love pleaded to her heart most strongly in his behalf;---but duty, her duty as a Spanish woman and a Christian, pleaded with greater energy against him. `Oh, that he were a Christian!' she sighed; `then indeed I might listen to him without guilt. But now, I must turn a deaf ear to his eloquent words, and close my eyes to the fire of his eye,--- Let me not forget that he is my country's foe---let me not forget he is the enemy of the Cross! Oh, that I were free in my native mountains.' Thus tortured and in suspense between the Prince's love and her sense of duty, she continued to walk her gorgeous apartments, till at length, wearied with the conflict, she sank upon her knees, and in tears and prayers sought relief and guidance. The next that she heard of her lover was his voice beneath her casement the evening of the same day, singing to her a song full of the most earnest passion; for Abdelasis was truly and irresistibly captivated by the fair Christian girl; and although she was in his power, his love invested her with a sacredness in his eyes that was her secure safeguard. Alfonzo, be it remembered, was ignorant of these events, and of the bias in Xariffa's mind towards her princely captor, or he would not have marvelled as he did to notice that absence of fear and disposition to speak favorably of Abdelasis, which she manifested; for he saw that she did not seem to be so overwhelmed with terror as he supposed she would have been, in the power of such a man. `Xariffa,' he said, lifting his eyes once more earnestly to the casement, `I see that unless I secure your escape at once, you will become a willing captive of the Caliph. I know not by what spells he hath charmed your heart, or by what weakness you have been betrayed to listen to him; but I see that thou art as willing to be a captive as to be free.' `Brother, you do me wrong!' she answered with spirit. `I would escape if it were possible without periling your life; but you may see that I connot descend from this casement, and even should you be able to reach it, you could not conduct me in safety from the palace---it is strictly guarded.' `Lady, the Prince comes!' said a beautiful slave, who came that instant to the casement and looked down. `Fly, Alfonzo,' cried Xariffa; `fear [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-157.jpg) \- external link  - Page 071. ] not for me! I will be true to myself and to my faith. Fly! if you are taken here you are lost!' she then waved her hand and disappeared. Alfonzo had had time to see that the maiden who came to notify her of the Prince's presence was exceedingly beautiful, slight of figure, and spoke as if she was the friend rather than the spy of his sister. He felt it his duty to obey and escape from the gardens, and sought the distant gate by which he had entered, greatly troubled in his mind as to Xariffa's fate; for he began to tremble for her faith under the dangerous influence of the insinuating Caliph. THE TURBAN-MAKER AND HIS GUEST. Alfonzo , upon reaching the court of the Senor Velez, found all quiet as he had left it half an hour before. He, however, had discovered his sister in the power of Abdelasis, yet respected by him, and in danger of forgetting her duty as a Christian woman through the power of his love. But it was out of his power to save her; and to attempt it, might result in his own captivity; and he felt that he was not his own, but belonged to those who had chosen him to be their leader in the coming revolution. He approached the street-gate, and unbarring it, looked out to see if he could discover any signs of the return of the Spanish noble from his friends. But the street was silent. The moonlight lay broadly upon one side of it, lighting up the Morisco edifices with a brilliancy and beauty that the noon-day sun never could lend to them. Here and there the black shadow of a tree lay across the field of moonlight. From a distance came to his ear low sounds of music, and remotely he heard the winding of a bugle, but whether outside or within the walls, he could not tell; the notes, however, he knew to be Moorish; for it had been a score of years since a Spanish bugle had waked the echoes of the walls of Cordova. `I will ramble up the street,' he said. `All is quiet, and if I see any one, I will retire into the shade, and so avoid them. As a Moor, I may pass on safely to the great square. It will be yet an hour ere the Senor Velez returns!' Thus speaking, he closed the gate after him, and grasping his scymetar firmly, he walked along up the narrow street on the dark side of the way. He was pleased at the beauty of the Moorish edifices, all the outlines of their elaborate architecture, being finely relieved in the light and shadow of the moon-beams. The arched gate-ways, the tall, deep casements, the heavy cornices and battlements, all attracted his eyes, unused to the magnificence of cities. Finding all quiet as he went on, he continued his way until he came to the entrance into the great square. Here the view that met his gaze was splendid beyond conception. The noble mosques, the palaces of the Emirs, the royal Seraglio were all visible at once embracing the vast area in a magnificent and sublime array of terraces and porticoes, columns and domes, towers and miniarets, with a hundred silver crescents, shining like a constellation of moons above all. He stood a moment and contemplated the scene, and in his heart prayed that God would ere long give these palaces once more into the hands of Christian Spain. There were guards both on horse and foot in front of the palace of Abdelasis, but where Alfonzo himself stood, no one was moving. He now saw that the palace in which he had seen Xariffa was not on the square before him, for it was to the north, on his left. By reflecting a moment, he believed he could find its [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-158.jpg) \- external link  - Page 072. ] front, and thus by personal inspection, ascertain exactly how strongly it was guarded; and whether, if he could gain access by the casement, he should be able to escape with her some other way. With this object in his mind, he turned out of the square to the left, and by mentally comparing the situation of Senor Velez's abode with the situation of the casement, he was enabled to find the street upon which it fronted. `He went down this street and came to a high wall overhung with foliage, and farther on was a massive gate-way, within which he heard voices. He crossed over, and under cover of the black shadows of the opposite side of the way saw---himself unseen---that this was the enclosure of the palace he sought, and that at its entrance, a guard of four soldiers was placed. Two of them were walking up and down before it, the other two were seated upon a bench, playing in the moonlight at Ta-bish , a popular Moorish game, with date stones. Upon the terrace of the palace, he saw also, two armed figures standing, doubtless, sentries, to prevent the escape of the fair captive. Alfonzo saw at a glance, that it would be impossible for him to rescue his sister alone, and return with her as he had hoped to do, to the mountains, after his own mission to Cordova should be terminated. He went on, however, to the extremity of the lofty wall, in belief that he might find some opening less strongly guarded; but he found no other gate. He was about to turn back, giving up the hope of recovering his sister, and anxious lest she shonld be led by the love and rank of the Caliph to renounce her faith, when his eye fell on a scarlet turban made of wood and painted, suspended over the door of a humble habitation, but a few paces further down the street. His heart bounded with joy and delighted surprise. He recollected that this was the sign of the house of the Moor, Yussef Ben Habib, where Ben Osmin was sojourning with Genilla. He sprung forward with the sudden impulse which his wishes gave to his feet, but as suddenly checked himself: `There are many turban makers in Cardova, and this may not be the shop of Ben Habib. Rut I will not go away till I ascertain. All this while I have been wishing that I knew the street, that I might at least look upon the house where Genilla dwells, and lo, here I have, without doubt, stumbled upon it! I will see her if she be here!' He then looked about him carefully to see that he was not observed, and then stepped across the street to the door, over which hung the scarlet turban. The house was of stone, one story in height, had once been white washed, but was now very dingy with age and neglect, apparently by its exterior, proclaiming the poverty of Ben Habib, whose wife the reader will remember, was chosen by Ben Osmin, as the nurse for his protege Genilla, after he found her wrapped up in the bale of shawls, in the mysterious manner already related. The house was buried in repose, aud seemed to be closely shut up. He resolved, however, to make some demonstrations towards ascertaining if the fair Moorish girl was an inmate of it. He had discovered the name `Yussuf Ben Habib,' written over the top of the door, in Arabic characters, with green chalk. This discovery assured him that this was the house in which Ginella was to be found, if she were in Cordova. To commence beating upon the gate, after the custom of applicants, with Moorish tenements, he did not feel safe in doing, so near the guard at the great gate of the palace enclosure, which was not more [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-159.jpg) \- external link  - Page 073. ] than two hundred yards distant. He therefore looked for some way of ingress to the court in the rear, for he knew that all Moorish dwellings had a fountain, and court, and garden, either of larger or smaller dimensions, for every Moslem citizen, however humble, had his fountain for his ablutions, though it be an earthen one; and a court to sit in to take his coffee, though it be but twelve feet square; and a garden to give him shade, though it be not able to hold more than two date trees. At the side of Ben Habib's house, he found the roof terminate in a wall about ten feet in height, over which crept a vine. By the aid of the strong, cordlike tenderils of the vine, he drew himself up to the top of the wall, and descended into a little square court, which was not ten steps either way in length or breadth. In the centre was a brick fountain, shaded by a fig-tree. He advanced a few steps from the wall, and was able to look into the open corridor of the Moor's humble house, upon the paved floor of which, the moonlight streamed like a flood of silver. This corridor was a sort of outer hall, open to the air, and having doors to lead into the front rooms of the dwelling. One of these doors was open, and showed a lamp within, suspended above a bench, on which sat a bald-headed mussulman busily engaged in folding silk and muslin into a suitable form to make turbans. He was a short fat Moor with a full face of good humor and simplicity. Opposite to him was Ben Osmin, reclining on a divan, and talking with Ben Habib. Genilla was not visible, and Alfonzo looked towards a small apartment on the left of Ben Osmin, which, he believed, held her from his wistful gaze. He advanced a step noiselessly, and bent forward, hoping that she might be screened only by the half-open door of the room in which they were; but he could not discover her. A word or two from Ben Habib arrested his ear, and he instantly became interested in the conversation. `And this is all true that the Christian hermit told you, brother,' was the remark of Ben Habib, looking up from his work, and fixing his small, keen Moorish eyes on the face of Ben Osmin. `Yes, brother. He came to me on purpose to tell me this. And I see it all now. I can see how that priest Paulus used to try and make a Christian of her, till I told him I would make him a head shorter if he spoke to Genilla of the cross of the Nazarene again. I see it all, but I love her not a whit less because she has Christian blood in her veins.' `How strange that a Christian monk should have sent to thee a Christian infant to keep. He might have known she would have grown up to be a follower of the true Prophet, for which Allah be thanked. Did he tell you who her mother was or her father?' `No; he came to me three days ago, and told me that this Paulus, whom we thought such a good Moslem, had told him, that the infant I had received in a bale of shawls was the daughter of Christian parents of high rank; that its life had been saved by him only by the most extraordinary exertions on his part, when all her race perished, and that finding he could not protect it longer, and knowing my goodness of heart, (for he paid me this compliment, Ben Habib; and deserved too,' remarked the turban-maker, parenthetically,) he sent her to me in the manner you have often been told. Since then he has watched over her as a Moslem and Mufti, though at heart he was a Nazarene. He said that Paulus did not intend she should remain with me any longer than he could find a safe asylum for her, for fear of her becoming a Moslem; but circumstances prevented his [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-160.jpg) \- external link  - Page 074. ] giving her his protection; and last week he died, telling father Godfrey these things.' `And yet this Paulus as a Moslem, used to come and try to make her a Christian, you say.' `I have my suspicions that he did; but I never liked to trust a converted Christian, and so I had my eye upon him, and finally forbade him the Emir's tower.' `Well, what is to be done?' `The father Godfrey, who seems to be a good man for a Christian, told me that the maiden was very rich, and that if I would come to Cordova he would point out where the wealth was secreted, and give me half of it if I would surrender Genilla to him.' `On my soul be it,---this was a request.' `It was. I pretended to assent to this--- though I would part with my life sooner than with my Genilla, though she had all the Christian blood of Jerusalem in her veins.' `She is no worse a Moslem for that, brother.' `No. I deceived the holy hermit, and came hither where he said he would meet me, and unfold to me the wealth of which Genilla has been so long deprived. He should have been here to-night by his promise,' answered Ben Osmin, looking towards the street door, and listening. THE MERCHANT AND HIS GUEST. There was a moment's pause in the conversation, during which Alfonzo had time to reflect rapidly upon the wonderful intelligence which he had heard.--- Genilla was then of Christian birth, and not the daughter of Ben Osmin the Moor. This discovery filled his bosom with delight. There was now no further obstacle to the free progress of his love for the fair young girl; for he felt that he had only to reveal to her this truth, to make her a willing convert to the faith of her fathers. That the fact was as the conversation he had overheard led him to see it, he could not doubt. But he resolved to see the hermit and learn from him the whole, confessing his attachment to her and persuading him to unfold her history. He now understood why father Godfrey had made that mysterious visit to the Emir's tower; and in his heart he said,---`He will no longer be displeased with me for gazing on the tower and thinking upon the fair occupant of the cottage by its walls; he will gladly assent to our union, hoping, as I hope, that through me she be restored to the fold of the church.' Suddenly the voice of Ben Habib roused him from his pleasing meditations. `How much gold think you, brother, the maiden has?' `That I know not; the hermit said it was a large sum in gold and jewels, which Paulus had hidden for her in some safe place in Cordova, where it had remained twenty years.' `I would I had found it. What do you mean to do when he gives thee half, and refuse to give up the maiden to him?' `I will tell him I will keep Genilla for the other half which I make over to him. This will be fair dealing, brother, with a Christian dog!' `It is no harm, but rather a virtue, to deceive them. But he may not let thee have the gold till he have thy daughter. But hist!---the maiden may be listening.' `No---she sleeps soundly; I saw that before we began our talk.' `It would be bad to be overheard by her, as she might play against us.' `She loves me too well; she would not leave me, brother Ben Habib. It would break her little heart.' `I have no doubt of it!---But surely I heard a noise!' cried the little turban-maker, as he glanced around with a quick, searching glance. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-161.jpg) \- external link  - Page 075. ] He did hear a noise---it was the footstep of Alfonzo, who, finding that he could learn nothing more, and that Genilla was asleep and in safety, recollecting his engagement with Senor Velez, retired from the corridor, but not without striking a loose brick of the paved floor. He rapidly sealed the wall, and lighted undiscovered in the street, along which he moved rapidly, to hasten back to the merchant's house. He had made happy discoveries during the two hours' absence of Senor Velez:---he had found where Xariffa was imprisoned, and that she rather loved her cage than desired to be stolen from it!---he had found Genilla, and learned not only her safety, but that she had now claims to his regard more sacred and stronger than ever. He took his way with a light tread along the street, and so wholly wrapped in the sweet thoughts of Genilla that he came unexpectedly upon two men at the corner of a street into which he was turning. He stepped back and drew his scymetar---the foremost stranger did the same. They confronted each other for a momeat in hostile attitude, the third standing a little behind the second, when Alfonzo thought he recognised the height and air of the latter. `Art thou not Senor Velez?' he said. `Yes; and thou?' `Alfonzo!' `Rash young man! How is it that I find you in the street?' `I was weary remaining at home, Senor, and invited by the moonlight I rambled forth. I have met with no mishap and have found all quiet!' `That was not your fault, my friend. Come we will hasten homeward.' `Is not this the way?' `Not as you were going. You see how imprudent you are, my noble friend. You might have been lost; and as guards of horsemen patrol the street every hour you would certainly have been arrested and discovered. I am glad I met with thee! Let us hasten homeward.' `Have you brought good tidings, Senor?' asked Alfonzo, suddenly forgetting Genilla, Xariffa and every thing but Spain and her wrongs! `Yes! I have given the news to ten brave and true men. Ere this they have conveyed it to ten more. By sun-rise a thousand Christian slaves in Cordova will know that Alfonzo the Destroyer has resolved to lift the standard of the Cross on the eve of San Diego upon the rock of St. Paul. The news will go from lip to lip till a fire shall run through all the veins of the bondmen of our blood in the city. They will keep the secret and await the signal to srike for Spain and liberty!' Thanks, thanks, noble Velez! I am already inspired by thy tidings,' answered Alfonzo, as he walked homeward with him, the Nubian slave following close behind him with his no longer needful lantern in his hand. Upen entering the house, and once more being seated, Senor Velez gave a minute relation of what he had done which convinced Alfonzo that he should receive the co-operation of almost as many strong arms within the walls of the Moors as without. He then related to the Senor his own adventures and even unfolded to him his love for Genilla now that he could speak of her as the daughter of Christian parents. The merchant heard him with profound surprise. He said, after some reflection, `What you have told me amazes me--- all of it! But I trust that your sister does not feel as kindly towards Abdelasis as you suspect. Doubtless she consulted more your safety than her own in refusing to permit you to risk your life in trying to save her! And if you had [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-162.jpg) \- external link  - Page 076. ] done so where could you have taken her? If you had brought her here she would have been discovered by the emissaries of the Caliph. If you had escaped from the city with her in disguise it would have been to desert a cause which calls for all your energies and devotion.' `True!' `Forget her and give your thoughts to your country, Alfonzo!' `I will do so!' `Yet one word touching this daughter of Ben Osmin! Said you that the father Godfrey did not know her parentage? ' `He did not name it to Ben Osmin. Doubtless he was informed by Paulus!' `I knew this priest Paulus well. He was confessor to the late Duke de Cordova brother to our good King Amalarie, whose memory Heaven bless forever. Paulus was a faithful adherent of the House of Amalarie and for years after the slaughter of the king and his household by the order of the Emir Taric I supposed he had shared their fate. But seven years ago I met him as I was travelling up the valley near the Pass of Roncesvar.' `He was habited as a recluse. He told me he lived in the mountains, and devoted his life to the returning glory of Spain. Since then I have heard nothing of him till now. And now I hear that he died a few days ago, leaving behind, in the ears of father Godfrey, this singular revelation. Do you know, Alfonzo, that I have my suspicions!' said Senor Velez, with a significant look and an animated air. `And I mine!' `What are they?' `That Genilla may belong to some one of the noble houses connected with the Duke de Cordova!' `More than this. I believe, from her age and your description of her, that she is the daughter of the Duke himself, saved by Paulus from death, at the risk of his own life, and placed with a Moor for preservation, as once a dying mother laid her infant in the midst of a litter of lion's whelps!' `Had the Duke a daughter who was then an infant?' `Yes; I was at its christening. It was believed to have perished.' `Genilla must be that infant, I feel persuaded!' `So also do I. I will draw the whole matter from father Godfrey. If it be true, then Spain has a Princess at least, and may hold up her head!' `And I droop mine own. For how will a princess look upon a peasant's love?' `Thy union may yet be ordered by Heaven as the salvation of the realm. If she be a princess, indeed, she can have no kindom, save by thy prowess. But let these matters rest till we see father Godfrey. He will doubtless unfold all to me!' At this moment was heard a tapping upon the outside of the street-gate. As it was some time past midnight, Senor Velez looked surprised, and rose himself to go to the gate before ordering his slave to open it. `Open, my good lord,' said the visitor. `It is Athir!' exclaimed Alfonzo, who had gone to the wicket with him. The gate was then unbarred and the youthful Moor admitted. He wore the dress of a royal page, a very elegant and graceful costume, which set his figure off to the best advantage. His turban was of pink silk entwined with a scarf of spangled muslin; his bernish was of bright yellow satin, bound with a gold border; and his vest was blue velvet, spangled with stars. He wore full muslin drawers, that nearly hid in the ample volume his red morocco gilt slippers. About his waist was bound a green sash, in which was stuck a silver-hilted yataghan and a jewelled dagger. `How is this fine display, Athir? You have made your two pieces of gold go a great ways,---your costume is worth a hundred bezets! ' exclaimed Alfonzo, surveying him. `I bought a coarser garb at the bazaar, my lord,' answered Athir, who seemed to be conscious how well he looked with his fine face and manly figure, to set off his rich costume; `but not liking it well, I went into the pages' bed-chamber, and while the idle rogues slept, I helped myself to the best suit among them that I could find; and donning it, I felt much more at my ease.' `Then you went into the palace of the Caliph?' `All over it, my lord, wheresoever a page's slipper is permitted to echo. I [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-163.jpg) \- external link  - Page 077. ] talked with many, and especially had a social talk with old Belzar, the chief eunuch, who was as communicative as I could desire;---and the result is, I am satisfied that Xariffa is not in the harem of the Seraglio.' `You have performed your duty well and faithfully, Athir: Xariffa is found--- she is in the private palace of Abdelasis, which is not far distant on the next street.' THE MEETING OF THE LONG-SEVERED. At the intelligence thus unexpectedly conveyed to him, Athir manifested his surprise and pleasure. `Allah be praised!' he cried: `I will aid my lord in recovering her.' `And, perhaps, you can aid me, Athir,' answered Alfonzo, after a moment's reflection. He then briefly stated how he had discovered her, and his fears that if she were suffered to remain longer in the power and presence of Abdelasis she might return his love for her. `Are you confident in your disguise?' asked Alfonzo. `It has saved me from detection in the Seraglio itself, my lord. But I have here a talisman.' `What is this?' asked Alfonzo, as he took from his hand a large signet. `It is what I have seen often,' interposed Senor Velez: `it is the Caliph's private seal.' `It is, my lord,' answered Athir, as Alfonzo fastened on him a glance of surprise and inquiry. `I took it from his own chamber, for he was absent---doubtless at the palace of his captive. I saw it there, and took it without much reflection about it---but believing that it might be of service to thee.' `It was a bold act, and may be useful. Can you gain admittance into the palace with it?' `Without doubt, my lord.' `Then go and see Xariffa, and say to her from whom you come, and urge her to fly with you to the Sierras. Will you not accompany her?' `Wherever my noble benefactor commands. I will do all I can to save her; if she will not come with me, I will re turn to you. What token shall I give her to prove that you sent me?' `Take this key---it is known to her.' The youthful Moor was going out upon his mission, when Senor Velez said to him,--- `When thou returnest, come by the way of the gardens; yonder gate on the other side of the court will let thee in and shall be left unhasped for thee.--- The gardens are the Caliph's, who, when Emir, let those who dwelt around them walk in them at certain hours daily.' Athir was then let out by the street door, and was departing, when a troop of the mounted city guard came galloping by. He quickly drew within the gate and when their retiring hoofs were heard at a distance, he again sallied forth. Leaving Alfonzo to discuss farther the details of the contemplated revolution which was to place Spain once more under the Christian rule, we will follow the disguised page to the gate of the palace where Alfonzo had seen the four guards stationed. He presented his signet boldly, and was at once admitted with great respect. A slave was called, who conducted him to the corridor of the palace where the chief eunuch received him and led him through a suite of magnificent halls towards the apartments occupied by Xariffa. Athir had adroitly ascertained at the gate that the Caliph had a long time before departed to his royal palace on the great square. Upon reaching the ante-room to her apartments, the eunuch said, bowing his head to the ground in the presence of the Caliph's messenger: `Does my lord Effendi wish to see the Christian slave in person, or speak with one of her attendants, and through he convey his Highness' message to the maiden.' `I will see her---go and announce me. The eunuch advanced, and lifting a massive curtain of gold and silk, heavily woven in gorgeous figures, he revealed a columed chamber, with alabaster panel exquisitely painted with birds of the richest plumage. The floor was mosaic, and the roof frescoed in the highest style of Moorish art, blue and gold contrasting with white being the prevailing colors. At the extremity of this beautiful apartment, upon a raised dais overlaid with the [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-164.jpg) \- external link  - Page 078. ] most costly and brilliant colors, sat Xariffa, the half-willing, half-trembling captive of the powerful Abdelasis. At her feet, a little removed, crouched in an attitude of natural grace, sat the beautiful Arabian maid her attendant, whom Alfonzo had seen appear at the casement, and warn her of the approach of the Prince after his serenade. She had a roquelin, or Moorish guitar, in her hands, upon the strings of which her taper fingers were arrested by the appearance of the eunuch, towards whom she turned her large black eyes enquiringly. Xariffa had been listening to the sweet voice of the young girl, who was singing, or rather improvising, a tale of love in her own experience, accompanying the romantic and touching narrative with a thrilling touch now and then upon the strings of her guitar. `Christian, a message from the Caliph,' said the eunuch, speaking with the machine-like action of an automaton. `I do not wish any message of the Prince but one, to tell me that I am free,' answered Xariffa with spirit. `He must not come in unless he brings such.--- Come, maiden, go on with thy sad story: tell me if thy father, the chief, never relented when he found thou didst so mourn the handsome youth, whom love for thee compelled to flee.' `No, lady---he was austere and cruel after this, and made me a prisoner in his own mountain hold. But true love has its own power. I escaped, and in disguise of a youth reached, after many hapless wanderings, these shores of Spain. Here I hoped I might find him who was dearer to me than the sun is to the green earth.' `And has thou ne'er met him?' `No, lady, but I have heard that he was a page to the Emir Algezir and afterwards became a wanderer in the Sierras! I know not where he is now!' `And how is it thou art the slave of Abdelasis?' `I was his page, also, till a month ago when, as I slept, my vest opening exposed my bosom. He made me tell him my whole story, and when he had listened attentively to it, he bade me take courage for if Athir were alive I should yet behold him; for he said nothing would give him so much happi ness as to see me united to him I had so faithfully loved. I have since been honorably entreated in the palace where I served as page; and yesterday when he brought thee hither he bade me please him by endeavoring to make thee happy and to love him!' `He is nobler than I believed. Thou has taken off one half my dislike to him for his kindness to thee. Here comes the Eunuch again to interrupt us! Sir Eunuch, it is past midnight; and because I choose to sit up and watch the moon I am not compelled to receive at such an hour the Caliph's messengers.' `He comes of his own will, Christian,' answered the Eunuch, standing aside and letting Athir advance. `Say to Abdelasis, fair page,' cried Xariffa, rising, `that this is not fulfilling his promise given me when he left, that I should not be intruded upon ere to-morrow! Ha! what is this? What has happened, child? How wildly you stare! Who---' Her words of surprise were interrupted by a loud shriek of heart heart breaking joy from the bosom of the Arabian girl and a cry of gladness co-mingling with it from the lips of the noble looking youth. `Nube!' `Athir!' These two words uttered with accents of the deepest-toned human, joy told her the whole story of lovers parted and and meeting again. Nube made but one bound to reach the approaching arms of Athir and her head sunk lifeless upon his shoulder while her arms clung around him as if she would never release her hold again. `My Nube! My long-lost, found Nube!' articulated Athir, with tender joy, as he gazed down upon her face and folded her again and again to his heart. Xariffa gazed upon this scene of happiness with tearful eyes and a smile sparkling upon her countenance. In a few minutes Nube slowly raised her face all smiles and tears, and dishevelled tresses, and said softly to her, and oh, what a world to her in those two syllables, `Athir!' and then she once more buried her face in his bosom!' The breathless questioning, the [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-165.jpg) \- external link  - Page 079. ] explanations, the thousand expressions of grateful joy, to all of which Xariffa listened, that followed this happy re-union who shall record! The bliss of the lovers was complete. It seemed to them that there was no sorrow on earth. At length Xariffa said to the happy lover, `You will now hasten and inform the Caliph of your discovery, that he may rejoice with you!' `Alas, lady,' said Nube, `he cannot rejoice save you smile on him! Be not cruel! Let an hour so blessed to me and to Athir be also blessed to the Prince and to you.' `Nay, sweet Nube,' interposed Athir, with a smile; `I cannot have you urge the lady to favor the Prince! I am not in the service of Abdelasis!' `In whose?' asked Xariffa, with surprise. Athir briefly related his history as it is already known to the reader, up to the time of his being ushered into the apartment by the Eunuch. He spoke freely and with confidence knowing he was with those who would not betray him. When Xariffa heard his message to her she sighed, and said, `I cannot go with you! Nor will you wish to leave Nube to escape with me!' `She can go with us!' `No, it is your duty to remain here with her, and to-morrow let the Prince learn from her lips who you are. He will rejoice. I will intercede with him to pardon you for taking his signet, which you will now give me; and return at once to Alfonzo and tell him that I--- I---' Here the Christian maiden hesitated and blushed. `I will end the sentence for thee, lady,' answered Nube, smiling; `tell him that you love the Prince Abdelasis and mean to make him happy by sharing his throne and heart.' `No---no---' `Yes! It is so! I see it, lady!' answered Athir. For Alfonzo's sake only am I sorry! He will grieve to hear it!' `Nay, I have not said that I love Abdelasis! ' `No---words are less eloquent than thy throbbing bosom and beaming eye as he is spoken of!' `Tell my brother that I feel that I can prevail upon the Caliph to embrace Christianity!' `Allah forbid!' ejaculated both the Arabian girl and her lover. Xariffa smiled at their earnestness, and said. `Go, Athir. To-morrow at noon come hither, and the Prince will receive thee, and thou shalt be made happy and Nube too!' `What shall I say to Alfonzo?' `Urge him to caution lest he should be discovered; and tell him that I know the Prince will treat me with all honour. Urge him to return to the mountains where in two days he will either see or hear from me! Athir embraced Nube tenderly, and then took his leave of Xariffa with a heavy cloud shadowing his happy heart. He bore the news to Alfonzo; and the brow of the brother darkened, and his vengeance against Abdelasis was awakened anew. But when Athir told him of his meeting with Nube, the brow of anger relaxed, and he shewed by the expression of his smiling face, that he sympathized fully in the happiness of his friend. THE CRISIS OF THE CONSPIRACY. The eve of St. James at length arrived, a season to be marked with great events--- the downfall of the crescent and the elevation of the cross. The emissaries which had departed from Alfonzo in the forest, to rouse up the Christians in the mountains, and in the plains, were everywhere received with joy and hailed as messengers of deliverance. The name of Alfonzo had preceded them to the remotest recesses of the vallies, and been heard by the farthest mountaineer. It carried with it a prestige that favored the messengers. Every where men were told that Alfonzo the Destroyer was to raise again the standard of the cross on the eve of St. James, their eyes brightened, they shook off their slavish indifference, and grasping their rude weapons, desired to be led against the Moor. The edict issned by Abdelasis, calling for the registering of every man's name, also contributed to this willingness to take up arms against the Moslem. They saw that now was the crisis of their nation's [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-166.jpg) \- external link  - Page 080. ] destiny; that the edict must be resisted--- that Spain must be made free. From hamlet to hamlet, from cabin to cabin the fifty emissaries went bearing the wooden cross, and raising the startling cry. `Up Christians of Spain! The standard of the cross is to be lifted up by the hand of Alfonzo the Destroyer. Up Christians of Spain. The eve of St. James is to be the eve of our national glory. Arm, Christians of Spain. Hasten to the rock of St. Paul on the eve of St. James. God and Spain! down with the Moor. With such words as these did those zealous mountaineers who had caught the spirit of Alfonzo, spread the news of the contemplated movement. No where did they meet with indifference. The fire spread and warmed every heart, and nerved every arm. Yet all was done secretly and unknown to the Moor. Each Christian sacredly kept his own council; and there, in the very bosom of the Saracen empire, was gathering a storm-cloud, which, to the eyes of the Infidel, cast not a shadow upon the land. All was sunshine and peace. Abdelasis had consolidated the kingdom. He was a descendant of the Prophet, and vice-general of the Faith of the crescent. Mo one thought now of questioning his authority, or of opposing his power. To Moorish Spain there seemed rising a glory greater than ever shone over the Moslem empire of Syria. The holy father Godfrey was also a messenger; but he went rather to the exiled priests in the recesses of the mountains than to the peasantry, though he passed none by. These priests became emissaries in their turn, and aroused the nobles who were to be found buried in their strong-holds, or dwelling in poverty and degradation in the northern towns of the Moorish empire. The cry went like electric fire from lip to lip, and met with the most thrilling welcome. `The eve of San Diego' was on every tongue, blended with the proudly uttered name of Alfonzo the Destroyer. Every man felt that a leader was now needed, or all Spain would have to bend its neck to the yoke of slavery, and to the faith of of Mahommet. In the city of Cordova Senor Velez, and his friends had not been idle. The intelligence which he had spread found willing hearts to receive it. Affection for the Cross and a desire for the returning glory of Spain inspired the bosoms of those who had long been slaves. Secretly sixteen thousand men prepared to rise upon their conquerors and masters as soon as the trumpet of Alfonzo should be heard at midnight without the walls, proclaiming his presence with an army. Alfonzo had held frequent secret meetings, at the house of Senor Velez, with the principal Christians in the city, and chosen his leaders of division and regularly organised the masses, so that they should act with harmony and effect. To one was given the assault on the Royal Palace; to another, to attack the armory, a round tower near the city; to another, to occupy one square and the streets leading to it; and to another division, another square. Some parties were to occupy the several palaces, and the chief party to attack the principal gate on the inner side, and endeavor to open it for the entrance of Alfonzo and his army. Having made all these arrangements with great wisdom and an almost innate knowledge of military affairs, Alfonzo, after remaining four days in Cordova, returned from the city to the hamlet. Here he found Gaspar, who was in the midst of a body-guard of four hundred mountaineers secretly gathered together; and from him he learned that these could be depended on a force of at least twelve thousand armed men. He now ascended to the Rock of St. Paul's, which commanded a wide view of all the valley of the Guadalquiver and the city of Cordova, and here in the presence of these men he constructed, by their aid, a wooden cross, which the father Godfrey, who now never left the side of his young friend, blessed and consecrated for this purpose. The cross was whitened, and being, when erect, thirty feet in height, could be seen at a great distance. The eve of St. James (or San Diego) was now ten days distant. Alfonzo having devoted the three next days, during which armed detachments were constantly coming in by the mountain roads, to the selection of his officers and the arrangement of the plan of the revolution, [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf202v2&image=202-167.jpg) \- external link  - Page 081. ] which he as effectually organised in the Sierras as he had done within the city, he resolved once more to revisit Cordova in diguise. Before deperting, he gave directions that all who needed provisions should be supplied from his herd of goats and gazelles first, and then from those of the other herdsmen on the Sierras, who willingly gave them up to the great cause to which they had devoted life and wealth. Father Godfrey accompanied him to Cordova, and both reached the abode of Senor Velez in safety. Alfonzo had now leisure to make inquiries of the hermit touching the birth of Genilla, and from him, to his surprise, learned that she was, as the merchant had suspected, the daughter of the Duke de Cordava and the sole heiress to the throne of Spain. The intelligence rendered the young lover despondent, for he felt that when she came to know her rank and (if the revolution was successful) to be elevated to the sceptre of the empire, she would disdain his humble love! But in these apprehensions he was deceived. Father Godfrey called upon Ben Osmin, at the abode of Habib, and having been permitted to have a private interview with Genilla, he unfolded to her the secret of her lineage. Her surprise gave place to deep reflection; and she at length said, `Have you told Ben Osmin, my father, of this?' `No. It would not be safe. Spain looks to you for safety and security. Alfonzo loves you. Embrace the faith of your father's and become the wife of Alfonzo, and let him, in your name, raise once more the standard of your royal ancestors.' The result of the interview was a desire on her part to see Alfonzo. They met privately the same evening while the hermit, taking Ben Osmin and Yusauf Habib with him, went to show them the hidden treasure that he would bestow upon the former to surrender his daughter. The eloquence and love of Alfonzo prevailed. Convinced that she was the child of a Christian race, the daughter of Christian kings, she promised to embrace the faith of the Cross in the great principles of which she had already been instructed not only the priest Paulus, but by Alfonzo himself. From this hour her destiny and line of life was separated from that of Ben Osmin. She felt that the parting would be painful, but she was firm in uniting her destinies with those of Alfonzo and Spain. Ben Osmin returned laden with jewels, and the hermit demanded Genilla. But Ben Osmin laughed and told him that he might have the other half left in the vaults of the old ruin of the Duke of Cordova's castle they had visited, and he would keep the maiden. Father Godfrey protesting, Ben Osmin menaced him with a complaint to the Caliph for hiding the wealth of Christian nobles. Genilla hearing this, became displeased, but remained silent. The same night she was under Alfonzo protection in the house of Senor Velez, and there in the presence of a score of the chief conspirators she was baptized, partook of the Holy Communion, and then receiving the sign of the cross, was solemnly united in marriage with Alfonzo. Spain now had a leader of right to conduct her to victory and to power.--- The intelligence spread from mouth to mouth, and from the city reached the assembled forces in the mountains. It gave new life to the revolution. Men felt that now they had something to fight for--- an end to crown their efforts. In the meanwhile, Xariffa remained an inmate of the palace of Abdelasis. He had called the next day to see her, and was surprised and overjoyed at the condescension of her reception. When he heard from her lips the romantic narrative of Nube, he was greatly pleased, and promised to forgive Athir, who at that moment came in. The Prince then made him give an account of his adventures, which he did--- save that portion, which related to his service with Alfonzo, upon which he remained silent. The Prince, however pardoned Athir at Xariffa's solicitation only on the condition that she would reciprocate his love for her, and consent to become his wife. `If you will, Xariffa,' he said, `I promise that the edict whieh you so deeply lament and censure me for, shall be revoked, and that your people shall share the privileges of citizens equally with mine.' `I consent, on condition that you will [
