 [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf625T&image=625fcov.jpg) \- external link  - Front Cover. ] [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf625T&image=625edgf.jpg) \- external link - Spine, with author and title inscribed in gilt. ] [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf625T&image=625bcov.jpg) \- external link  - Back Cover. ] [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf625T&image=625edgb.jpg) \- external link  - Bottom Edge. ] [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf625T&image=625-001.jpg) \- external link - 625EAF. Paste-Down Endpaper with Bookplate: heraldry figure with a green tree on top and shield below. There is a small gray shield hanging from the branches of the tree, with three blue figures on that small shield. The tree stands on a base of gray and black intertwined bars, referred to as a wreath in heraldic terms. Below the tree is a larger shield, with a black background, and with three gray, diagonal stripes across it; these diagonal stripes are referred to as bends in heraldic terms. There are three gold leaves in line, end-to-end, down the middle of the center stripe (or bend), with green veins in the leaves. Note that the colors to which this description refers appear in some renderings of this bookplate; however, some renderings may appear instead in black, white and gray tones. ] [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf625T&image=625-002.jpg) \- external link  - 625EAF. Free Endpaper. The page includes various samples of the owner's name, Emma Forbes. She has written her name three different times, with the final entry marking that she is now Mrs. Emma Foster. ] [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf625T&image=625-003.jpg) \- external link  - Blank Page. ] [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf625T&image=625-004.jpg) \- external link  - Blank Page. ] [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf625T&image=625-005.jpg) \- external link  - Blank Page. ] [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf625T&image=625-006.jpg) \- external link  - Title-Page. ] THE ADOPTED DAUGHTER. BY ALICE CAREY. AND OTHER TALES. PUBLISHED BY J. B. SMITH  & CO. NO. 610 CHESTNUT STREET. 1859. [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf625T&image=625-007.jpg) \- external link  - Page 180. ] BY MRS. C. M. KIRKLAND. O calm contented days and peaceful nights! Who, when such good can be obtained, would strive To reconcile his manhood to a couch Soft, as may seem, but, under that disguise Stuff'd with the thorny substance of the past, For fixed annoyance; and full oft beset With floating dreams, black and disconsolate, The vapory phantoms of futurity! As men from men Do, in the constitution of their souls, Differ, by mystery not to be explained, And as we fall by various ways, and sink, One deeper than another, self-condemned, Through manifold degrees of guilt and shame;--- So manifold and various are the ways Of restoration, fashioned to the steps Of all infirmity, and tending all To the same point---attainable by all--- Peace in ourselves and union with our God. Wordsworth. " Comfort " is one of those significant and precious words that are apt to be much abused. It is so comprehensive that people try to make it mean every thing, just as "religion" has been stretched to cover the burning of heretics, and "justice" the gratification of vindictive feeling or the devices of envy. It is so good a word, in its true character, that none but honest and true people can use it with propriety. It is, by tacit consent, banished from the vocabulary of Fashion, and if Ambition should make a dictionary, Comfort would find no place in it. The French, who are lovers of pleasure, have been obliged to transplant our word comfort bodily into their language, as they had before naturalized a correlative word--- [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf625T&image=625-008.jpg) \- external link  - Page 181. ] home, atter they had adopted the idea. Strange that we, proud as we are of our right to it, should ever misuse it! But, as we were saying, it has, like some other good things, been sometimes sadly misunderstood or perverted. The most general as well as fatal mistake is that which supposes it to dignify present gratification at all hazards. This is as if a man whose fingers were cold should make a fire of his chairs or split up his piano, for comfort. Or like a young lady who should take so much comfort in reading a novel that when the twilight grew too deep she could not resist setting the curtains a-blaze rather than wait for candles. (We see people risking ophthalmia in this cause every day.) Let none accuse us of extravagance in our illustrations. What we have imagined would be as much less foolish than some kinds of self-indulgence but too common, as matter is less precious than mind, body than soul; and it is only because the consequences of such absurdities would be immediate and obvious, while those of the more fatal sacrifices to present enjoyment are deferred in proportion to the dignity of the powers they ruin, that we do not recoil in horror from tempting pleasures which lead to certain misery. We are all more or less disposed to self-indulgence, and as some amount of it is proper enough, it is not always easy to determine where the right ends and the wrong begins. In some very familiar and but too frequent cases this is peculiarly difficult; and in the matter of intoxicating drinks experience shows us how prone some natures are to self-delusion, as to the limit of lawful indulgence. It is on this ground that moralists recommend total abstinence as alone safe. "Abstinence," says Johnson, "is easy, it is temperance that is difficult," and the fact is well known. Is it not strange, then, that a principle sanctioned by the highest authority should arouse [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf625T&image=625-009.jpg) \- external link  - Page 182. ] angry opposition? One would think it must command respect at least, even from those who yet were not disposed to adopt it practically. But whatever touches our private and personal practice comes so near, and calls in question such sensitive and delicate points, that it is perhaps to be expected that self-love should make us unjust. We do not love people who interfere with our "comfort." If it were possible, in all cases of intemperance, to go down to the very roots of the habit, and ascertain and put one's finger upon the very first motion towards evil, we should doubtless be astonished to see how entirely among the things innocent or indifferent the seeds of destruction appear, in their undeveloped state. Nay---should we not find temptation lying in wait even among the virtues? That of good housekeeping, for instance, on which our present illustration turns. Can there be any bounds to the attention which a woman ought to pay to the comfort of her family? There was our old acquaintance, Jacob Zieber, a German farmer in --- county, who used to sit soaking with cider, or something stronger, for two hours every evening before he went to bed. He had a prodigious European constitution, and you might as well have talked to one of the great logs it was his pride to take to the sawmill, as speak to him of the injuriousness of the practice. It had never hurt him, he said! He was of a cubical build, with a great jolter head of his own, set right on his shoulders, dispensing with neck for the greater firmness and security of carriage. His large light eyes had little speculation in them, and all the good cider and other good things he had faithfully imbibed had done little towards imparting a genial tinge to his complexion. Flesh he had, in abundance; his hands were like bunches of sausages, and when he walked his feet planted themselves, like those of the [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf625T&image=625-010.jpg) \- external link  - Page 183. ] tramping statue on Don Giovanni. In strict accordance with this bodily configuration, his life was one of the dullest routine, diversified by going once every Sunday to church, when the text always put him to sleep. Comfort, wherever you can get it, was his creed. His ordinary behavior was pretty good, considering the cider and other stimulants which might have fired a less phlegmatic temper into insufferableness. He never used to beat his wife, who was a smart-spoken dame that held her own in the family, though she had come late into it and brought with her a son, the only one the house ever knew. She stood on strong ground; and she knew it. Jacob Zieber was a confirmed old bachelor when the tricksy Fates threw him into the way of the widow Ferris, who established herself in his good graces by her excellent knack at making apple-toddy at a wedding where Jacob happened to be present. Then her nephew returned from a voyage round the world, and could think of no more appropriate present to his aunt than a carved pipe-head, which the good lady at once transferred to her excellent neighbor, Mr. Zieber, with some very choice tobacco, which her nephew was able to furnish. "I know you know what's good, Mr. Zieber," said the widow, "and I like to see every body taking comfort,"---and the cubical bachelor looked kindly upon her as she softly enunciated his favorite word. It is not to be wondered at that after this, whenever he sat smoking by the fire, in that state of mental dissolution which it is the peculiar province of tobacco to produce, the image of the comfortable widow Ferris was associated with the gentle fumes, until she came in time to be part and parcel of Mr. Zieber's floating idea of the only true happiness. When Mrs. Ferris became Mrs. Zieber, which she did in due season, she was far from deserving the reproach of [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf625T&image=625-011.jpg) \- external link  - Page 184. ] unfaithfulness with regard to the "comfort" of her husband and his household. Her difficulty lay rather in the other direction. She made him too comfortable. From his coffee in the morning to his apple-toddy or mulled cider at bed-time, there was hardly an hour in the day that she was not baking or boiling, stewing, brewing, or concocting somewhat for the consolation of Jacob's mortal frame. She had an old receipt-book of her mother's, yellow with age, worn almost to undecipherable tatters by eeaseless consultation, and marked all over with tastes or specimens of every article that had been made by its instructions in fifty years. This was her vade-mecum \---her oracle---her almanac---we had almost said her Bible. She was emphatically a woman of one book, and she spent the more time over it because, although very bulky, it possessed no table of contents; so that in order to find a rule for salting down hams, one might be obliged to plough through plumcakes, soar with puffs, wallow in washes, stick fast in plasters, take the shade of dye-stuffs, and put up with all kind of sauces. All the eye-waters in the book were not sufficient to make it intelligible to any but the initiated. To Mrs. Zieber, however, who had been brought up upon it, it had a beauty such as the earliest folio Shakspeare had in the eyes of Charles Lamb---viz., the beauty of sentiment, or "Something than beauty dearer"--- a tender interest, in short, not to be argued about or meddled with. We should like to have seen the individual bold enough to offer in exchange for it the most elegant and voluminous copy of Ude or Soyer. Its very idea was embalmed in butter, sugar, eggs, and spice, to say nothing of medicaments, charms, and lovelifying lotions. To read it always gave her an appetite, sharpened ner ingenuity, and sent her at once to the [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf625T&image=625-012.jpg) \- external link  - Page 185. ] kitchen, and the result was that her husband and her son grew to be as fastidious tasters and as great connoisseurs as herself Nor did Mrs. Zieber confine her cares to the comforting of the inner man. The condition, temperature, light, arrangement, and availableness of the house were equally objects of her solicitude. She was conscientious in stopping draughts, regulating fires, stuffing cushions, placing chairs, so that no possible inconvenience could occur, no possible advantage be lost. All the rocking-chairs, and they were many, were made to rock just right---not too suddenly, nor yet with difficulty, as far from pitching backward as forward, and without a particle of squeak in their motion, let that be as vehement as it might. Not that vehement motion was much the habit of the family; but the little boy, Tommy Ferris, preferred rocking to any other mode of exercise, and his mother had a chair made and quilted on purpose for him, which no one else was allowed ever to occupy. Not to dwell too long on particulars, Mrs. Zieber was what is called an excellent wife, that being the term which is usually applied to a woman who takes good care of the physical comfort of her household. Further than this she never aspired. No book was ever permitted in the parlor, except an old family Bible, which was carefully placed on a stand in the corner, and only removed once a week, on Sunday evening, when Mr. Zieber read a chapter, in course, with a good deal of ceremony. What few school-books little Tommy Ferris brought home were put out of sight as soon as possible, for Mrs. Zieber would as soon have seen a toad on the table as a book. Tommy grew up under these auspices, and imbibed, to his heart's core, the family notion of "comfort." He never did any thing he didn't want to; never learned a lesson when he [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf625T&image=625-013.jpg) \- external link  - Page 186. ] preferred flying his kite, or went to school when he chose to have a headache and go fishing. He had a sip or a bit of every thing nice that came from his mother's skilful hands, and would have felt much injured if he had not shared Mr. Zieber's bed-time beverage, be it what it might. That worthy person grew more and more quiet as his years increased, till at last he did not rise out of the great chair which he filled so well, except to exchange it for the "comfortable" feather-bed, which was duly visited by the warming-pan when the thermometer stood below 60°. There he sat and smoked, or dozed, or sipped some potent comforter, or lingered lovingly over some dainty placed before him on a little stand, which had gradually become consecrated to that use. Tommy's comings and goings became less and less the object of his care, and that ingenious youth tried many youthful follies, which his mother took care should never reach her husband's ears. She said she thought boys must have a little comfort, as well as grown people! By-and-by Mr. Zieber died rather suddenly, although he had been ailing for some time. He had several troublesome diseases, but would not allow a physician to be called because of the miserable ideas of diet which that class of persons are supposed to entertain. Mr. Zieber was "determined not to be starved to death, at any rate." On his last morning, his wife had prepared an egg, beaten up with a spoonful of brandy, which she gave him before he rose, to strengthen him. He then ate a tolerable breakfast of sausages, muffins, buckwheat cakes, and coffee, finishing off with a small glass of old, hard cider, that made even his eyes water, that being, as he declared, an excellent thing for the stomach. Feeling rather faint at lunch-time, he had a veal cutlet and a little brandy and water. When dinner-time came, he complained of feeble [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf625T&image=625-014.jpg) \- external link  - Page 187. ] appetite, so Mrs. Zieber kindly procured some venison-steaks, which she served up with a sauce of her own, redolent of wine and piquant with spices. This Mr. Zieber pronounced excellent, and having dispatched an apple-dumpling or two, he took his siesta with unusual satisfaction. Tea was never, with him, much of a meal, but he managed two or three cups of good green tea, with plenty of cream and sugar, and as many rounds of buttered toast, made as nobody but Mrs. Zieber could make it, as he often triumphantly declared. After this he felt, he said, uncommon comfortable, and dozed most of the evening, only once asking for a drink of cider, which he imbibed after putting in a little brandy to correct the acid. Tommy had been out all day, and came home late and rather cross, upon which his tender mother thought she would get him something good to eat to make him feel comfortable. This occupied some time, and detained her in the kitchen, where, when all was ready, Tommy sat down to his supper, with a returning gleam of good humor at sight of the variety of dainties which his mother had brought together for his refreshment. He had hardly tasted any thing, however, when he was startled by a loud scream in the adjoining room. Mrs. Zieber, on attempting to raise her husband to ask what he would have for supper, had found him quite dead. This occasioned such a shock and commotion in the family, that Tommy did not get back to his supper till it was cold, at which he grumbled a good deal, for he loved comfort dearly. The coroner said nothing of murder or suicide, but concluded Mr. Zieber to have died "by the visitation of God," and everybody praised Mrs. Zieber for the excellent care she had taken of her husband. So she continued to take equally good care of her son, and he grew up a connoisseur in good [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf625T&image=625-015.jpg) \- external link  - Page 188. ] living, and an infallible judge of cigars, and indeed of tobacco in every form. He tried various kinds of business, but found some fault with each, and his mother, thinking his objections very natural and reasonable, remarked that it was a comfort, after all, that Tommy was not obliged to do any thing, if he didn't choose. He made pretty good use of his gun and his fishing-rod, and occasionally brought in some contribution to the dinner, which again, as his mother observed, was a great comfort. But unhappily comforts of this description did not always satisfy the youth who had so long been accustomed to exercise his ingenuity principally upon the means of personal enjoyment. He wearied of his mother's watchful and solicitous eye, and, in the ingratitude of a heart hardened by too much mistaken kindness, learned to despise her for the sacrifices she made to his unreasonable whims. As for her, poor woman! she had so narrowed her mind to one poor, mean set of ideas, that it was incapable of receiving new ones; and when her darling son contemned her dainty dishes, or any of the various devices for his gratification that were always revolving in her brain, she was at her wit's end, and would go away and weep in sad foreboding of coming ills, she knew not what. Time showed the justice of her presentiments, for Tommy was hardly one-and-twenty, when he had formed some very unhappy connections with dissolute young men of the neighborhood, who, for their own bad ends, flattered his weak pride by an outward show of deference which he felt to be a homage to his wealth. Unmistakable marks of the evil tendency of a self-indulgent life very soon began to appear upon the once good-looking youth, and his poor mother, always mistaken in her modes of attempting to do good, worried at him incessantly on the subject until he declared his home intolerable, and jus [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf625T&image=625-016.jpg) \- external link  - Page 189. ] tified his own misconduct by the assertion that he could have no "comfort" anywhere but at the tavern. This state of things came on gradually, but not so gradually that the unhappy mother was not conscious of each step in the downward path which the successive changes in her son's domestic habits served sufficiently to mark. When at length he was absent from home the greater part of the time, and would sit smoking in moody silence while he was there, either deaf to his mother's remonstrances and complaints, or roused to fierce and defiant replies when she pushed them too vehemently; the desperation of the case drove Mrs. Zieber to a special effort for his recall before it should be forever too late. In this case, as ever, she was unconscious of her own selfishness, and considered herself as acting "all for the best," though no sacrifice to Moloch was ever more cruel. She bethought her of an orphan niece of hers, a gentle and pretty girl, who was living in an uncle's family at some distance; and her bright thought was to send for this young woman, in the hope that so agreeable an inmate would prove at least some counterbalance to the attractions of the tavern. What was to become of the decoy-duck in this case, concerned her no more than if Mary Turner had been made of wood: Tommy was to be saved---saved, that is, from disgracing himself, wasting his money, and annoying his mother, and in order to this, any thing was lawful; and Mrs. Zieber, in her heart, thought herself an excellent mother, as indeed so she was, as far as certain qualities of a good mother went. Want of knowledge is sometimes as fatal as want of virtue. Mary Turner came, and the good effects of her presence were very soon evident at Mrs. Zieber's. Her cousin's dress began to improve; his hair and whiskers assumed a tamer aspect, and the general rowdyism of costume which had marked [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf625T&image=625-017.jpg) \- external link  - Page 190. ] him for some time past, gradually softened into something approaching gentlemanliness. The visits to the public house, too, were shorter and less frequent his manner to his mother kinder, and his treatment of pretty Mary Turner almost gallant. She, on her part, bore herself with native modesty; assisted her aunt in household affairs, cultivated some acquaintance with the young people of the neighborhood, and treated her dissipated cousin in that simple and familiar way which puts farthest off the idea of particular attention. This did not, however, prevent his falling or fancying himself in love with her, and, in the devotion of time and thoughts which ensued, evil habits and companions were put off, and the desired reformation seemed complete. The young man spent his evenings at home or attended his fair cousin to village merrymakings; treated his mother with abundant respect, restrained, as far as possible, his natural and customary selfishness, and seemed for the first time in his life to find "comfort" in pleasing other people. Whether he was in reality less selfish than usual, we shall see. Mary Turner was by no means insensible to the agreeable change in her aunt's family, or indifferent to the effect of her charms upon the wayward heart of the spoiled child. She was young and easily fascinated, and soon yielded up her whole wealth of innocent affection in return, nothing doubting. Ferris declared himself and was accepted, and nothing now remained but to obtain his mother's consent. This, to his great surprise, was not so readily granted as he expected. Mrs. Zieber loved her son, but she loved money too, and now that she considered Tom as entirely reclaimed from bad courses, she had no idea of letting him marry a girl without a shilling. She was even ready to accuse Mary of having artfully enticed her cousin into offering himself, and said such [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf625T&image=625-018.jpg) \- external link  - Page 191. ] unkind and unbecoming things on this point, that the poor girl insisted on leaving the house and returning home at once. To this Mrs. Zieber gladly consented, thinking that absence would soon cure her son's sudden folly, and bring him once more under her own exclusive influence. But in this she was quite mistaken. Her knowledge of human nature was not very great, and of Tom's particular share of it, wonderfully small. The habits of self-indulgence in which she had herself trained him, were all against her. He had, as he said, found more "comfort" in Mary's society than anywhere else, and the thought of relinquishing it never entered his thoughts for a moment. So he very soon followed her to her uncle's, and now his mother saw even less of him than before his reformation. Many unpleasant scenes of altercation and recrimination occurred when they did meet, and the poor woman had bitter proof the hardening effect of making present gratification the first object of pursuit. Her passionate remonstrances fell on Tom's ear like cold water on the flinty rock; they did not even make him waver. He was of age, and chose to marry his cousin; his mind would hold no ideas but these. Opposition had aroused his temper, and made that a passion which might otherwise have proved but a passing fancy. If he had been let alone, he would very likely have changed his mind, but now a marriage with Mary Turner became the settled purpose of his soul. It may seem strange that one who could pursue his own inclinations with so little regard to any body else, should have shown even such an amount of deference for his mother's wishes as was implied in delay. But Tom's dutifulness was exactly in proportion to the amount of property in his mother's power; and although he felt little fear as to her ultimate disposal of it, still, in so important a matter, he did not [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf625T&image=625-019.jpg) \- external link  - Page 192. ] like to run any risk. So at last he fairly worried her into a consent, or the form of it, and in a short time after this Mary Turner was married and brought home as Mrs. Thomas Ferris. Oh how amiable was the devotee of "comfort" in those days! Mrs. Zieber was a trifle sullen at first, but the real sweetness of Mary's disposition was too much for her prejudices; and the magic power of love diffused such a glory through the house, that old things were forgotten, or remembered only as heighteners of present satisfaction. With mother and Mary both devoted to his comfort, Ferris felt himself at the pinnacle of human felicity, and he would not have changed places even with that Hottentot sovereign whose two esquires of the mouth found their sole employment in cramming him with delicacies on the right hand and on the left. And here, according to the practice of the modern novel, our story ought to conclude, leaving our characters in the condition described by the severe poet, as "cursed with every granted prayer,"---but truth forbids, and the world's history would contradict ours if we should represent a happiness founded mainly upon the senses, as proving any more permanent than it is exalted. Ennui is usually the first enemy in such cases,---that negative torment, whose very vagueness makes it unendurable. Satiety is the most hopeless of mortal ills. It is the constant iteration, stale And tasteless, of the same repeated joys, That palls and satiates, and makes languid life A pedler's pack, that bows the bearer down. Health suffers, and the spirits ebb; the heart Recoils from its own choice; at the full feast Is famished; finds no music in the song, No smartness in the jest, and wonders why! [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf625T&image=625-020.jpg) \- external link  - Page 193. ] The next stage is ill health---the revenge of insulted nature; stealthy, but sure and terrible. Ferris had naturally a robust constitution, and it was slow in confessing the sapping and mining process that had been going on ever since he was born, so that he had had many of what he called "singular attacks" before he felt permanently the worse for them. In due time, however, they began to tell upon his whole being, and then that other avenger, ill-temper, took the field. Seasons of terrible irritation alternated with the usual indulgences, and Mary's voice, once so potent in charming down the evil spirit, lost its magic. And now the old habit of wild and reckless companionship resumed its reign. Wife and children were as nothing, or only tedious and importunate clogs upon pleasure. Their expenditures seemed unreasonable because so much was drawn off in unlawful directions. Disputes about money, between Mrs. Zieber and the son she had so idolized and ruined, were fierce and frequent; Mary was appealed to as umpire, and thus often incurred the wrath of both. She did what she could to stem the tide of evil, but its sources were far beyond her reach. She had been educated in economy and self-denial, and would fain have brought up her children in the same way, but every perceptible effort in that direction was felt as a personal affront by Mrs. Zieber, who was never tired of sneering at "people who think themselves so much wiser than their neighbors!" She, poor old lady, was very infirm, and had a terribly red nose, for which she was continually trying various lotions and potions from her mother's receipt-book, but with very little success, though she sometimes took the skin off the offending feature by mistaken or too heroic practice, which did not at all tend to the mollification of her temper. Her dutiful son, whose excesses had not yet centralized the over-heated blood so as to give a volcanic aspect to his countenance, made his mother's [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf625T&image=625-021.jpg) \- external link  - Page 194. ] misfortune the subject of many a jibe, which she resented with a degree of acrimony that highly amused him, producing in this way scenes from which Mary was used to draw off her children on any or no pretence, lest all respect for both father and grandmother should be utterly destroyed. It was on her return, after one of these short absences, that she found her husband, who had been drinking a good deal, still storming at his mother and all the world, while the old lady, for a wonder, sat mute, not offering to interrupt him by one of those well-put observations with which human or diabolic ingenuity is wont to add fuel to the unhallowed fire already too hot. A second glance at Mrs. Zieber showed her the reason of this passiveness. A shocking change had taken place in her face, which was all awry, and though her eyes still showed consciousness, she was evidently deprived of the power of speech and motion---smitten with palsy. Her son, sobered at least in part by Mary's exclamation of horror, rushed to her side and tried to recall her fading senses by his expressions of grief and contrition, but in vain. The doctor came, remedies such as his skill suggested were anxiously applied, but Mrs. Zieber never spoke again. Repeated shocks confirmed the first, and in three days she breathed her last. Tom was some thousands of dollars richer for his mother's demise, but there was in his secret soul a thought which effectually prevented the enjoyment of this accession to his property. He believed himself, whether justly or not, to be the cause of his mother's death. Conscience told him he had wantonly provoked and irritated her, and her dying look was always before his eyes, giving him a new excuse to himself for flying to temporary madness or oblivion for relief. A life on this principle led of course to various kinds of misery, including at length the disorder of affairs. A man who lives on stimulants makes foolish bargains, as a matter of course; and [ [Page image](http://etext.virginia.edu/cgi-local/chad- pt/pageturner.pl?id=eaf625T&image=625-022.jpg) \- external link  - Page 195. ] a man who is known to be in the habit of making foolish bargains, will soon be a mark for sharpers. Hardly a month passed that some of Tom's tavern friends had not some fascinating scheme to propose which only wanted a small capital at the beginning to insure the most incredible profits. If this larger trap did not take, there was a fine horse to be had at a bargain, or a famous trotter to bet upon. Mortgages became necessary, and these ate like cormorants; so that Tom Ferris was not very far from absolute and irretrievable ruin when, happily for all concerned, he came to a sudden end, by means of a wonderful horse just purchased of his dearest friend, which he happened to ride on a very dark night, after a tavern supper. He was brought home insensible, and scarcely spoke or noticed his family afterwards, but bled inwardly for twentyfour hours, and so died, leaving wife and children in a poor condition enough. But Mary had been learning deep lessons all this time. She was young when she came into the family, and naturally pleased with the change from poverty and neglect to abundance and affection. But she soon began to see the errors of her mother-in-law's system, and to deplore their effect upon the character of her husband. She saw how powerless is even affection to combat a habit of self-indulgence, for it was not very long before occasional harshness and disregard of her feelings alternated with Ferris's demonstrations of attachment. As years wore on, he had grown more and more exacting, and, between his requisitions and those of Mrs. Zieber, Mary had become a sort of drudge, outwardly, while her moral nature had much ripened, as is often the case, where we are wise enough to accept in the best spirit evils evidently unavoidable. She had a kind and gentle nature, and a goodly habit in respect to the soft answer that turneth away wrath, and the opportune silence that gives time for unreason to recollect [
