 More cheerily and firmly, as befits his sex, speaks the emigrant's father:--- What though the memory brings us pain? John's letters I will read again, The boy is well! thank God for that! And "Mary has grown strong and fat Since coming to Australia;" And "Little Bob"---our John's first son--- "Can ride a horse and fire a gun Here in this great Australia." But what gets over me, old dame, John's staying there I hold to blame--- It must be an un-English clime, Else why do they in summer time Have winter in Australia? Give me the holly on the wall. The mistletoe hung in the hall, The snow four feet upon the moor, 'The welcome greeting at the door--- A fig for all Australia! With pipe and ale at ingle-side. Give me our homes at Christmas-side, England and not Australia! Give me the land our fathers trod, The land that's bless'd by freedom's God, The home no tyrant can enslave, The soil that's bred the true and brave, Whose sons have made Australia! After all, truth and nature here get the better of our poet's Hibernian animosities. The land "whose sons have made Australia" is and can be no other than the whole United Kingdom, the common birthplace of this one great nation. In some mournful lines at the end of his book Mr. O'Conor lets us see that the course of his patriotism in the narrower sense, his exclusively Irish patriotism, has by no means run smooth:--- I sang the yearnings of the soul the soulless among, Who, when wassail made them frantic, made the night air ring With the thrilling songs and ballads 'twas my gift to sing. Ah, they wore their setters gaily, those centuried slaves, Though vowing to their tyrant-lords woe and bloody graves, When inspired by song and tabor they would shout To arms ! And make the night air hideous with their bootless alarms! The vulgar Irish insurrectionist could hardly be better hit off. But we prefer to dwell, not on the "bootless alarms" of Irish nationalism, "inspired by song and tabor," but on that which in the Irish race for ever charms and interests us. What treasures of passion and tenderness are in this people; what natural music, what lyrical force, what gaiety! Young, rich, fortunate, riding in the park, dining at Maidenhead, finishing the day with three balls, a human being has no great merit, one would think, in being happy; and yet how many of us with these advantages only succeed in boring and being bored, and in feeling "the mortal coldness of the soul like death itself come down!" But here is a poor Irishman with a soul for refinement and delight, whose lot is to work with his hands down at Deptford, with frail health, work uncertain, and a wife and children to maintain; yet he manages to feel and to illustrate the truth of Schiller's excellent saying that "all art is dedicated to joy! " We understand that Mr. O'Conor is candidate for a humble place as school-board visitor in his neighbourhood. We wish him success, and perhaps the London School Board might act wisely in occasionally setting at their Mrs. Markses a sympathetic poet instead of a Cerberus. However, in affording places for its writers of song, the world is not often happy, and we are not sanguine about placing Mr. O'Conor; but the readers of the Pall Mall Gazette will, we hope, not a few of them, give five shillings for his book. 
